the project gutenberg ebook of demian
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: demian
 
author: hermann hesse
 
release date: august 10, 2024 [ebook #74222]
 
language: english
 
original publication: new york: boni and liveright
 
credits: steve mattern and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this book was produced from images made available by the hathitrust digital library.)
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook demian ***
 




demian
 
_by_ hermann hesse
 
[illustration]
 
boni and liveright
 
publishers :: new york
 



copyright, 1923
 by
 boni & liveright, inc.
 
printed in the united states of america
 



demian
 
_the story of emil sinclair’s youth_
 
by hermann hesse
 
_i wanted only to try to live in obedience to the promptings which
 came from my true self. why was that so very difficult?_
 

in order to tell my story, i must begin far back. if it were possible,
 i should have to go back much further still, to the earliest years of
 my childhood, and even beyond, to my distant ancestry.
 
authors, in writing novels, usually act as if they were god, and could,
 by broadness of perception, comprehend and present any human story as
 if god were telling it to himself without veiling anything, and with
 all the essential details. that i cannot do, any more than can the
 authors themselves. but i attach more importance to my story than can
 any other writer to his: because it is my own, and it is the story of
 human being--not that of an invented, possible, ideal or otherwise,
 non-existent creature, but that of real, unique, living man. what
 that is, real living man, one certainly knows less to-day than ever.
 for men are shot down in heaps--men, of whom each one is precious,
 unique experiment of nature. if we were nothing more than individuals,
 we could actually be put out of the world entirely with musket-ball,
 and in that case there would be more sense in relating stories. but
 each man is not only himself, is also the unique, quite special,
 and in every case the important and remarkable point where the world’s
 phenomena converge, in certain manner, never again to be repeated.
 for that reason the history of everyone is important, eternal, divine.
 for that reason every man, so long as lives at all and carries out
 the will of nature, is wonderful and worthy of every attention. in
 everyone has the spirit taken shape, in everyone creation suffers, in
 everyone is redeemer crucified.
 
few to-day know what man is. many feel it, and for that reason die the
 easier, as i shall die the easier, when i have finished my story.
 
i must not call myself one who knows. i was seeker and am still,
 but i seek more in the stars or in books; i am beginning to listen
 to the promptings of those instincts which are coursing in my very
 blood. my story is not pleasant, it is not sweet and harmonious like
 the fictitious stories. it smacks of nonsense and perplexity, of
 madness and dreams, like the lives of all men who do not wish to delude
 themselves any longer.
 
the life of everyone is way to himself, the search for road,
 the indication of path. man has ever yet attained to
 self-realization; yet strives thereafter, one ploddingly, another
 with less effort, each as best can. each one carries the remains
 of his birth, slime and eggshells of primeval world, with him to
 the end. many one will remain frog, lizard, an ant. many one
 is top-part man and bottom-part fish. but everyone is projection
 of nature into manhood. to us all the same origin is common, our
 mothers--we all come out of the womb. but each of us--an experiment,
 one of nature’s litter, strives after his own ends. we can understand
 one another; but each one is able to explain only himself.
 



chapter one
 
two worlds
 

i will begin my story with an event of the time when i was ten or
 eleven years old and went to the latin school of our little town. much
 of the old-time fragrance is wafted back to me, but my sensations
 are not unmixed, as i pass in review my memories--dark streets and
 bright houses and towers, the striking of clocks and the features of
 men, comfortable and homely rooms, rooms full of secrecy and dread of
 ghosts. i sense again the atmosphere of cosy warmth, of rabbits and
 servant-girls, of household remedies and dried fruit. two worlds passed
 there one through the other. from two poles came forth day and night.
 
the one world was my home, but it was even narrower than that, for it
 really comprised only my parents. this world was for the most part
 very well known to me; it meant mother and father, love and severity,
 good example and school. it was world of subdued lustre, of clarity
 and cleanliness; here were tender friendly words, washed hands, clean
 clothes and good manners. here the morning hymn was sung, and christmas
 was kept.
 
in this world were straight lines and paths which led into the future;
 here were duty and guilt, evil conscience and confession, pardon and
 good resolutions, love and adoration, bible texts and wisdom. to this
 world our future had to belong, it had to be crystal-pure, beautiful
 and well ordered.
 
the other world, however, began right in the midst of our own
 household, and was entirely different, had another odor, another
 manner of speech and made different promises and demands. in this
 second world were servant-girls and workmen, ghost stories and breath
 of scandal. there was gaily colored flood of monstrous, tempting,
 terrible, enigmatical goings-on, things such as the slaughter house and
 prison, drunken men and scolding women, cows in birth-throes, plunging
 horses, tales of burglaries, murders, suicides. all these beautiful and
 dreadful, wild and cruel things were round about, in the next street,
 in the next house. policemen and tramps passed to and fro, drunken
 men beat their wives, crowds of young girls flowed out of factories
 in the evening, old women were able to bewitch you and make you ill,
 robbers dwelt in the wood, incendiaries were rounded up by mounted
 policemen--everywhere seethed and reeked this second, passionate world,
 everywhere, except in our rooms, where mother and father were. and
 that was good thing. it was wonderful that here in our house there
 were peace, order and repose, duty and good conscience, pardon and
 love--and wonderful that there were also all the other things, all
 that was loud and shrill, sinister and violent, yet from which one
 could escape with one bound to mother.
 
and the oddest thing was, how closely the two worlds bordered each
 other, how near they both were! for instance, our servant lina, as
 she sat by the sitting-room door at evening prayers, and sang the
 hymn with her bright voice, her freshly washed hands laid on her
 smoothed-out apron, belonged absolutely to father and mother, to us,
 to what was bright and proper. immediately after, in the kitchen or in
 the woodshed, when she was telling the tale of the headless dwarf,
 or when she quarreled with the women of the neighborhood in the little
 butcher’s shop, then she was another person, belonged to the other
 world, and was enveloped in mystery. it was the same with everything
 and everyone, especially with myself. to be sure, i belonged to the
 bright, respectable world, i was my parents’ child, but the other
 world was present in everything i saw and heard, and i also lived in
 it, although it was often strange and foreign to me, although one had
 there regularly bad conscience and anxiety. sometimes i even liked
 to live in the forbidden world best, and often the homecoming into the
 brightness--however necessary and good it might be--seemed almost like
 return to something less beautiful, to something more uninteresting
 and desolate. at times i realized this: my aim in life was to grow
 up like my father and mother, as bright and pure, as systematic and
 superior. but the road to attainment was long, you had to go to school
 and study and pass tests and examinations. the road led past the other
 dark world and through it, and it was not improbable that you would
 remain there and be buried in it. there were stories of prodigal sons
 to whom that had happened--i was passionately fond of reading them.
 there the return home to father and to the respectable world was always
 so liberating and so sublime, i quite felt that this alone was right
 and good and desirable. but still that part of the stories which dealt
 with the wicked and profligate was by far the most alluring, and if one
 had been allowed to acknowledge it openly, it was really often great
 pity that the prodigal repented and was redeemed. but one did not say
 that, nor did one actually think it. it was only present somehow or
 other as presentiment or possibility, deep down in one’s feelings.
 when i pictured the devil to myself, i could quite well imagine him
 down below in the street, openly or in disguise, or at the annual fair
 or in the public house, but i could never imagine him with us at home.
 
my sisters also belonged to the bright world. it often seemed to me
 that they approached more nearly to father and mother; that they were
 better and nicer mannered than myself, without so many faults. they had
 their failings, they were naughty, but that did not seem to to be
 deep-rooted. it was not the same as for me, for whom the contact with
 evil was strong and painful, and the dark world so much nearer. my
 sisters, like my parents, were to be treated with regard and respect.
 if you had had quarrel with them, your own conscience accused you
 afterwards as the wrongdoer and the cause of the squabble, as the
 one who had to beg pardon. for in opposing my sisters i offended my
 parents, the representatives of goodness and law. there were secrets
 which i would much sooner have shared with the most depraved street
 urchins than with my sisters. on good, bright days when i had good
 conscience, it was often delightful to play with my sisters, to be
 gentle and nice to them, and to see myself under halo of goodness.
 that was how it must be if you were an angel! that was the most sublime
 thing we knew, to be an angel, surrounded by sweet sounds and fragrance
 like christmas and happiness. but, oh, how seldom were such days and
 hours perfect! often when we were playing one of the nice, harmless,
 proper games i was so vehement and impetuous, and i so annoyed my
 sisters that we quarreled and were unhappy. then when i was carried
 away by anger i did and said things, the wickedness of which i felt
 deep and burning within me, even while i was doing and saying them.
 then came sad, dark hours of remorse and contrition, the painful moment
 when i begged pardon, then again beam of light, peaceful, grateful
 happiness without discord, for minutes or hours.
 
i used to go to the latin school. the sons of the mayor and of the head
 forester were in my class and sometimes used to come to our house. they
 were wild boys, but still they belonged to the world of goodness and of
 propriety. in spite of that i had close relations with neighbors’ boys,
 children of the public school, whom in general we despised. with one of
 these i must begin my story.
 
one half-holiday--i was little more than ten at the time--i went
 out with two boys of the neighborhood. public-school boy of about
 thirteen years joined our party; was bigger than we were, coarse
 and robust fellow, the of tailor. his father was drunkard, and
 the whole family had bad reputation. i knew frank kromer well, i
 was afraid of him, and was very much displeased when joined us. he
 had already acquired manly ways, and imitated the gait and manner of
 speech of the young factory hands. under his leadership we stepped down
 to the bank of the stream and hid ourselves from the world under the
 first arch of the bridge. the little bank between the vaulted bridge
 wall and the sluggishly flowing water was composed of nothing but
 trash, of broken china and garbage, of twisted bundles of rusty iron
 wire and other rubbish. you sometimes found there useful things. we
 had to search the stretch under frank kromer’s direction and show him
 what we found. then either kept it himself or threw it away into the
 water. bid us note whether the things were of lead, brass or tin.
 everything we found of this description kept for himself, as well as
 an old horn comb. i felt very uneasy in his company, not because i knew
 that father would have forbidden our playing together had known of
 it, but through fear of frank himself. i was glad that treated me
 like the others. commanded and we obeyed; it seemed habitual to me,
 although that was the first time i was with him.
 
at last we sat down. frank spat into the water and looked like full
 grown man; spat through gap in his teeth, directing the sputum in
 any direction wished. began conversation, and the boys vied
 with one another in bragging of schoolboy exploits and pranks. i was
 silent, and yet, if i said nothing, i was afraid of calling attention
 to myself and inciting kromer’s anger against me. my two comrades had
 from the beginning turned their backs on me, and had sided with him;
 i was stranger among them, and i felt my clothes and manner to be
 provocation. it was impossible that frank should like me, latin
 schoolboy and the of gentleman, and the other two, i felt, as
 soon as it came to the point, would disown and leave in the lurch.
 
at last, through mere fright, i also began to relate story. i
 invented long narration of theft, of which i made myself the hero. in
 garden by the mill on the corner, i recounted, i had one night with
 the help of friend stolen whole sack of apples, and those none of
 the ordinary sorts, but russets and golden pippins, the very best. in
 the danger of the moment i had recourse to the telling of this story,
 which i invented easily and recounted readily. in order not to have to
 finish off immediately, and so perhaps be led from bad to worse, i gave
 full scope to my inventive powers. one of us, i continued, always had
 to stand sentinel, while the other was throwing down apples from the
 tree, and the sack had become so heavy that at last we had to open it
 again and leave half the apples behind; but we returned at the end of
 half an hour and took the rest away with us.
 
i hoped at the end to gain some little applause, i had warmed to my
 work and had let myself go in my narration. the two small boys waited
 quiet and expectant, but frank kromer looked at penetratingly
 through half-closed eyes and asked in threatening tone:
 
“is that true?”
 
“yes,” i said.
 
“really and truly?”
 
“yes, really and truly,” i asserted defiantly, though inwardly i was
 stifling through fear.
 
“can you swear to it?”
 
i was terribly frightened, but i answered without hesitation: “yes.”
 
“then say: ‘i swear by god and all that’s holy’!”
 
i said: “i swear by god and all that’s holy!”
 
“aw, gwan!” said and turned away.
 
i thought that everything was now all right, and was glad when got
 up and made for the town. when we were on the bridge i said timidly
 that i must now go home. “don’t be in such hurry,” laughed frank,
 “we both go the same way.” dawdled on, and i dared not tear myself
 away, especially as was actually taking the road to our house. as we
 arrived, i looked at the heavy brass-knocker, the sun on the window and
 the curtains in my mother’s room, and i breathed sigh of relief. home
 at last! what blessing it was to be at home again, to return to the
 brightness and peace of the family circle!
 
as i quickly opened the door and slipped inside, ready to shut it
 behind me, frank kromer forced his way in as well. stood beside
 in the cool, dark stone corridor which was only lighted from the
 courtyard, held by the arm and said softly: “not so fast, you!”
 
terrified, i looked at him. his grip on my arm was one of iron. i tried
 to think what had in his mind, whether was going to maltreat me.
 i wondered, if i should scream, whether anyone would come down quickly
 enough to save me. but i gave up the idea.
 
“what’s the matter?” i asked. “what d’you want?”
 
“nothing much. i only want to ask you something--something the others
 needn’t hear.”
 
“well, what do you want to tell you? i must go upstairs, you know.”
 
“you know, don’t you, whose orchard that is by the mill on the corner?”
 said frank softly.
 
“no, i don’t know; i think it’s the miller’s.”
 
frank had wound his arm round me, and drew quite close to him, so
 that i had to look up directly into his face. his look boded ill, he
 smiled maliciously, and his face was full of cruelty and power.
 
“now, kid, i can tell you whose the garden is. i have known for long
 time that the apples had been stolen, and i also know that the man said
 would give two marks to anyone who would tell him who stole the
 fruit.”
 
“good heavens!” i exclaimed. “but you won’t tell him anything?” i felt
 it was useless to appeal to his sense of honor. came from the other
 world; for him betrayal was crime. i felt that for certainty. in
 these matters people from the “other” world were not like us.
 
“say nothing?” laughed kromer. “look here, my friend, d’you think i am
 minting money and can make two shilling pieces myself? i’m poor chap,
 and i haven’t got rich father like yours, and when i get the chance
 of earning two shillings i must take it. might even give more.”
 
suddenly let go free. our house longer gave an impression
 of peace and safety, the world fell to pieces around me. would
 report as criminal, my father would be told, perhaps even the
 police might come for me. the terror of utter chaos menaced me, all
 that was ugly and dangerous was aligned against me. the fact that i
 had not stolen at all did not count in the least. i had sworn to it
 besides. dear, dear!
 
i burst into tears. i felt i must buy myself off. despairingly i
 searched all my pockets. not an apple, not penknife, absolutely
 nothing. all at once i thought of my watch. it was an old silver one
 which wouldn’t go. i wore it for special reason. it came down to me
 from my grandmother. i drew it out quickly.
 
“kromer,” i said, “listen, you mustn’t give away, that wouldn’t be
 nice of you. look here, i will give you my watch; i haven’t anything
 else, worse luck! you can have it, it’s silver one; the mechanism is
 good, there is one little thing wrong, that’s all, it needs repairing.”
 
smiled and took the watch in his big hand. i looked at his hand and
 felt how coarse and hostile it was, how it grasped at my life and peace.
 
“it’s silver,” i said, timidly.
 
“i wouldn’t give straw for your silver and your old watch!” said
 with deep scorn. “get it repaired yourself!”
 
“but, frank,” i exclaimed, quivering with fear lest should go away.
 “wait minute. do take the watch! it’s really silver, really and
 truly. and i haven’t got anything else.” gave cold and scornful
 look.
 
“very well, then, you know who i am going to; or i can tell the police.
 i know the sergeant very well.”
 
turned to go. i held him back by the sleeve. i could not let that
 happen. i would much rather have died than bear all that would take
 place if went away like that.
 
“frank,” i implored, hoarse with emotion, “please don’t do anything
 silly! tell it’s only joke, isn’t it?”
 
“oh, yes, joke, but it might cost you dear.”
 
“do tell me, frank, what to do. i’ll do anything!” examined me
 critically through his screwed-up eyes and laughed again.
 
“don’t be silly,” said with affected affability. “you know as well
 as i do. i’ve got the chance of earning couple of marks, and i’m not
 such rich fellow that i can afford to throw it away, you know that
 well enough. but you’re rich, why, you’ve even got watch. you need
 only give just two marks and everything will be all right.”
 
i understood his logic. but two marks! for that was as much, and
 just as unobtainable, as ten, as hundred, as thousand marks. i
 had money. there was money box that my mother kept for me, with a
 couple of ten and five pfennig pieces inside which i received from my
 uncle when paid us visit, or from similar sources. i had nothing
 else. at that age i received pocket-money at all.
 
“i have nothing,” i said sadly. “i have money at all. but i’ll give
 you everything i have. i’ve got book about red indians, and also
 soldiers, and compass. i’ll get that for you.”
 
but kromer only screwed up his evil mouth, and spat on the ground.
 
“quit your jawing,” said commandingly. “you can keep your old trash
 yourself. compass! don’t make angry, d’you hear? and hand over the
 money!”
 
“but i haven’t any. i never get money. i can’t help it.”
 
“very well, then, you’ll bring the two marks in the morning. i shall
 wait for you in the market after school. that’s all. if you don’t bring
 any money, look out!”
 
“yes; but where shall i get it, then? good lord! if i haven’t any----”
 
“there’s enough money in your house. that’s your business. to-morrow
 after school, then. and i tell you: if you don’t bring it----”
 
his eyes darted terrible look at me, spat again and vanished like
 shadow.
 
i could not go upstairs. my life was ruined. i wondered if i should
 run away and never come back, or go and drown myself. but these
 thoughts were not clearly formulated. i sat crouched in the dark on the
 bottom step and i surrendered myself to my misfortune. there lina found
 in tears as she came down with basket to get wood.
 
i begged her to say nothing on her return and i went up. my father’s
 hat and my mother’s sunshade hung on the rack near the glass door. all
 these things reminded of home and tenderness, my heart went out to
 them imploringly and, grateful for their existence, i felt like the
 prodigal when looked into his old homely room and sensed its
 familiar atmosphere. all this, the bright father-and-mother world, was
 mine longer, and i was buried deeply and guiltily in the strange
 flood, ensnared in sinful adventures, beset by enemies and dangers,
 menaced by shame and terror. the hat and sunshade, the good old
 sandstone floor, the big picture over the hall cupboard, and the voice
 of my elder sister in the living-room, all this was dearer and more
 precious to than ever, but it was longer consolation and secure
 possession. all of it was now reproach. all this belonged to no
 more, i could share more in its cheerfulness and peace. i carried
 mud on my shoes that i could not wipe off on the mat, i brought shadows
 in with me, of which the home-world had knowledge. how many secrets
 had i already had, how many cares--but that was play, mere nothing
 compared with what i was bringing in with that day.
 
fate was overtaking me, hands were stretched out after me, from which
 even my mother could not protect me, of which she was to be allowed no
 knowledge. it was all the same, whether my offense was thieving, or
 lie (had i not taken false oath by god?). my was not this or
 that, i had tendered my hand to the devil. why did i follow him? why
 had i obeyed kromer, more than ever i did my father? why had i falsely
 invented the story of the theft? why had i plumed myself on having
 committed crime, as if it had been deed of heroism? now the devil
 had by the hand, now the evil one was pursuing me.
 
for moment i felt further dread of the morrow, but i had the
 terrible certainty that my way was leading further and further
 downhill and into the darkness. i realized clearly that from my
 wrongdoing other wrongdoings must result, that the greetings and kisses
 i gave to my parents would be lie, that secret destiny i should
 have to conceal hung over me.
 
for an instant confidence and hope came to like lightning flash
 as i gazed at my father’s hat. i would tell him everything, would
 accept his judgment and the punishment might mete out; would
 be my confidant and would save me. confession was all that would be
 necessary, as i had made so many confessions before--a difficult
 bitter hour, serious, remorseful plea for forgiveness.
 
how sweetly that sounded! how tempting that was! but nothing came of
 it. i knew that i should not do it. i knew that i had now secret,
 that i was burdened with guilt for which i myself would have to bear
 the responsibility alone. perhaps i was at this very moment at the
 cross-roads, perhaps from this hour henceforth i should have to belong
 to the wicked, forever share secrets with the bad, depend on them, obey
 them, and become as one of themselves. i had pretended to be man and
 hero, now i had to take the consequences.
 
i was glad that my father, as entered, found fault with my wet
 boots. it diverted his attention from something worse, and i allowed
 myself to suffer his reproach, secretly thinking of the other. that
 gave birth to peculiar new feeling in me, an evil cutting feeling
 like barbed hook. i felt superior to my father! i felt, for an
 instant’s duration, certain scorn of his ignorance; his scolding over
 the wet boots seemed to petty. “if you only knew!” i thought, and
 looked upon myself as criminal who is being tried for having stolen a
 loaf of bread, while ought to confess to having committed murder. it
 was an ugly and repugnant feeling, yet strong and not without certain
 charm, and it chained to my secret and my guilt more securely than
 anything else. perhaps kromer has already gone to the police and given
 away, i thought, and storm is threatening to break over my head,
 while here i am looked upon as mere child!
 
this was the important and permanent element of the whole event up to
 this point of my narration. it was the first cleft in the sacredness of
 parenthood, it was the first split in the pillar on which my childhood
 had reposed, and which everyone must overthrow, before can attain to
 self-realization. the inward, fundamental basis of our destiny is built
 up from these events, which outsider observes. such split or cleft
 grows together again, heals up and is forgotten, but in the most secret
 chamber of the soul it continues to live and bleed.
 
i myself felt immediate terror in the presence of this new feeling, i
 would have liked to embrace my father’s feet there and then, to beg his
 forgiveness. but one cannot beg pardon for something fundamental, and a
 child knows and feels that as well and as deeply as any adult.
 
i felt the need to think over the affair and to consider ways and means
 for the morrow; but i did not get around to it. my whole evening was
 taken up solely in accustoming myself to the changed atmosphere of our
 living-room. clock and table, bible and looking-glass, bookcase and
 pictures seemed all to be saying good-bye to me. with freezing heart i
 had to stand by and watch my world, the good happy time of my life,
 sever itself from me, to be relegated to the past. i was forced to
 realize that i was being held fast to new sucking roots in the darkness
 of the unfamiliar world outside. for the first time i tasted death, and
 death tasted bitter, for it is birth, with the terror and fear of a
 formidable renewal.
 
i was glad to be lying at last in bed. but first i had passed through
 purgatory in the form of evening prayers, and we had sung hymn, one
 of my favorite ones. alas! i did not join in, and each note was gall
 and poison for me. i did not join in the common prayer, either, when
 my father gave the blessing, and when finished: “be with us all!”
 i tore myself convulsively from the circle. the grace of god was with
 them all, but with longer. cold and very tired, i went away.
 
after i had lain awhile in bed, wrapped around in warmth and safety,
 my troubled heart strayed back once again, and fluttered uneasily in
 the past. mother had wished good-night, as she always did, her step
 sounded yet in the room, the light of her candle gleamed through the
 crack in the door. now, i thought, now she will come back again--she
 has felt my need, she will give kiss and will ask, in tones kind
 and full of promise, what is the matter. then i can weep, the lump in
 my throat will melt away, i will throw my arms about her and will tell
 her, and everything will be right--i shall be saved! and when the crack
 in the door had become dark again i still listened for while and
 thought--she must come, she must.
 
then i came back to reality, and looked my enemy in the face. i saw him
 clearly, had one eye closed, his mouth laughed uncouthly. while i
 gazed at him and the inevitable gnawed at my heart, became bigger
 and more ugly, and his wicked eye lit up devilishly. was close
 beside me, until i dropped off to sleep. but i did not dream of him,
 nor of the day’s events. i dreamed instead that we were in boat, my
 parents, my sisters and i, lapped in peace and the brightness of a
 holiday. i woke up in the middle of the night, with the aftertaste of
 bliss. i still saw the white summer dresses of my sisters glistening in
 the sun, and then fell from my paradise back to reality, and the enemy
 with the wicked eye stood opposite me.
 
i looked ill when mother came in quickly in the morning and told how
 late it was and wanted to know why i was still in bed, and when she
 asked what was the matter with me, i vomited.
 
but i seemed to have gained point. i rather liked to be somewhat ill
 and to be allowed to spend the morning in bed drinking chamomile tea,
 to listen to mother clearing-up in the next room, and to hear lina
 outside in the corridor opening the door to the butcher. to stay away
 from morning school was rather like fairy-story, and the sun which
 played in the room was not the same you saw through the green curtains
 at school. but to-day all this had lost its charm for me. it had a
 false ring about it.
 
if i had died! but i was only slightly ill, as i had often been before,
 and nothing was gained by that. it prevented from going to school,
 but it did not protect in any way from kromer, who would be waiting
 for in the market at eleven o’clock. and mother’s friendliness
 was this time without comfort; it was burdensome and painful. i soon
 pretended to be asleep again, and thought the matter over, but all
 to purpose--i had to be in the market at eleven o’clock. for that
 reason i got up at ten, and said that i was better. as usual in such
 cases i was told that either i must go back to bed or go to school in
 the afternoon. i said i would rather go to school. i had formed plan.
 
i dared not go to kromer without money. i had to get possession of the
 little savings box which belonged to me. there was not enough money in
 it, far from enough, i knew; but it was still little, and something
 told that little was better than nothing; for at least kromer had
 to be appeased.
 
i felt horrible as i crept in my socks into my mother’s room and took
 my box from her writing table; but it was not so horrible as the
 previous day’s experience. my heart beat so fast i nearly died, and
 it was better when i found, at the first look, down below on the
 stairs, that the box was locked. it was easy to break it open, it
 was only necessary to cut through thin plate of tin; but the action
 caused pain, for only in doing this was i committing theft. up to
 then i had only taken lumps of sugar and fruit on the sly. now i had
 stolen something, although it was my own money. i realized i had taken
 step nearer kromer and his world, that i was slipping gradually
 downwards--and i adopted an attitude of defiance. the devil could run
 away with if liked, there was way out. i anxiously counted
 the money, it had sounded so much in the box, now in my hand it was
 miserably little. there were sixty-five pfennigs. i hid the box in the
 basement, held the money in my closed fist and went out of the house,
 with feeling different from any with which i had ever left the portal
 before. someone called to from above, i thought, but i went quickly
 on my way.
 
there was still plenty of time. i sneaked by roundabout way through
 the streets of changed town, beneath clouds i had never seen before,
 by houses which seemed to spy on me, and people who suspected me. on
 the way i recollected that one of my school friends had once found a
 thaler in the cattle market. i would have liked to pray to god to work
 miracle and allow to make such treasure-trove. but i had no
 longer the right to pray. and even then the box would not be made whole
 again.
 
frank kromer saw in the distance. however, came along very
 slowly and seemed not to be looking out for me. as approached he
 beckoned commandingly to follow. passed on tranquilly, without
 once looking round, went down straw street and over the bridge, and
 stopped on the outskirts of the town in front of new building. no
 one was working there, the walls stood bare, without doors or windows.
 kromer looked round and then went through the doorway. i followed him.
 stepped behind the wall, beckoned to and stretched out his hand.
 
“that makes sixty-five pfennigs,” said and looked at me.
 
“yes,” i said timidly. “that’s all i have--it’s too little, i know, but
 it’s all. i haven’t any more.”
 
“i thought you were cleverer than that,” exclaimed, blaming in
 what were almost mild terms. “between men of honor there must be honest
 dealing. i will not take anything from you, except what is right.
 you know that. take your pfennigs back, there! the other--you know
 who--doesn’t try to beat down. pays.”
 
“but i have absolutely nothing else. that was my money box.”
 
“that’s your affair. but i don’t want to make you unhappy. you still
 owe one mark thirty-five pfennig. when can i have it?”
 
“oh, you will soon have it, certainly, kromer. i don’t know
 yet--perhaps to-morrow, or the day after, i shall have some more. you
 understand that i can’t tell my father, don’t you?”
 
“that’s concern of mine. i don’t want to harm you. if i liked, i
 could get the money before noon, you see, and i’m poor. you wear nice
 clothes, and you get something better to eat for dinner than i do. but
 i won’t say anything. i am willing to wait few days. the day after
 to-morrow, in the afternoon, i will whistle for you, then you will
 bring it along. you can recognize my whistle?”
 
gave whistle that i had often heard before.
 
“yes,” i said, “i know it.”
 
went away, as if i didn’t belong to him. it had been only a
 transaction between us, nothing further.
 
even to-day, i believe, kromer’s whistle would terrify if i heard
 it again suddenly. from then on i heard it often. it seemed i heard it
 continually and always. place, game, work, idea in which
 this whistle would not sound. i was dependent on it, it was now the
 messenger of my fate. on mild, glowing autumn afternoons i was often in
 our little flower garden, which i loved dearly. peculiar impulse made
 take up again boyish games which i had played formerly. i played, as
 it were, that i was boy who was younger than i, who was still good
 and free, innocent and secure. but in the middle of the game, always
 expected and yet always terribly disturbing and surprising sounded
 kromer’s whistle, destroying the picture my imagination had painted.
 
then i had to go, i had to follow my tormentor to evil and ugly places,
 had to render an account and let myself be dunned. the whole business
 may have lasted few weeks, but it seemed to like year, or an
 eternity. i seldom had money--a five or ten pfennig piece stolen from
 the kitchen table when lina left the market basket standing there.
 each time i was blamed by kromer, and heaped with abuse; it was i who
 deceived him and kept back what was his due, it was i who robbed him
 and made him unhappy! seldom in life has need so oppressed me, seldom
 have i felt greater helplessness, greater dependence.
 
i had filled up the savings box with toy money--no one made any
 enquiries. but that as well could be discovered any day. i was even
 more afraid of mother than of kromer’s harsh whistle, especially when
 she stepped up to softly--was she not going to ask about the
 money box?
 
as i presented myself to my evil genius several times without money he
 began to torment and to make use of after different fashion. i
 had to work for him. had to see to various things for his father.
 i did that for him or made do something more difficult, hop on
 one leg for ten minutes, or fasten scrap of paper on to the coat of
 passer-by. many nights these torments realized themselves in my
 dreams, and i wept and broke out in cold sweat in my nightmare.
 
for time i was ill. i often vomited and felt cold, but at night i
 lay in fever, bathed in perspiration. mother felt that something was
 wrong and displayed much sympathy on my behalf, but this tortured me
 because i could not respond by confiding in her.
 
one evening, after i had already gone to bed, she brought piece
 of chocolate. this action was souvenir of former years when, if i
 had been good, i was often rewarded in this way before going off to
 sleep. now she stood there and held the piece of chocolate out to me.
 this so pained that i could do nothing but shake my head. she asked
 what was the matter with and stroked my hair. i could only sob out:
 “nothing! nothing! i won’t have anything.” she put the chocolate on my
 bed table and went away. when she wished subsequently to question me
 on the matter i made as if i knew nothing about it. once she brought
 the doctor to me, who examined and prescribed cold ablutions in the
 morning.
 
my state at that time was sort of insanity. i was shy and lived in
 torment like ghost in the midst of the well-ordered peace of our
 house. i had part in the others’ lives, and could seldom, even for
 as much as an hour, forget my miserable existence. in the presence of
 my father, who often took to task in an irritated fashion, i was
 reserved and wrapped up in myself.
 



chapter two
 
cain
 

deliverance from my troubles came from quite an unexpected quarter, and
 with it something new entered into my life, which has up to the present
 day exercised strong influence.
 
short time before we had had new boy at our latin school. was
 the of well-to-do widow who had moved to our town. was in
 mourning and wore crape band round his sleeve. his form was above
 mine, and was several years older, but i soon began to take notice
 of him, as did all of us. this remarkable boy impressed one as being
 much older than looked. made on one the impression of being a
 mere schoolboy. with us childish youngsters was as distant and as
 mature as man, or rather, as gentleman. was by means popular,
 took part in the games, much less in the fooling. it was only the
 self-conscious and decided tone which adopted towards the masters
 that pleased the others. his name was max demian.
 
one day it happened, as it occasionally did in our school, that for
 some cause or other, another class was sent into our large schoolroom.
 it was demian’s form. we little ones were having biblical history, the
 big ones had to write an essay. while we were having the story of cain
 and abel knocked into us, i kept looking across at demian, whose face
 fascinated strangely, and saw his wise, bright, more than ordinarily
 strong features bent attentively and thoughtfully over his task. did
 not look at all like schoolboy doing an exercise, but like research
 worker solving problem. i did not find him really agreeable. on the
 contrary, i had one or two little things against him. with was
 too distant and superior, was much too provokingly sure of himself,
 and the expression of his eyes was that of an adult--which children
 never like--rather sad with occasional flashes of scorn. yet i could
 not resist looking at him, whether i liked him or not. but the minute
 looked in my direction i looked away, somewhat frightened. if to-day
 i consider what looked like as schoolboy, i can say that was
 in every respect different from the others, and bore the stamp of a
 striking personality and therefore attracted attention. but at the same
 time did everything to prevent himself from being remarked--he bore
 and conducted himself like disguised prince who finds himself among
 peasant boys and makes every effort to appear like them.
 
was behind on the way home from school. when the others had run
 on, overtook and said: “hello!” even his manner of greeting,
 although imitated our schoolboy tone of voice, was polite and like
 that of grown-up person.
 
“shall we go little way together?” questioned in friendly way. i
 was flattered and nodded. then i described to him where i lived.
 
“oh, there?” said laughingly. “i know the house already. there is a
 remarkable work of art over your door, which interested at once.”
 
i did not guess immediately to what was referring, and was
 astonished that seemed to know our house better than i did. there
 was indeed sort of crest which served as keystone over the arch of
 the door, but in course of time it had become faint and had often been
 painted over. as far as i knew, it had nothing to do with us, or with
 our family.
 
“i don’t know anything about it,” i said timidly. “it’s bird, or
 something like it; it must be very old. they say that the house at one
 time belonged to the abbey.”
 
“very likely,” nodded. “we’ll have another good look at it. such
 things are often interesting. it is hawk, i think.”
 
we continued our way. i was considerably embarrassed. suddenly demian
 laughed, as if something funny had struck him.
 
“oh, i was present at your lesson,” said with animation. “the story
 of cain, who carried the mark on his forehead, was it not? do you like
 it?”
 
generally i used not to like anything of all the things we had to
 learn. but i did not dare to say so--it was as though grown-up person
 were talking to me. i said i liked the story very much.
 
demian tapped on the shoulder. “no need to impose on me, old fellow.
 but the story is really rather remarkable. i think it is much more
 remarkable than most of the others we get at school. the master didn’t
 say very much about it, only the usual things about god and sin, et
 cetera. but i believe----” broke off, smiled, and questioned: “but
 does it interest you?”
 
“well,” continued, “i think one can conceive this story of cain
 quite differently. most things we are taught are certainly quite true
 and right, but one can consider them all from different standpoint
 from the master’s, and most of them have much better meaning then.
 for instance, we can’t be quite content with the explanation given us
 with regard to this fellow cain and the mark on his forehead. don’t
 you find it so, too? it certainly might happen that should kill
 one of his brothers in quarrel, it is also possible that should
 afterwards be afraid, and have to come down peg. but that should
 be singled out into the bargain with decoration for his cowardice,
 which protects him and strikes terror into everyone else, that is
 really rather odd.”
 
“certainly,” i said, interested. the case began to interest me. “but
 how else should one explain the story?” clapped on the shoulder.
 
“quite simply! the essential fact, and the point of departure of the
 story, was the sign. here was man who had something in his face which
 terrified other people. they did not dare to molest him, made big
 impression on them, and his children. perhaps, or rather certainly,
 it was not really sign on his forehead like an office stamp--things
 are not as simple as that in real life. i would sooner think it was
 something scarcely perceptible, of peculiar nature--a little more
 intelligence and boldness in his look than people were accustomed to.
 this man had power, other people shrank from him. had ‘sign.’
 one could explain that as one wished. and one always wishes what is
 convenient and agrees with one’s opinions. people were afraid of cain’s
 children, they had ‘sign.’ and so they explained the sign not as it
 really was, distinction, but as the contrary. the fellows with this
 sign were said to be peculiar, and they were courageous as well. people
 with courage and character are always called peculiar by other people.
 that race of fearless and peculiar men should rove about was very
 embarrassing. and so people attached surname and story to this
 race, in order to revenge themselves on it, in order to compensate
 themselves more or less for all the terror with which it had inspired
 them. do you understand?”
 
“yes--that means to say, then--that cain was not at all wicked? and the
 whole story in the bible isn’t really true?”
 
“yes and no. such ancient, primitive stories are always true, but they
 have not always been recorded and explained in the proper manner. in
 short, i mean that cain was thundering good fellow, and this story
 got attached to his name simply because people were afraid of him. the
 story was merely report, something people might have set going in a
 gossiping way, and it was true in so far as cain and his children did
 actually wear sort of ‘sign’ and were different from most people.”
 
i was much astonished.
 
“and do you believe then, that the affair of the murder is absolutely
 untrue?” i asked, much impressed.
 
“not at all! it is certainly true. the strong man killed weak one.
 one may doubt of course whether it was really his brother or not. it
 is not important, for, in the end, all men are brothers. strong man,
 then, has killed weak one. perhaps it was deed of heroism, perhaps
 it was not. but in any case the other weak people were terrified,
 they lamented and complained, and when they were asked: ‘why don’t
 you simply kill him as well?’ they did not answer, ‘because we are
 cowards,’ but they said instead: ‘you can’t. has sign. god has
 singled him out!’ the humbug must have arisen something after this
 style---- oh, i am keeping you from going in. good-bye, then!”
 
turned into old street and left alone, more astonished than i
 had ever been before. scarcely had gone when everything that he
 had said seemed to quite unbelievable! cain noble fellow, abel a
 coward! cain’s sign distinction! it was absurd, it was blasphemous
 and infamous. what was god’s part in the matter? had not accepted
 abel’s sacrifice, did not love abel? demian’s story was nonsense!
 i suspected him of making fun of and of wishing to mislead me. the
 devil of clever fellow, and could talk, but--well----
 
still, i had never thought so much about any of the biblical or other
 stories before. and for some time past i had never so completely
 forgotten frank kromer, for hours, for whole evening. at home i
 read through the story once again, as it stands in the bible, short
 and clear. it was quite foolish to try to find special, secret
 meaning. if it had one, every murderer could look upon himself as a
 favorite of god! no, it was nonsense. but demian had nice way of
 saying such things, so easily and pleasantly, as if everything were
 self-evident--and then his eyes!
 
my ideas were certainly little upset, or rather they were very much
 confused. i had lived in bright, clean world, i myself had been a
 sort of abel, and now i was so firmly fixed in the other and had
 sunk so deeply, but really what could i do to help it? what was my
 position now? reminiscence glowed in which for the moment almost
 took away my breath. i remembered that wretched evening, from which my
 present misery dated, when i looked for an instant into the heart of my
 father’s bright world and despised his wisdom! then i was cain and bore
 the sign; i imagined that it was in way shameful, but distinction,
 and in my wickedness and unhappiness i stood on higher level than my
 father, higher than good and pious people.
 
it was not in such clear-thinking way that my experience then
 presented itself to me, but all this was contained therein. it was only
 flaming up of feeling, of strange emotions which caused pain and
 yet filled with pride.
 
when i considered the matter, i saw how strangely demian had spoken of
 the fearless and the cowards! how curiously had explained the mark
 on cain’s forehead. how singularly his eyes had lit up, those peculiar
 eyes of grown person! and indistinctly it shot through my brain: is
 not himself, this demian, sort of cain? why did defend him, if
 did not feel like him? why had this force in his gaze? why did he
 speak so scornfully of the “others,” of the fearsome, who are really
 the pious and the well-considered of god?
 
this thought led to definite conclusion. stone had fallen into
 the well, and the well was my young soul. and this business with cain,
 the murder and the sign, was for long, very long, time the point
 from which my seekings after knowledge, my doubts and my criticisms
 took their departure.
 
i noticed that the other boys also occupied themselves good deal with
 demian. i had not told anyone of his version of the story of cain,
 but appeared to interest the others as well. at least, many rumors
 concerning the “new boy” became current. if only i still knew all of
 them, each would help to throw fresh light on him, each would serve
 to interpret him. i only remember the first rumor was that demian’s
 mother was very rich. it was also said that she never went to church,
 nor the either. another rumor had it that they were jews, but they
 could just as easily have been, in secret, mohammedans. furthermore,
 tales were told of max demian’s strength. so much was certain, that the
 strongest boy in his form, who challenged him to fight, and who at
 his refusal branded him coward, suffered terrible humiliation at his
 hands. those who were there said that demian had simply taken him by
 the nape of the neck with one hand and had brought such pressure to
 bear that the boy went white and afterwards crawled away, and that for
 several days was unable to use his arm. for whole evening rumor
 even ran that was dead. for time everything was asserted and
 believed, everything that was exciting and wonderful. then there was
 satiety of rumors for while. little later new ones circulated,
 which asserted that demian had intimate relations with girls and “knew
 everything.”
 
meanwhile my affair with frank kromer took its inevitable course. i
 could not get away from him, for although left in peace for
 days together, i was still bound to him. in my dreams lived as my
 shadow, and thus my fantasy credited him with actions which did not,
 in reality, do; so that in dreams i was absolutely his slave. i lived
 in these dreams--i was always deep dreamer--more than in reality.
 these shadowy conceptions wasted my strength and my life force. i often
 dreamed, among other things, that kromer ill-treated me, that spat
 on and knelt on and, what was worse, that led to commit
 grave crimes--or rather i was not led, but simply forced, through his
 powerful influence. the most terrible of these dreams, from which i
 woke up half mad, presented itself as murderous attack on my father.
 kromer whetted knife and put it in my hand, as we were standing
 behind the trees of lane, and lying in wait for someone--whom i knew
 not; but when someone came along and kromer through pressure of the
 arm informed that this was the man, whom i was to stab, it turned
 out to be my father! then i woke up.
 
with all these troubles, i still thought great deal about cain and
 abel, but much less about demian. it was, strangely enough, in dream
 that first came in contact with again. i dreamed once more, of
 assault and ill-treatment which i suffered, but instead of kromer,
 this time it was demian who knelt upon me. and, what was quite new and
 profoundly impressive, everything that i suffered resistingly and in
 torment at the hands of kromer, i suffered willingly from demian, with
 feeling which was composed as much of joy as of fear. i had this
 dream twice, then kromer occupied his old position in my thoughts.
 
for long time i have not been able to separate what i experienced in
 these dreams from what i underwent in reality. but in any case my evil
 relation with kromer took its course, and was by means at an end,
 when i had at last, by petty thefts, paid the boy the sum owed. no, for
 now knew of these thefts, as always asked where the money came
 from, and i was more in his hands than ever. frequently threatened
 to tell my father everything, and my terror then was scarcely as
 great as the profound regret that i had not myself done that in the
 beginning. however, miserable as i was, i did not repent of everything,
 at least not always, and sometimes felt, i thought, that things could
 not have helped being as they were. the hand of fate was upon me, and
 it was useless to want to break away.
 
i conjecture that my parents suffered not little in these
 circumstances. strange spirit had come over me, i longer fitted
 into our community which had been so intimate, and for which i often
 felt maddening homesickness, as for lost paradise. i was treated,
 particularly by mother, more like sick person than like miserable
 wretch. but the actual state of affairs i was able to observe best
 in the conduct of my two sisters. it was quite evident from their
 behavior, which was very considerate and which yet caused endless
 pain, that i was sort of person possessed, who was more to be pitied
 than blamed for his condition, but yet in whom evil had taken up
 residence. i felt that i was being prayed for in different way from
 formerly, and realized the fruitlessness of these prayers. i often felt
 burning within an intense longing for relief, an ardent desire for
 full confession, and yet i realized in advance that i should not be
 able to tell everything to father and mother properly, in explanation
 of my conduct. i knew that i should be received in friendly way,
 that much consideration and compassion would be shown me, but that i
 should not be completely understood. the whole affair would have been
 looked upon as sort of backsliding, whereas it was really the work of
 destiny.
 
i know that many people will not believe that child scarcely eleven
 years old could feel thus. but i am not relating my affairs for their
 benefit. my narration is for those who know mankind better. the
 grown-up person who has learned to convert part of his feelings into
 thoughts, feels the absence of these ideas in child, and comes to
 believe that the experiences are likewise lacking. but they have seldom
 been so vivid and not often in my life have i suffered as keenly as
 then.
 
one rainy day i was ordered by my tormentor to castle place, and there
 i stood, waiting and digging my feet in the wet chestnut leaves, which
 were still falling regularly from the black, dripping branches. money
 i had none, but i had brought with two pieces of cake that i had
 stolen in order at least to be able to give kromer something. i had
 long since been accustomed to stand about in any odd corner waiting for
 him often for very long time, and i put up with the unalterable.
 
kromer came at last. that day did not stay long. poked several
 times in the ribs, laughed, took the cake, and even offered mouldy
 cigarette, which however i did not accept. was more friendly than
 usual.
 
“oh,” said, as went away, “before i forget--next time you can
 bring your sister along, the elder one. what’s her name? now tell the
 truth.”
 
i did not understand, and gave answer. i only looked at him
 wonderingly.
 
“don’t you get me? you must bring your sister along.”
 
“but kromer, that won’t do. i mustn’t do that, and besides she wouldn’t
 come.”
 
i thought this was only another pretext for vexing me. often did
 that, requiring to do something impossible, and so terrifying me.
 and often, after humiliating me, would by degrees become more
 tractable. i then had to buy myself off with money or with some other
 gift.
 
this time was quite different. was really not at all angry at my
 refusal.
 
“well,” said airily, “you’ll think about it, won’t you? i should
 like to make your sister’s acquaintance. it will not be so difficult.
 you simply take her out for walk, and then i come along. to-morrow
 i’ll whistle for you, and then we can talk more about it.”
 
when had gone, glimpse of the meaning of his request dawned on me.
 i was still quite child, but i knew by hearsay that boys and girls,
 when they were somewhat older, did things which were forbidden, things
 of secret and scandalous nature. and now i should also have to--it
 was suddenly quite clear to how monstrous it was! i immediately
 resolved never to do that. but i scarcely dared think of what would
 happen in that case and how kromer would revenge himself on me. new
 torment began, i had not yet been tortured enough.
 
i walked disconsolately across the empty square, my hands in my
 pockets. fresh torments, new servitude!
 
suddenly fresh, deep voice called to me. i was terrified and began to
 run on. someone ran after me, hand gripped from behind. it was max
 demian.
 
i let myself be taken prisoner. i surrendered.
 
“it’s you?” i said uncertainly. “you frightened so!”
 
looked at me, and never had his glance been more like that of an
 adult, of superior and penetrating person. for long time past we
 had not spoken with one another.
 
“i am sorry,” said in his courteous and at the same time very
 determined manner. “but listen, you mustn’t let yourself be frightened
 like that.”
 
“oh, that can happen sometimes.”
 
“so it appears. but look here: if you shrink like that from someone
 who hasn’t hurt you, then this someone begins to think. it makes him
 curious, wonders what can be the matter. this somebody thinks to
 himself, how awfully frightened you are, and thinks further: one is
 only like that when one is terrified. cowards are always frightened;
 but i believe you aren’t really coward. ain’t i right? of course, you
 aren’t hero either. there are things of which you are afraid. there
 are also people of whom you are afraid. and that should never be. no
 one should ever be afraid of other people. you aren’t afraid of me? or
 are you, perhaps?”
 
“oh no, of course not.”
 
“there, you see. but there are people you are afraid of?”
 
“i don’t know ... let go, what do you want of me?”
 
kept pace with me--i was going quicker with the idea of escaping--i
 felt his look directed on from the side.
 
“just assume,” began again, “that i mean well with you. in any
 case you needn’t be afraid of me. i would very much like to try
 an experiment with you--it’s funny, and you can learn something
 that’s very useful. listen: i often practise an art which is called
 mind-reading. there’s witchcraft in it, but it seems very peculiar
 if one doesn’t know how to do it. you can surprise people very much
 with it. well, let us try it. i like you, or i interest myself in
 you, and i would like to find out what your real feelings are. i have
 already made the first step towards doing that. i have frightened
 you--you are, then, easily frightened. there are things and people of
 which and of whom you are afraid. why is it? one need be afraid of no
 one. if you fear somebody then it is due to the fact that has power
 over you. for example, you have done something wrong, and the other
 person knows it--then has power over you. d’you get me? it’s clear,
 isn’t it?”
 
i looked helplessly into his face, which was serious and prudent as
 always, and kind as well, but without any tenderness--his features were
 rather severe. righteousness or something akin lay therein. i was not
 conscious of what was happening; stood like magician before me.
 
“have you understood?” questioned again.
 
i nodded. i could not speak.
 
“i told you mind-reading looked rather strange, but the process is
 quite natural. i could for example tell you more or less exactly what
 you thought about when i once told you the story of cain and abel.
 but that has nothing to do with the matter in hand. i also think it
 possible that you have dreamed of me. but let’s leave that out! you’re
 clever kid, most of ’em are so stupid. i like talking now and then
 with clever fellow whom i can trust. you have objections, have
 you?”
 
“oh, no! only i don’t understand.”
 
“let’s keep to our old experiment! we have found that: the boy s. is
 easily frightened--he is afraid of somebody--he apparently shares a
 secret with this other person, which causes him much disquietude. is
 that about right?”
 
as in dream i lay under the influence of his voice, of his
 personality. i only nodded. was not voice talking there, which could
 only come from myself? which knew all? which knew all in better,
 clearer way than i myself?
 
demian gave powerful slap on the shoulder.
 
“that’s right then. i thought so. now just one question more: do you
 know the name of the boy who has just gone away?”
 
i sank back, had the key to my secret, this secret which twisted
 back inside as if it did not want to see the light.
 
“what sort of fellow? there was one there, except myself.”
 
laughed.
 
“don’t be afraid to tell me,” said laughingly. “what’s his name?”
 
i whispered: “do you mean frank kromer?”
 
nodded contentedly.
 
“bravo! you’re smart chap, we shall be good friends yet. but now i
 must tell you something else: this kromer, or whatever his name is, is
 nasty fellow. his face tells he’s rascal! what do you think?”
 
“oh yes,” i sobbed out, “he is nasty, he’s devil! but mustn’t know
 anything! for god’s sake, mustn’t know anything. d’you know him?
 does know you?”
 
“don’t worry! he’s gone, and doesn’t know me--not yet. but i should
 like to make his acquaintance. goes to the public school?”
 
“yes.”
 
“in which standard?”
 
“in the fifth. but don’t say anything to him! please, don’t say
 anything to him!”
 
“don’t worry, nothing will happen to you. i suppose you wouldn’t like
 to tell little more about this fellow kromer?”
 
“i can’t! no, let go!”
 
was silent for while.
 
“it’s pity,” said, “we might have been able to carry the
 experiment still further. but i don’t want to bother you. you know,
 don’t you, that it is not right of you to be afraid of him? such fear
 quite undermines us, you must get rid of it. you must get rid of it, if
 you want to become real man. d’you understand?”
 
“certainly, you are quite right ... but it won’t do. you don’t know....”
 
“you have seen that i know lot, more than you thought. do you owe him
 any money?”
 
“yes, i do, but that isn’t the essential point. i can’t tell, i can’t!”
 
“it won’t help matters, then, if i give you the amount you owe him? i
 could very well let you have it.”
 
“no, no, that is not the point. and please: don’t say anything to
 anybody! not word! you are making miserable!”
 
“rely on me, sinclair. later you can share your secrets with me.”
 
“never, never!” i exclaimed vehemently.
 
“just as you please. i only mean, perhaps you will tell something
 more later on. only of your own free will, you understand. surely you
 don’t think i shall act like kromer?”
 
“oh no--but you don’t even know anything about it!”
 
“absolutely nothing. but i think about it. and i shall never act like
 kromer, believe me. besides, you don’t owe anything.”
 
we remained long time silent, and i became more tranquil. but
 demian’s knowledge became more and more of puzzle to me.
 
“i’m going home now,” said, and in the rain drew his coat more
 closely about him. “i should only like to repeat one thing to you,
 since we have gone so far in the matter--you ought to get rid of this
 fellow! if there is nothing else to be done, then kill him! it would
 impress and please me, if you were to do that. besides, i would help
 you.”
 
i was again terrified. i suddenly remembered the story of cain. i had
 an uncanny feeling and i began to cry softly. so much that was weird
 seemed to surround me.
 
“all right,” max demian said, smilingly. “go home now! we will put
 things square, although murder would have been the simplest. in such
 matters the simplest way is always the best. you aren’t in good hands,
 with your friend kromer.”
 
i came home, and it seemed to as if i had been away year.
 everything looked different. between myself and kromer there now stood
 something like future freedom, something like hope. i was lonely no
 longer! and then i realized for the first time how terribly lonely i
 had been for weeks and weeks. and i immediately recollected what i had
 on several occasions turned over in my mind: that confession to my
 parents would afford relief and yet would not quite liberate me. now
 i had almost confessed, to another, to stranger, and as if strong
 perfume had been wafted to me, sensed the presentiment of salvation!
 
still my fear was far from being overcome, and i was still prepared for
 long and terrible mental wrestlings with my evil genius. so it was all
 the more remarkable to that everything passed off so very secretly
 and quietly.
 
kromer’s whistle remained absent from our house for day, two days,
 three days, whole week. i dared not believe my senses, and lay
 inwardly on the watch, to see whether would not suddenly stand
 before me, just at that moment when i should expect him longer. but
 was, and remained, away! distrustful of my new freedom, i still
 could not bring myself to believe in it whole-heartedly. until at
 last i met frank kromer. was coming down the street, straight in
 my direction. when saw me, drew himself together, twisted his
 features in brutal grimace, and turned away without more ado, in
 order to avoid meeting me.
 
that was wonderful moment for me! my enemy ran away from me! my devil
 was afraid of me! surprise and joy shook through and through!
 
in few days demian showed himself once again. waited for me
 outside school.
 
“hullo,” i said.
 
“good morning, sinclair. i only wanted to hear how you’re getting on.
 kromer leaves you in peace, doesn’t he?”
 
“did you manage that? but how did you do it? how? i don’t understand
 it. hasn’t come near me.”
 
“splendid. if should come again--i don’t think will, but he’s a
 cheeky fellow--then simply tell him to remember demian.”
 
“but what does it all mean? have you had fight with him and thrashed
 him?”
 
“no, i’m not so keen on that. i simply talked to him, as i did to you,
 and i made it clear to him that it is to his own advantage to leave you
 in peace.”
 
“oh, but you haven’t given him any money?”
 
“no, kid. you have already tried that way yourself.”
 
i attempted to pump him on the matter, but disengaged himself. the
 old, embarrassed feeling concerning him came over me--an odd mixture of
 gratitude and shyness, of admiration and fear, of affection and inward
 resistance.
 
i had the intention of seeing him again soon, and then i wanted to talk
 more about everything, about the cain affair as well. but i did not see
 him. gratitude is not one of the virtues in which i believe, and to
 require it of child would seem to wrong. so i do not wonder very
 much at the complete ingratitude which i evinced towards max demian.
 to-day i believe positively that i should have been ruined for life if
 had not freed from kromer’s clutches. at that time also i already
 felt this release as the greatest event of my young life--but i left
 the deliverer on one side as soon as had accomplished the miracle.
 
as i have said, ingratitude seems to nothing strange. solely, the
 lack of curiosity i evinced is odd. how was it possible that i could
 continue for single day my quiet mode of life without coming nearer
 to the secrets with which demian had brought in contact? how could
 i restrain the desire to hear more about cain, more about kromer, more
 about the thought-reading?
 
it is scarcely comprehensible, and yet it is so. i suddenly saw myself
 extricated from the demoniacal toils, saw again the world lying
 bright and cheerful before me. i was longer subject to paroxysms
 of fear. the curse was broken, i was longer tormented and
 condemned creature, i was schoolboy again. my temperament sought
 to regain its equilibrium and tranquillity as quickly as possible,
 and so i took pains above all things to put behind all that had
 been ugly and menacing, and to forget it. the whole, long story of my
 guilt, of my terrifying anxiety, slipped from my memory wonderfully
 quick, apparently without having left behind any scars or impressions
 whatsoever.
 
the fact that i likewise tried as quickly to forget my helper and
 deliverer, i understand to-day as well. instinctively my mind turned
 from the damning recollection of my awful servitude under kromer, and
 i sought to recover my former happy, contented mental outlook, to
 regain that lost paradise which opened once more to me, the bright
 father-and-mother world, where my sisters dwelt in the fragrant
 atmosphere of purity, in loving kindness such as god had extended to
 abel.
 
on the very next day after my short conversation with demian, when i
 was at last fully convinced of my newly-born freedom and feared no
 longer relapse to my condition of slavery, i did what i had so often
 and so ardently desired to do--i confessed. i went to mother and showed
 her the little savings box with the broken lock, filled with toy mark
 pieces instead of with real money, and i told her how long i had been
 in the thrall of an evil tormentor, through my own guilt. she did not
 understand everything, but she saw the money box, she saw my altered
 look and heard my changed voice--she felt that i was healed, that i had
 been restored to her.
 
and then with lofty feelings i celebrated my readmission into the
 family, the prodigal son’s return home. mother took to father, the
 story was repeated, questions and exclamations of wonder followed in
 quick succession, both parents stroked my hair and breathed deeply, as
 in relief from long oppression. it was all lovely, like the stories
 i had read, all discords were resolved in happy ending.
 
i surrendered myself passionately to this harmonious state of affairs.
 i could not have enough of the idea that i was again free and trusted
 by my parents. i was model boy at home and played more frequently
 than ever with my sisters. at prayers i sang the dear, old hymns with
 the blissful feeling of one converted and redeemed. it came straight
 from my heart, it was lie this time.
 
and yet it was not at all as it should have been. and this is the point
 which alone can truly explain my forgetfulness of demian. i ought to
 have made confession _to him_! the confession would have been
 less touching and less specious, but for it would have borne more
 fruit. i was now clinging fast to my former paradisaical world, i had
 returned home and had been received in grace. but demian belonged in no
 wise to this world, did not fit into it. also--in different way
 from kromer--but nevertheless also was seducer, too bound to
 the second, evil, bad world, and of this world i never wanted to hear
 anything more. i could not now, and i did not wish to give up abel and
 help to glorify cain, now when i myself had again become an abel.
 
so much for the outward correlation of events. but inwardly it was like
 this: i had been freed from the hands of kromer and the devil, but not
 through my own strength and effort. i had ventured footing on the
 paths of the world, and they had been too slippery for me. now that
 the grasp of friendly hand had saved me, i ran back, without another
 glance round, to mother’s lap, to the protecting, godly and tender
 security of childhood. i made myself younger, more dependent on others,
 more childlike than i really was. i had to replace my dependence on
 kromer by new one, since i was powerless to strike out for myself.
 so i chose, in the blindness of my heart, the dependence on father
 and mother, on the old, beloved, “bright world,” on this world which
 i knew already was not the sole one. had i not done this, i should
 have had to hold to demian, to entrust myself to him. the fact that i
 did not, appeared to then to be due to justifiable distrust of his
 strange ideas; in reality it was due to nothing else than fear. for
 demian would have required more of than did my parents, much more.
 by stimulation and exhortation, by scorn and irony would have tried
 to make more independent. alas, i know that to-day: nothing in the
 world is so distasteful to man as to go the way which leads him to
 himself!
 
and yet, about half year later, i could not resist the temptation to
 ask my father while we were out for walk, what was to be made of the
 fact that many people declared cain to be better than abel.
 
was much surprised, and explained to that this was conception
 by means novel. it had even emerged in the early christian era, and
 had been professed by sects, one of which was called the “cainites.”
 but naturally this foolish doctrine was nothing else than an attempt of
 the devil to undermine our belief. for, if one believes that cain was
 right and abel was wrong, then it follows that god has erred, and that
 the god of the bible is not the true and only god, but false one. the
 cainites really used to profess and preach something approximating this
 doctrine; but this heresy vanished from among mankind long time ago
 and wondered the more that school friend had been able to learn
 something on the subject. nevertheless, earnestly exhorted not to
 let these ideas occupy my attention.
 



chapter three
 
the thief on the cross
 

i could describe scenes of my childhood, spent in peaceful security at
 the side of father and mother, relate how i passed this period of my
 life, playing contentedly in the midst of surroundings brightened by
 love and tenderness. but others have done that. i am only interested
 in the steps i took in life, in order to attain self-realization. all
 the pretty resting-places, happy isles and children’s paradises, whose
 charm is not unknown to me, i leave lying behind in the shimmer of a
 distant horizon, and i have desire to set foot there again.
 
for that reason i will speak, so far as i intend to dwell on the period
 of my childhood, only of new events which overtook me, of what impelled
 forward enabling to throw off my shackles.
 
these impulses always came from the “other” world, they always brought
 fear, coercion and bad conscience in their train, they were always
 of revolutionary tendency and danger to the peace in which i would
 willingly have been allowed to remain.
 
there came the years in which i had to discover anew that there was
 within an instinct which had to lie close and concealed in the
 bright world of moral sanction. as to every man, the slowly awakening
 sense of sex came to as an enemy and destroyer, as something
 forbidden, as seduction and sin. what my curiosity sought to know, what
 caused dreams, desire and fear, the great secret of puberty, that
 was not at all in keeping with the guarded happiness of my peaceful
 childhood. i did as everyone else. i led the double life of child,
 who is yet child longer. my conscious self lived under the
 conditions sanctioned at home; it denied the existence of the new world
 whose dawn glimmered before me. but i lived as well in dreams, impelled
 by desires of secret nature, upon which my conscious self anxiously
 attempted to build new fabric, as the world of my childhood fell in
 ruins about me. like almost all parents, my own did nothing to help
 the awakening life-instincts, about which not syllable was uttered.
 they only aided, with untiring care, my hopeless attempts to deny the
 reality, and to continue my existence in child-like world which was
 ever becoming more unreal and more mendacious. i do not know whether
 parents can do much in such case, and i make mine reproach. it
 was my own affair, to settle my difficulties and to find my way, and
 i carried through the business badly, like most of those who are well
 brought up.
 
every man passes through this difficulty. for the average person, this
 is the point in his life where the demands of his own life come most
 in conflict with his surroundings, where the road forward has to be
 attained through the bitterest fighting. for many people this is the
 only time in their lives that they experience the sequence of death
 and rebirth that is our fate, when they become conscious of the slow
 process of the decay and breaking up of the world of their childhood,
 when everything beloved of us leaves us, and we suddenly feel the
 loneliness and deathly cold of the universe around us. and for very
 many this pitfall is fatal. they cling their whole life long painfully
 to the irrevocable past, to the dream of lost paradise, the worst and
 most deadly of all dreams.
 
but to return to the story. the sensation and dream pictures in which
 the close of childhood presented itself to are not important
 enough to be described. the important point was that i was once again
 conscious of the existence of the “dark” world, the “other” world. what
 frank kromer had once been to me, was now present within myself. and
 so, from the outside as well, the other world once more gained power
 over me.
 
several years had passed since my affair with kromer. that dramatic
 and guilty time of my life lay far behind at that time and seemed
 to have passed like quick nightmare into nothingness. frank kromer
 had long since disappeared from my life; i scarcely gave it moment’s
 thought if i chanced to meet him. but the other important figure in my
 tragedy, max demian, never entirely disappeared from my life. however,
 for long time stood on the far horizon, visible, but not affecting
 me. only by degrees approached again, and i came once more under
 the ray of his power and influence.
 
i will try to recollect what i know of demian in that period. perhaps
 for year, or longer, i did not have single conversation with him.
 i avoided him, and in wise forced himself on me. once or twice,
 when we met, nodded to in friendly greeting. then it seemed to
 at times that there was note of scorn or ironical reproach in his
 friendliness, but that might only have been imagination on my part. my
 relation with him, and the strange influence had exercised over me,
 were as if forgotten, by him as well as by me.
 
i try to recall his face--as i recollect him, i see that i was
 conscious of his existence after all, and took notice of him. i can
 see him going to school, alone or with some of the other big boys. i
 see him walking among them like stranger, lonely and still like a
 celestial body, enveloped in different atmosphere and subject to
 his own laws. one liked him, was intimate with one, except
 his mother, and his relations with her did not seem like those of a
 child, but those of grown-up person. the masters left him as much as
 possible in peace. was good pupil, but did not go out of his
 way to please them. from time to time we heard, in gossip, of word, a
 comment or retort had made to master, and which left nothing to
 be desired in the way of blunt challenge or irony.
 
i call him to mind, as i close my eyes, and i see his picture emerge.
 where was it? ah, now i have it again. it was in the street, in front
 of our house. there one day i saw him standing, note book in his
 hand. i saw that was drawing. was drawing the old crest with the
 bird over the door of our house. and i stood at window, concealed
 behind curtain, and gazed at him. i saw with astonishment his
 attentive, cool, bright features turned to the crest, the features
 of man, of research worker, or an artist, superior and full of
 will-power, oddly bright and cool, with knowing eyes.
 
and again i can see him. it was little later, in the street; we had
 come out of school and were all standing round horse that had fallen
 down. it lay, still harnessed to the shaft, in front of peasant’s
 cart, and sniffed the air pitifully with open nostrils, while blood
 flowed from an invisible wound, so that the white dust in the street
 darkened as it became slowly saturated. as i, with feeling of nausea,
 turned my gaze away, i saw demian’s face. had not pressed forward,
 stood furthest back of all, rather elegant, quite at his ease, as
 was proper to him. his gaze seemed to be directed at the horse’s
 head, and expressed again that deep, quiet, almost fanatical and yet
 calm attentiveness. i could not resist watching him some considerable
 time, and i remember feeling, though quite unconsciously, that there
 was something very peculiar about him. i saw demian’s face, i saw not
 only that had not the face of boy, but that of man; i saw still
 more, i thought i saw, or felt, that it was not the face of man
 either but something else besides. there seemed to be also something
 of the woman in his features, and particularly it seemed to for a
 moment, not manly or boyish, nor old or young, but somehow or other a
 thousand years old, not to be measured by time, bearing the stamp of
 other epochs. animals could look like that, or trees, or stones--i did
 not realize that precisely, i did not experience the exact sensation
 which i, grown-up person, am now describing, but what i felt then
 approximated in some way to what i have just related. perhaps was
 beautiful, perhaps pleased me, perhaps even was repugnant--i
 could not then determine. i saw only that was different from us, he
 was like an animal, or spirit, or picture, i know not what was
 like, but was different, inconceivably different from us all.
 
my reminiscence tells nothing more, and perhaps even what has been
 described has arisen, in part, from later impressions.
 
until i was several years older, i did not come into close contact
 with him again. contrary to custom, demian had not been confirmed with
 the boys of his year, and in consequence fresh rumors concerning him
 were set afloat. in school they were again saying that was really
 jew, or no, heathen, and others pretended to know that and his
 mother professed religion, or that they belonged to bad sect in
 mythology. in connection with this i seem to remember that was
 suspected of living with his mother as with mistress. presumably
 the facts were that had been, up to that time, brought up without
 any denominational creed, and that it was now thought that this might
 be disadvantageous for his future career. in any case, his mother now
 decided after all to allow him to be prepared for confirmation, two
 years later than the boys of his own age. hence it came about that for
 months was my classmate in the confirmation class.
 
for time i kept out of his way, i did not want to have anything to do
 with him; too many mysterious rumors had become attached to his name.
 but above all things i was worried by sense of obligation, implanted
 in since my affair with kromer. and just at that time i had enough
 to do with my own secrets. for the confirmation class coincided with
 the period when i was definitively enlightened on matters of sex, and
 in spite of my good will, my interest in the pious instruction was on
 that account greatly diminished. the things of which the clergyman
 spoke lay far from in still, sacred unreality; they may have been
 quite beautiful and valuable, but in way real and stirring, as were
 in the highest degree, these other things.
 
the more indifferent i became, under these conditions, to our spiritual
 instruction, the more was my interest drawn towards max demian again.
 something or other seemed to unite us. as nearly as i remember it began
 in class early one morning, while the light was still burning in the
 schoolroom. the clergyman taking the confirmation class happened to be
 talking about cain and abel. i hardly paid any attention, i was sleepy
 and scarcely listened. then with raised voice the clergyman began to
 speak fervently of cain’s sign. at this moment i felt sort of contact
 or exhortation and looking up i saw demian’s face turned toward from
 row of desks in front, with bright speaking look, which could have
 expressed scorn as much as seriousness. looked at for moment
 only, and suddenly i was listening intently to the clergyman’s words.
 i heard him speak of cain and the mark on his forehead, and suddenly i
 felt deep within the knowledge that the story could have different
 signification, that it could be looked at from another view, that it
 was possible to be critical.
 
from that instant the bond of communication between demian and myself
 was again established. and oddly enough, scarcely had this sense of
 certain solidarity between us presented itself to my mind, than i
 saw it transferred as if by magic from the ideal world to the world of
 space. i did not know whether had been able to arrange it himself,
 or whether it was pure chance--at that time i believed firmly in
 chance--but few days after i noticed demian had suddenly changed his
 place and was now sitting directly in front of me. (i recollect still
 how pleasant it was, in the midst of the miserable workhouse atmosphere
 of the overcrowded schoolroom, to sense the delicate, fresh aroma of
 soap from his neck in the morning.) few days later had changed
 again, and now sat next to me. and there stayed, occupying the same
 place through the whole of that winter and spring.
 
morning lessons had quite changed. they were longer sleepy and
 boring. i looked forward to them. sometimes we both listened to the
 clergyman with the greatest attention. glance from my neighbor would
 suffice, calling my attention to strange story or peculiar text.
 and another glance from him, very decided one, acted on as an
 admonition, arousing criticism and doubt.
 
but very often we were bad pupils and heard nothing of the lesson.
 demian was always courteous towards masters and schoolfellows. i never
 saw him commit schoolboy prank, never heard him laugh out loud or
 talk in class; never drew on himself the master’s blame. but
 noiselessly, rather by signs and glances than by whispered words, he
 knew how to let share in his own occupations. these were, in part,
 of peculiar nature.
 
for instance, told which of the fellows interested him; and in
 what manner studied them. judged many of them with accuracy.
 used to say to before the lesson: “when i signal to you with
 my thumb, so and so will look round at us, or will scratch his neck,
 etc.” then during the lesson, when i scarcely gave thought to what
 had told me, max would attract my attention by suddenly bending
 his thumb. i would look up quickly at the boy already designated, and
 every time, as if attached to wire, the fellow would make the gesture
 required of him. i bothered max to try this on the master, but did
 not want to do it. but once, when i came into class and told him i
 had not done my preparation, and that i hoped the clergyman would not
 question that day, helped me. the master looked round for boy
 to recite portion of the catechism, and his roving eye rested on me.
 approached slowly, stretched out his finger in my direction, and
 already had my name on his lips--when suddenly became absent-minded
 or uneasy, put his hand to his collar, stepped up to demian who looked
 fixedly into his face. seemed to want to ask him something but he
 turned away, to our surprise, coughed little, and put his question to
 another boy.
 
these jokes amused very much, but only gradually did i notice that
 my friend frequently played the same game with me. it would happen
 that on my way home from school i had suddenly the feeling demian was
 little way behind me, and when i turned round, there was, sure
 enough.
 
“can you really make another person think what you want him to?” i
 asked him.
 
gave information on the subject readily enough, quietly and
 pertinently, in his grown-up manner.
 
“no,” said, “that can’t be done. that is to say, one hasn’t free
 will, even if the person acts that way. neither can the other person
 think as will, nor can i make him think what i want him to. but you
 can observe someone well, and then you can say fairly exactly what he
 thinks or feels; in this way you can generally predict what will do
 the moment after. it’s quite simple, but people merely do not know it.
 naturally it requires practice. to take an example from the butterfly
 world, there is certain species of moth, of which the female is much
 rarer than the male. the moths reproduce like other animals, the male
 impregnates the female, who then lays the egg. suppose you have in your
 possession female of this type of moth--naturalists have often made
 the experiment--then the male moths fly in the night to this female,
 they even make flight of several hours’ duration! think of it! for
 many miles around all the males are conscious of the whereabouts of the
 only female moth in the district. people have tried to explain that,
 but it is not easy. moths must have sense of smell, or something like
 it, which allows them to pick up and follow an almost imperceptible
 scent, like good hound. you understand? there are such things, nature
 is full of them, and one can explain them. now i draw the conclusion
 that if among this class of moths the females were as abundant as
 the males, then these latter would not have such refined sense of
 smell! they have it simply because they have been trained like that.
 if an animal or man concentrates his whole attention and his whole
 will-power on certain thing then attains it. that’s all. and it is
 just the same with what you have asked me. observe man sufficiently
 well, and you will know more about him than does himself.”
 
it lay on the tip of my tongue to mention the word “mind-reading,” and
 so to remind him of the scene with kromer, now relegated to such a
 distant past. but the odd thing between us both was that neither nor
 i ever made the slightest reference to the fact that several years ago
 had intervened so decisively in my life. it was as if formerly there
 had been nothing between us, or as if each of us reckoned that the
 other had forgotten the affair. it even happened once or twice when we
 were together that we met frank kromer in the street, but we exchanged
 look, neither did we speak of him.
 
“but what has that got to do with will-power?” i asked. “you said there
 was such thing as free will. and then you said one only had to
 concentrate one’s will on something to be able to attain one’s ends.
 that doesn’t agree! if i am not master of my will, then i can’t direct
 it here or there as i wish.”
 
“a good question!” said, laughing. “you should always ask questions,
 you must always doubt. but the explanation is very simple. if moth
 for instance wants to concentrate his will-power on star or something
 like that, can’t do it. only--he doesn’t try. seeks only what
 has sense and value for him, satisfies his needs, gets what he
 absolutely must have. and it is just there that the unbelievable
 succeeds--he develops marvelous sixth sense, that other animal
 besides him has! people in our position have more elbow-room,
 certainly, and more interests than an animal. but even we are confined
 to comparatively small space, beyond which we cannot go. to be sure,
 i can imagine this or that, or make myself believe that i absolutely
 want to get to the north pole or somewhere, but i can only carry that
 out and wish it strongly enough when the desire lies right in myself,
 when my whole being is really filled with it. as soon as that is the
 case, as soon as you try to carry out an inward command, then you
 succeed, then you can harness your will as you would good nag. if
 for instance i resolved that our good mr. parson shall not wear his
 spectacles for the future, then that wouldn’t work. that is merely
 play. but when last autumn i had the fixed intention of getting myself
 moved to another desk, i succeeded. someone suddenly arrived who came
 before in the alphabet and who up to then had been ill. because
 someone had to make room for him, it was naturally i who did it,
 because my willing it had made ready to seize the opportunity.”
 
“yes,” i said, “that seemed to very strange at the time. from the
 moment we began to get interested in one another, you managed to get
 nearer and nearer to me. but how was that? you did not immediately take
 place next to me; for few lessons at first you were sitting in the
 row of desks in front of me, weren’t you? how did that come about?”
 
“it was like this. i wasn’t quite certain where i wanted to go when
 i wished to move from my first place. i only knew that i wanted to
 sit further back. it was my wish to move towards you, but i was not
 conscious of this at the time. simultaneously your own will was working
 with mine and helped me. it was only when i sat in front of you that i
 realized my wish was only half fulfilled--i noticed that really i had
 desired nothing else than to sit next to you.”
 
“but on that occasion newcomer arrived.”
 
“no, but then i simply did what i wished, and sat next to you without
 hesitation. the boy with whom i changed places was simply surprised,
 and let do it without further say. and the parson indeed noticed
 once that change had taken place--in fact, whenever looks at me
 something worries him secretly. that is to say, knows my name is
 demian, and that something must be wrong that i, whose initial is d,
 am sitting back there among the s’s! but that does not penetrate his
 consciousness because my will is against it, because i prevent him
 again and again from becoming conscious of it. notices now and
 then that something is wrong. looks at and begins to study the
 question, the good fellow. but i have simple means at my disposal.
 i look at him very, very fixedly in the eyes. hardly anyone can bear
 that. they always get restive. if you want to get something out of a
 person, and you fix him unexpectedly with your eyes, and if doesn’t
 get restive, then give it up! you won’t get anything out of him, ever!
 but that happens seldom. i know only one single person with whom this
 trick won’t help me.”
 
“who is that?” i asked quickly.
 
looked at me, with eyes somewhat closed; as his fashion was when he
 meditated. then looked away and gave answer, and in spite of my
 lively curiosity i could not bring myself to repeat the question.
 
but i believe was referring to his mother. seemed to live on
 very intimate terms with her, but never spoke about her, never
 invited to his house. i scarcely knew what his mother looked like.
 
* * * * *
 
several times i attempted to imitate his example by concentrating my
 will-power on something so firmly that i would have to attain it. i had
 desires which seemed to sufficiently pressing. but nothing came of
 it. i could not bring myself to talk matters over with demian. i should
 not have been able to make him understand what i wanted. did not
 ask, either.
 
my faith in matters of religion had meanwhile suffered many breach.
 yet in my manner of thinking, which was entirely under the influence of
 demian, i was to be distinguished from those of my schoolfellows who
 professed an entire disbelief. there were few such who let occasional
 phrases be overheard, to the effect that it was laughable and unworthy
 of man’s dignity to believe in god, and that stories such as those
 of the trinity and the immaculate conception of the virgin mary were
 simply joke. it was disgraceful, they said, that such rubbish was
 peddled about to-day. this was by means my way of thinking. even
 where i had doubts, the whole experience of my childhood taught to
 believe in the efficacy of godly life such as that led by my parents,
 which i knew to be neither contemptible nor hypocritical. on the
 contrary, now as before, i had the greatest reverence for the spirit
 of religion. only demian had accustomed to consider and explain the
 stories and articles of belief from more liberal and more personal
 point of view, point of view in which fantasy and imagination had
 their share. at least, i always took great pleasure and enjoyment in
 the interpretations suggested to me. to be sure much seemed to me
 too crude; such as the affair of cain. and once, during the preparation
 for confirmation, i was terrified by conception, which, if that were
 possible, seemed to even still more daring. the master had been
 speaking of golgotha. the biblical account of the passion and death of
 christ had, from my earliest years, made deep impression on me. as a
 little boy, on such days as good friday, after my father had read out
 to us the story of the passion, i had lived in imagination and with
 much emotion in gethsemane and on golgotha, in that world so poignantly
 beautiful, pale and ghostlike, and yet so terribly alive. and when i
 listened to the passion according to st. matthew by bach, i felt the
 mystical thrills of this dark, powerful, mysterious world of passion
 and suffering. i find in this music, even to-day and in the “actus
 tragicus,” the essence of all poetry and of all artistic expression.
 
at the conclusion of the lesson demian said to contemplatively:
 
“there’s something in this, sinclair, which i don’t like. read through
 the story, consider it, there’s something there which sounds insipid. i
 mean this business of the two thieves. it’s sublime, the three crosses
 standing side by side on the hill! but what about this sentimental
 story of the honest thief, which reads more like tract? first was
 criminal who had perpetrated crimes, and god knows what, and now
 breaks out in tears and is consumed by feelings of contrition and
 repentance. i ask you what’s the sense of such repentance two steps
 from the grave? it’s nothing but real parson’s story, mawkish and
 mendacious, larded with emotion, and having most edifying background.
 if to-day you had to choose one of the two thieves as your friend, or
 if you consider which of the two you would the sooner have trusted, it
 would most certainly not be this weeping convert. no, it’s the other,
 who’s real fellow with plenty of character. doesn’t care straw
 about conversion, which in his case can mean simply nothing more than
 pretty speeches. goes his way bravely to the end, without being
 such coward as to renounce the devil in the last moment who up to
 that point has had to help him. is character, and in biblical
 history people of character always come off second best. perhaps he’s a
 descendant of cain. don’t you think so?”
 
i was dismayed. i had believed myself to be quite familiar with the
 story of the crucifixion, and now i saw for the first time what
 little personal judgment i had brought to bear on it, with what little
 force of imagination and of fantasy i had listened to it and read
 it. demian’s new ideas, therefore, were quite annoying, threatening
 to overthrow conceptions, the stability of which i had believed it
 necessary to maintain. no, one could not deal with anything and
 everything like that, certainly not with the all holiest.
 
as always, noticed my opposition immediately, even before i had
 spoken word.
 
“i know,” said he, in tone of resignation, “it’s the old story.
 everything is all right until you’re serious about it! but i’ll tell
 you something: this is one of the points where one can clearly see
 the shortcomings of this religion. the fact is that this god, of the
 old and of the new dispensation, may be an excellent conception, but
 is not what really ought to be. is everything that is good,
 noble, fatherly, beautiful, sublime and sentimental certainly! but the
 world consists of other things which are simply ascribed to the devil.
 all this part of the world, good half, is suppressed and hushed up.
 just the same as they praise god as the father of all life, but pass
 over the whole sex-life, on which all life depends, and declare it to
 be sinful and the work of the devil! i have nothing to say against
 honoring this god jehovah, nothing at all. but i think we should
 reverence everything and look upon the whole world as sacred, not
 merely this artificially separated, official half of it! we ought then
 to worship the devil as well as god. i should find that quite right.
 or we ought to create god, who would embody the devil as well, and
 before whom we should not have to close our eyes, when the most natural
 things in the world take place.”
 
contrary to his custom, had become almost vehement, but smiled
 again immediately and pressed further.
 
but in these words encountered the riddle of my whole boyhood,
 which i had hourly carried with me, but of which i had never spoken
 to anyone. what demian had said about god and the devil, about the
 official godly world and the suppressed devil’s world, that was exactly
 my own idea, my own myth, the idea of the two worlds or two halves of
 the world--the light and the dark. the realization that my problem
 was problem of humanity as whole, of life and thought in general,
 suddenly dawned on me, and this recognition inspired with fear and
 awe as i suddenly felt to what an extent my own innermost personal
 life and thought were part of the eternal stream of great ideas. the
 realization was not joyful, although it confirmed my mode of thought
 and made happy to certain extent. it was hard and tasted raw,
 because hint of responsibility lay therein, telling to put away
 childish things and to stand alone.
 
i told my friend--the first time in my life i had revealed so deep a
 secret--of my conception of the “two worlds,” conception which had
 been formed since the earliest years of my childhood. at once saw
 that i was in thorough agreement with him. but was not the kind to
 make the most of this. listened with greater attention than had
 ever given me, and looked in the eyes until i had to turn away. i
 again noticed in his look this odd, animal-like timelessness, this
 inconceivably old age.
 
“we will talk more about that another time,” said considerately: “i
 see that you think more than you can express. but if that is so, then
 you also know that you have never lived in experience all that you have
 thought, and that is not good. only the thought that we live through in
 experience has any value. you knew that your ‘world of sanction’ was
 simply one-half of the world, and yet you tried to suppress the other
 half in you, as do the parsons and teachers. you will not succeed. no
 one succeeds who has once began to think.”
 
this impressed deeply.
 
“but,” i almost shouted, “there _are_ horrible things which are
 really and actually forbidden--you can’t deny that fact. and they are
 forbidden once for all, and so we must renounce them. i know of course
 that there are such things as murder, and all possible kinds of vice,
 but shall i then, simply because such things exist, go and become a
 criminal?”
 
“we shan’t be able to finish our discussion to-day,” said max, in a
 milder tone. “you must certainly not commit murder or rape, no. but you
 haven’t yet reached that point where one can see what is ‘permitted’
 and what is really ‘taboo.’ you have realized only part of the truth.
 the remainder will come after, rely on it. for instance, for the past
 year or so you have had in you an instinct which is stronger than
 all the others, and which is held to be ‘taboo.’ the greeks and many
 other people, on the contrary, made sort of divinity out of this
 instinct, and honored it by great celebrations. what is now ‘taboo’ is
 therefore not eternally so, it can change. to-day everyone is permitted
 to sleep with woman as soon as has been with her to parson and
 has gone through the ceremony of marriage. with other races it is
 different, even to-day. for that reason each one of us must find out
 for himself what is permitted and what is forbidden--forbidden, that
 is, to himself. you need never do anything that is forbidden and yet be
 thorough rascal. and vice versa. it is really merely question of
 convenience. whoever is too lazy to think for himself and to constitute
 himself his own judge simply conforms to the taboos, whatever they
 happen to be. has an easy time of it. others realize they carry laws
 in themselves. for them things are forbidden which every man of honor
 does daily. on the other hand things are permitted them which are
 otherwise taboo. everyone must stand up for himself.”
 
suddenly seemed to regret having said so much, and broke off. i felt
 i could understand to certain extent what his sentiment was. that
 is to say, however agreeably used to present his ideas (apparently
 in cursory manner) could on account tolerate conversation
 made simply “for the sake of talking,” as once said. realized
 in my case that, although my interest was genuine enough, i was too
 much inclined to look upon discussion as game, too fond of clever
 talking--in short i was lacking in perfect seriousness.
 
* * * * *
 
as i read again the words i have just written--“perfect
 seriousness”--another scene suddenly comes into my mind, the most
 impressive experience i lived through with max demian in those still
 half-childlike times.
 
our confirmation classes were drawing to an end, and the closing
 lessons were devoted to the last supper. the clergyman thought this
 very important, and took pains to make us feel something of the
 inspiration and sacred character of his teaching. however, precisely
 in those last few lessons, thoughts were diverted to another object,
 to the person of my friend. looking forward to my confirmation, which
 was explained to us as being our solemn admission into the community
 of the church, the thought presented itself imperatively to that
 the value of this half-year’s religious instruction did not lie for
 in what i had learned in class, but rather in demian’s presence and
 influence. it was not into the church that i was ready to be received,
 but into something else, into an order of ideas and of personalities
 which surely existed somewhere or other on earth, and of which i felt
 my friend was the representative or messenger.
 
i tried to repress this thought. in spite of everything, i earnestly
 intended to go through the ceremony of confirmation with certain
 dignity, and the new notions i was forming seemed scarcely compatible
 with this. yet do what i would, the idea was there, and gradually
 identified itself with the approaching religious ceremony. i was ready
 to celebrate it in different fashion from the other confirmation
 candidates. for it would mean admission into world of ideas, with
 which i had become acquainted through demian.
 
in those days it happened that i had another discussion with him; it
 was just before lesson. my friend was wrapped up in himself and took
 little pleasure in my talk, which was perhaps rather precocious and
 bombastic.
 
“we talk too much,” said with unwonted gravity. “wise speeches have
 value at all, absolutely none. you only escape from yourself. to
 escape from yourself is sin. you should be able to creep right into
 yourself, like tortoise.”
 
we entered the schoolroom immediately after. the lesson began. i took
 pains to listen, and demian did not disturb in my effort. after a
 while i began to feel something peculiar at my side where his place
 was, sort of emptiness or coolness or something like that, as if his
 seat had suddenly become vacant. the feeling became oppressive and i
 turned round.
 
there i saw my friend sitting, upright and in his customary attitude.
 but looked quite different from usual. something i did not know
 went out from him, enveloped him. i thought his eyes were closed,
 until i saw held them open. but they were stiff as if gazing within
 or directed to an object great way off. sat there perfectly
 motionless; seemed not to be breathing and his mouth was as if
 carved out of wood or stone. his face was white, uniformly white, as
 stone. his brown hair showed more signs of life than did any other
 feature. his hands lay before him on the desk, without life, as still
 as inanimate objects, like stones or fruit, white and motionless, yet
 not relaxed, but as if controlling the secret springs of powerful
 life force.
 
the sight made tremble. is dead, i thought. i almost said it out
 loud. but i knew was not dead. mesmerized, i hung on his look; my
 eyes were riveted to this white, stone mask. i felt it was the real
 demian. the demian who was in the habit of walking and talking with me,
 that was only one side of him, half. demian, who from time to time
 played part, who accommodated himself to circumstances out of mere
 complacence. but the real demian looked like this, with just this look
 of stone, prehistorically old, like an animal, beautiful and cold, dead
 yet secretly full of fabulous life force. and around him this still
 emptiness, this infinite ethereal space, this lonely death!
 
“now has quite retired into himself,” i felt with shudder. never
 had i been so isolated. i had part in him, was unattainable, he
 was further from than if had been on the most distant isle in the
 world.
 
i scarcely understood why one besides myself noticed it. i thought
 that everyone would have to remark him, that everyone would shudder.
 but one gave him any attention. sat like picture and, as i
 could not prevent myself from thinking, as stiff as strange idol.
 fly settled on his forehead, moved slowly down over his nose and
 lips--not muscle, not nerve in his face twitched.
 
where, where was now? what was thinking, what was feeling? was
 in heaven or in hell?
 
it was impossible for to question him. when i saw him at the end of
 the lesson living and breathing again, when his glance met mine, was he
 as formerly had been? where did come from? where had been? he
 seemed tired. his face had its normal color, his hands moved again,
 but his brown hair was lustreless and fatigued, as it were.
 
in the days following i practised new exercise in my bedroom several
 times. i sat stiffly on chair, kept my eyes fixed, and held myself
 perfectly motionless. i waited to see how long i could maintain this
 attitude, and what the sensation would be like. however, i merely got
 very tired, and suffered from violent twitching of the eyelids.
 
the confirmation took place soon after, of which important
 recollections remain with me.
 
everything was now quite changed. childhood fell about in ruins. my
 parents used to look at with certain embarrassment. my sisters had
 become quite strange in their conduct towards me. disillusionment
 falsified and weakened the old sentiments and pleasures, the garden was
 without fragrance, the wood was longer inviting, the world around
 seemed like clearance-sale of old articles, insipid and without
 charm, books were merely paper, music noise. the leaves fall thus
 from tree in autumn, the tree feels it not, rain drips on it, sun
 comes and frost, and the life in it recedes slowly into the narrowest
 and most inward recess. the tree is not dying. it is waiting.
 
it was decided that after the holidays i should go to another school,
 leaving home for the first time. my mother meanwhile approached me
 with especial tenderness, sort of preliminary good-bye, endeavoring
 to charm with love from which i should go with homesickness and
 unforgetfulness in my heart. demian had gone away. i was alone.
 



chapter four
 
beatrice
 

without having seen my friend again, i traveled at the end of the
 holidays to st. ----. both my parents came with me, and handed over
 with all possible care to the protection of master of the school, in
 whose house i was to board. they would have been numb with horror, had
 they only known to what sort of fate they were leaving me.
 
it still hung in the balance whether i should become with time good
 and useful citizen, or whether my nature would break out in other
 directions. my last attempt to be happy under the roof of my father’s
 house and the spirit prevailing there had lasted for considerable
 period, and at times had almost succeeded, only in the end to fail
 completely.
 
the curious emptiness and isolation which i had begun to feel for
 the first time in the holidays after my confirmation (how i learned
 to know it later, this emptiness, this thin atmosphere) did not pass
 immediately. the parting from home was for peculiarly easy. i was
 really rather ashamed of not being sadder--my sisters wept without
 reason, i could not. i was astonished at myself. i had always been
 an emotional child, and at bottom, tolerably good. now i was quite
 changed. i was completely indifferent towards the outside world. for
 days together my sole occupation was hearkening to my inner self,
 listening to the flood of dark, forbidden instincts which roared
 subterraneously within me. i had grown very quickly in that last
 half-year, and appeared lanky, thin and immature. the amiability of
 boyhood had completely disappeared from my character; i realized myself
 that it was impossible to like thus, and i by means loved myself.
 i had often great longing for max demian; on the other hand, i hated
 him not seldom, and looked upon him as responsible for the moral
 impoverishment of my life, to which i resigned myself as to sort of
 nasty disease.
 
in the beginning i was neither liked nor respected in our school
 boarding house. first they ragged me, then kept out of my way, looking
 upon as rotter and an eccentric character; i was pleased with
 myself and i even overplayed my part, withdrawing into my solitary
 self, growling occasional cynicisms. superficially i appeared to
 despise the world in most manly fashion, whereas in reality i was
 secretly consumed by melancholy and despair. in school i could fall
 back on knowledge amassed at home. the form i was in was not so
 advanced as the same form in the school i had just left, and so i
 acquired the habit of despising my school contemporaries, regarding
 them as mere children.
 
this attitude lasted year and longer. my first holiday visits at home
 brought change, i went gladly away again.
 
it was in the beginning of november. i had formed the habit of taking
 short, meditative walks in all kinds of weather, during which i often
 experienced sort of joy, joy full of melancholy, contempt of the
 world and contempt of self. i was sauntering thus one evening through
 the damp, foggy twilight in suburb of the town. the broad drive of a
 public park stood completely deserted, inviting to enter. the road
 lay thick with fallen leaves, into which i dug voluptuously with my
 feet. it smelt damp and bitter; in the distance the trees stood up tall
 and shadowy, ghostlike in the fog.
 
at the end of the drive i stood still and undecided, staring into the
 black foliage, scenting eagerly the damp odor of decomposition and
 death, which seemed to be in harmony with my own mood. oh, how insipid
 life tasted!
 
man, with the collar of his raincoat blowing about him, came out of a
 side path. i was just going on when called to me.
 
“hello, sinclair!”
 
it happened to be alphonse beck, the senior boy of the house. i was
 always glad to see him and had nothing against him, except that he
 always treated as did all the younger boys, in an ironical and
 grandfatherly manner. passed for being as strong as bear, was
 said to have great influence on the house master, and was the hero of
 many school stories.
 
“what are you doing here?” asked affably, in the tone the seniors
 always used when they condescended on occasion to talk to us.
 “composing verse, i bet?”
 
“shouldn’t dream of it,” i disclaimed gruffly.
 
laughed, came up to me, and we chatted together in manner to which
 i had not been accustomed for some time past.
 
“you needn’t be afraid, sinclair, that i shouldn’t understand. i know
 the feeling, when one goes for walk on foggy evening--the thoughts
 autumn inspires in one. and one writes poetry about dying nature, of
 course, and spent youth; which is very much like it. read heinrich
 heine?”
 
“i am not so sentimental,” i said in self-defense.
 
“oh, all right. but in this weather, i think, it does man good to
 find quiet place where one can take glass of wine or something. are
 you coming with for bit? i happen to be quite alone. or wouldn’t
 you care to? i wouldn’t like to lead you astray, old man, if you are
 one of those model boys.”
 
little while after we sat clinking our thick glasses in little
 tavern in the suburbs, drinking wine of doubtful quality. at first
 i wasn’t much pleased, still it was rather novelty for me. but
 unaccustomed to wine, i soon became talkative. it was as if window
 had been flung open within me, and the world shining in--for how long,
 how terribly long, had i not eased my heart by talking. i gave full
 play to my imagination, and once started, i related the story of cain
 and abel.
 
beck listened to with pleasure--someone at last, to whom i was
 giving something! clapped on the shoulder, told i was
 the devil of good fellow and clever rascal. how i reveled in
 communicating my opinions, as i relieved myself of all the pent-up
 thought of the past months! my heart swelled with pride at finding my
 talents recognized by someone older than i was. when called a
 clever rascal the effect was like sweet, strong wine running through
 me. the world lit up in new colors, thoughts came to as from a
 hundred sources, wit and fire blazed up in me. we spoke of masters and
 schoolfellows, and i thought we understood one another wonderfully
 well. we talked of greeks and of pagans, and beck wished absolutely
 to draw out on the subject of women. but on this point i could not
 converse. i had experience, nothing to relate. true, all that i
 had felt and imagined was burning within me, but i could not impart
 my thoughts, not even under the influence of wine. beck knew much
 more about girls, and i listened to his tales with glowing eyes. the
 things i heard were unbelievable. what i should never have conceived
 to be possible entered the sphere of commonplace reality and seemed
 self-evident. alphonse beck, who was perhaps eighteen years old, was
 already man of experiences. among other things, told that
 girls liked boys to play the gallant with them, but in general were
 too frightened to go any further. you could hope for more success with
 women. women were much cleverer. for instance, there was mrs. jaggelt,
 who sold pencils and copybooks, who was much easier to deal with. all
 that had happened behind the counter in her shop was unprintable in any
 book.
 
i sat on captivated; my head was swimming. to be sure, i could not
 exactly have loved mrs. jaggelt, but still, it was unheard of. it
 seemed as if things happened, at least to older people, of which i had
 never dreamed. there was false ring about it, to be sure, everything
 seemed more trivial and commonplace, and did not coincide with my own
 ideas about love, but still, it was reality, it was love and adventure,
 someone sat next to who had lived it in experience, to whom it
 seemed matter of course.
 
our conversation had reached lower level, had deteriorated. i was
 longer clever little fellow, i was just mere boy listening
 to man. but even then--in comparison with what my life had been
 for months and months, this was delicious, this was heaven. besides,
 as i gradually began to realize, all this was forbidden, absolutely
 forbidden, everything from sitting in public house, down to the
 subject of our conversation. in any case, i thought i was showing
 spirit; i was in revolt.
 
i can recollect that night with the greatest clearness. we both of us
 wended our way home at late hour under the dimly burning gas lamps
 through the cool, damp night, and for the first time in my life i was
 drunk. it was not agreeable, it was in the highest degree unpleasant,
 but there was sort of charm about it, sweetness--it smacked of
 orgy and revolt, of spirit and life. beck bravely took in hand, and
 although grumbled at as being bloody novice, half carried,
 half dragged home, where, by good fortune, was able to smuggle us
 both through window which stood open on the ground floor.
 
but maddening pang accompanied the sobering up as i painfully awoke
 after short heavy sleep. i sat up in bed and saw that i was still
 wearing my shirt. my clothes and shoes lay round about on the floor,
 smelling of tobacco and vomit. and between headache, nausea and a
 maddening thirst, picture came before my mind on which i had not
 set eyes for many long day. i saw my home, the house where dwelt my
 parents. i saw father and mother, my sisters and the garden. i saw
 my peaceful, homely bedroom, the school and the marketplace. demian
 and the confirmation class--and all this was bright, lustrous, all
 was wonderful, godly and pure, all that, i realized now, had until
 yesterday belonged to me, had waited for me. but now, in this hour, it
 was mine longer, it spurned and looked upon with disgust. all
 that was loving and intimate, all that i had received from my parents
 since the first golden days of my childhood, each kiss mother had given
 me, each christmas, each godly bright sunday morning there at home,
 each flower in the garden, all that was laid waste, i had trampled on
 it all with my foot! if the police had come for then and had bound
 and led away to the gallows as desecrator and as the scum of
 humanity, i should have acquiesced; should have gone gladly. i would
 have found it right and fitting.
 
that was the state of my feelings. i, who had gone about despising the
 world! i, who had been so proud in spirit and who had shared demian’s
 thoughts! so i appeared filthy pig, to be classed with the scum of
 the earth, drunk and befouled, disgusting and common, dissolute
 beast, carried away by abominable instincts. so i appeared, i who came
 from those gardens whose bright flowers had been purity and sweet
 gentleness, i who had loved bach’s music and beautiful poetry! i could
 still hear, with aversion and disgust, my own laugh, the drunken,
 uncontrolled, convulsive and silly laugh which escaped me. that was i!
 
but in spite of everything there was certain enjoyment in suffering
 these torments. i had lived for so long blind, dull existence, for
 so long had my heart been silent, impoverished and shut up, that
 even this self-accusation, this self-aversion, this entirely dreadful
 feeling was welcome. at least it was feeling; flowers were flaring up,
 emotion was quivering therein. i experienced in the midst of my misery
 confused sensation of liberation, of the approach of spring.
 
however, as far as outward appearances went, i was going fast down
 the hill. the first debauch was soon followed by others. there was
 much drinking at school, and other things not in accord with study.
 i was among the youngest who carried on in this way, but from being
 just tolerated and looked upon as mere youngster, i soon rose to be
 considered as leader and star. i was renowned as daredevil and
 could drink with the best. once again i belonged entirely to the dark
 world, to the devil, and i passed in this world for being splendid
 fellow.
 
but at the same time i was in pitiful state of mind. i lived in a
 whirl of self-destroying debauchery, and while i was looked up to by
 my friends as leader and the devil of good fellow, as cursed
 witty and spirited drinking companion, my anxious soul was full of
 apprehension. i remember on one occasion tears started to my eyes when,
 on coming out of tavern one sunday morning, i saw children playing
 in the street, bright and contented, with freshly combed hair, and
 in their sunday clothes. and while i amused and often terrified my
 friends with monstrous cynicisms, as we sat at dirty tables stained
 with puddles of beer, in low public houses, i had in my heart secret,
 deep reverence for everything at which i scoffed--inwardly i was
 weeping bitterly at the thought of my past life, of my mother, of god.
 
there is good reason for the fact that i was never one with my
 companions, that i remained lonely even in their midst, that i suffered
 in the manner above described. i was hero of drinking bouts, with
 the roughest of them, i was scoffer after their own heart. i showed
 courage and wit in my ideas and in my talks about masters, school,
 parents, the church--i listened to their smutty stories unflinchingly
 and even ventured one or two myself--but i was never about when my
 boon companions went off with girls. i remained behind alone, filled
 with an ardent desire for love, hopeless longing, whereas to judge
 from my conversation i must have been hardened rake. one was more
 vulnerable, one more chaste than i. and when from time to time i saw
 young girls pass by in the town, pretty and clean, bright and charming,
 they seemed to like wonderful, pure dream women, thousand times
 too good and too pure for me. for long time i could not bring myself
 to enter mrs. jaggelt’s stationery shop, because i blushed when i saw
 her and thought of what alphonse beck had told about her.
 
the more i realized how different i was from the members of my new
 set, how isolated i was in their midst, the less easy was it for that
 very reason to break with them. i do not really know whether the
 toping and bragging ever caused much pleasure, and i could never
 so accustom myself to hard drinking that i did not feel the painful
 consequences after each bout. i was as if coerced into doing this. i
 did it because i had to, because i was otherwise absolutely ignorant of
 course to follow, i knew not where to begin. i was afraid of being
 long alone. i was frightened of the many tender, chaste, intimate moods
 to which i constantly felt myself inclined, i was afraid of the tender
 notions of love which so often came to me.
 
one thing i lacked most of all--a friend. there were two or three
 schoolfellows whom i liked very much. but they belonged to the good set
 and my vices had for long time been secret to one. they avoided
 me. with all i passed for hopeless gamester under whose feet the very
 earth quaked. the masters knew much about me, severe punishments were
 several times inflicted on me, my final expulsion from the school was
 waited for with more or less certainty. i knew that myself; for long
 time i had ceased to be good pupil; i got through my work by hook or
 by crook, with the feeling that the state of affairs could not last
 much longer.
 
there are many ways by which god can make us feel lonely and lead us
 to consciousness of ourselves. with it was in this way: it was
 like bad dream, in which i saw myself ostracized, foul and clammy,
 creeping restlessly and painfully over broken beer glasses, down an
 abominably unclean road. there are such dreams, when you imagine you
 have set out to find beautiful princess, but you stick in stinking
 back streets full of rubbish and dirty puddles. so it was with me. in
 this scarcely refined way i was destined to become lonely and to put
 between myself and my childhood locked door of eden over against
 which stood merciless sentinels on guard in beaming rays of light. it
 was beginning, an awakening of that homesickness, that longing to
 return to my true self.
 
i was terribly frightened when my father, alarmed by letter from my
 house master, appeared for the first time in st. ---- and faced me
 unexpectedly. when came for the second time, towards the end of that
 winter, i was hard and indifferent, i let him heap blame on me, i let
 him beg to think of my mother, i was unmoved. finally grew very
 angry and said that if i did not turn over new leaf would have me
 disgraced and chased out of the school, and would have placed in a
 reformatory. little i cared! when went away i felt sorry for him,
 but had accomplished nothing; had found approach to me, and
 for few moments i felt that it served him right.
 
i was indifferent as to what might become of me. in my peculiar and
 unlovely manner, with my carrying on and my frequenting of public
 houses, i was at odds with the world--this was my way of protesting.
 i was ruining myself thereby, but what of it? sometimes the case
 presented itself to in this wise: if the world had use for such
 as me, if there was better place for us, if there were higher
 duties, then people like myself simply went to the devil. so much the
 worse for the world.
 
the christmas holidays of that year were exceedingly unpleasant. my
 mother was terrified when she saw again. i had grown taller, and
 my thin face looked gray and ravaged by dissipation, with flabby
 features and inflamed rings round the eyes. the first indications
 of moustache, and the spectacles which i had but lately taken to
 wearing, made look stranger still. my sisters started back and
 giggled when they saw me. it was all very pleasant. unpleasant was
 the conversation with my father in his study, unpleasant the greeting
 of couple of relations, unpleasant above all things was christmas
 night. that has been since my birth the great day of our house, the
 evening of festivity and love, of gratitude, of the renewal of the bond
 between my parents and myself. this time everything was depressing
 and embarrassing. as usual my father read the portion of the gospel
 about the shepherds in the field “keeping watch over their flock by
 night”; as usual my sisters stood radiantly before the table on which
 the presents were laid out. but my father’s voice was sad, and he
 looked old and constrained. mother was unhappy; for everything was
 equally painful and unwished for, presents and good wishes, gospel and
 christmas tree. the ginger-bread smelt delicious and exhaled thick
 clouds as of sweet remembrances. the christmas tree was fragrant and
 told of things which existed longer. i longed for the end of the
 evening and of the holidays.
 
so passed the whole winter. it was not long before i was severely
 reprimanded by the faculty and threatened with expulsion. it could not
 last much longer. well it made difference to me.
 
i had special grudge against max demian, whom i had not seen for the
 whole of this period. in my first term at st. ---- i had written to him
 twice, but had received reply; for that reason i had not paid him a
 visit in the holidays.
 
* * * * *
 
in the same park, where i had met alphonse beck in the autumn, it
 chanced that in the first days of spring, just as the thorn hedges were
 beginning to turn green, girl attracted my attention. i was out for a
 walk by myself, full of gnawing cares and thoughts, for my health was
 bad. besides that i was in continual financial embarrassment. i owed
 various sums to my friends and had to invent excuses to procure some
 money from home. in several shops i had run up accounts for cigars and
 such things. not that these cares were very pressing--if the end of my
 school career was approaching, and if i drowned myself or was sent to
 reform school, these trifles would not make much difference either.
 but i was nevertheless constantly facing these unpleasant things and i
 suffered from it.
 
on that spring day in the park i met girl who had strong attraction
 for me. she was tall and slender, elegantly dressed, and had wise,
 boyish face. she pleased at once, she belonged to the type that i
 loved, and she began to work upon my imagination. she was scarcely
 older than i, but she was more mature; she was elegant and possessed
 good figure, already almost woman, but with touch of youthful
 exuberance in her features, which pleased exceedingly.
 
it was never my good fortune to approach girl with whom i could
 have fallen in love, neither was it my luck in this case. but the
 impression was deeper than all the former ones, and the influence of
 this infatuation on my life was powerful.
 
suddenly i had again picture standing before me, revered
 picture--ah, and need, impulse was so deep or so strong in me
 as the desire to revere, to adore. i gave her the name of beatrice,
 of whom, without having read dante, i knew something from an english
 painting, reproduction of which i had in my possession. the picture
 was of an english pre-raphaelite girlish figure, very long-limbed and
 slender, with small, long head and spiritualized hands and features.
 my beautiful young girl did not completely resemble this, although
 she had the same slenderness and boyish suppleness of figure, which i
 loved, and something of the spiritualization of the face, as if her
 soul lay therein.
 
i never spoke single word to beatrice. yet at that time she exercised
 the deepest influence over me. her picture fastened itself on my mind;
 in my imagination she opened sanctuary for me, she caused to
 pray in temple. from one day to another i remained absent from the
 drinking bouts and the nightly excursions. once more i could bear being
 alone, i read gladly, i liked to go for walks again.
 
i was much scoffed at for my sudden conversion. but i had now something
 to love and to worship, i had again an ideal, life was once more full
 of suggestion, of gaily colored secret nuances, that made insensible
 to the jeers of my companions. i again felt at home with myself,
 although i was now the servant and slave of picture which i revered.
 
i cannot think of that time without certain emotion. with earnest
 striving, i again endeavored to build “bright world” out of the ruins
 of that period of my life which had broken up around me, i again lived
 entirely and single-mindedly in the desire to put away the dark and
 the bad, and to dwell completely in the light, on my knees before my
 gods. still, this “bright world” i built up was to certain extent my
 own creation. it was not the action of flying back or of crawling back
 to mother, to security without responsibilities. it was new service
 upon which i entered, invented by myself for my own requirements, with
 responsibilities and discipline of self. the sex consciousness from
 which i suffered and before which i was in constant flight was now
 transmuted in this sacred fire to spirit and devotion. the grim and
 horrible would disappear, i should groan through more agonizing
 nights, there would be more heart-beatings in front of lewd
 pictures, more listening at forbidden doors, more lasciviousness.
 instead of all this, i set up my altar, with the picture of beatrice,
 and in dedicating myself to her i dedicated myself to the spirit and
 to the gods. that part of myself which i withdrew from the powers of
 darkness i brought as sacrifice to the powers of light. not lust was
 my aim, but purity; not happiness, but beauty and spirituality.
 
this cult for beatrice completely changed my life. precocious cynic
 but short while before, i had now become servant in the temple,
 whose aim it was to be saint. i not only renounced the evil life to
 which i had accustomed myself, but i endeavored to change everything,
 to set myself standard of purity, nobility and dignity, which i even
 applied to eating and drinking, to my manner of speech and dress. i
 began each morning to wash with cold water, to the use of which i had,
 in the beginning, to force myself. i behaved with gravity and dignity,
 carried myself erect and acquired slower and more dignified gait. to
 an observer it might have seemed rather ludicrous, but to it was the
 performance of divine worship.
 
of all the ways in which i sought to find expression for my new faith,
 one bore fruit. i began to paint. to start with, the english picture of
 beatrice i had in my possession did not bear sufficient resemblance
 of beatrice. i wanted to try to paint her for myself. full of new
 pleasure and hope i carried into my room--i had recently been given
 room to myself--beautiful paper, colors, and paint-brush. i made
 ready my palette, porcelain bowls, glass and pencils. the fine water
 colors in little tubes which i had bought captivated me. there was a
 bright chromic green which i think i can see yet as it flashed out for
 the first time from the little white tube.
 
i began with caution. to paint face was difficult; i wished first
 of all to try something else. i painted ornaments, flowers, and small
 landscapes from imagination, tree near chapel, roman bridge with
 cypresses. i often lost myself completely in this pastime, i was
 as happy as child with box of paints. at last i began to paint
 beatrice.
 
the first few attempts were abortive, and i threw them away. the more
 i tried to conjure up in my mind the face of the girl, whom i met from
 time to time in the street, the less i seemed able to transfer my
 impressions to paper. finally i gave up the idea, and began simply to
 paint face according to the guidance of my imagination, face which
 gradually grew out of the one already begun, as if by itself, at the
 mercy of color and brush. the result was face i had dreamed of, and i
 was not ill pleased with it. yet i made another essay immediately, and
 each new picture was clearer, and approached more nearly to the type,
 but was by means like the reality.
 
more and more i accustomed myself, in dreamy sort of way, to draw
 lines with my brush, to fill in surfaces. my sketches grew out of a
 few strokes of the brush, out of the unconscious. at last one day i
 finished face, almost unconsciously, which made stronger appeal to
 than the former ones. it was not the face of the girl, for i had
 long since given up the idea of trying to paint my beatrice to the
 life. it was something else, something unreal, and yet not of less
 value for on that account. it looked more like the head of youth
 than of girl. the hair was not blond like that of my pretty girl,
 but brown with tinge of red; the chin was strong and firm, but the
 mouth was red as blossom. the features were rigid, like mask, but
 impressive and full of secret life.
 
as i sat before the finished sketch, it made peculiar impression on
 me. it seemed to sort of picture of god or of sacred mask,
 half man, half woman, ageless, the expression being at once dreamy
 and strong-willed, stiff and yet secretly alive. this face seemed to
 have something to say to me, it belonged to me; its look was rather
 imperative, as if requiring something of me. and there was certain
 resemblance to someone or other, to whom i knew not.
 
the picture played an important rôle for while, sharing my thoughts
 and my life. i kept it concealed in drawer, in order that one should
 not get possession of it and so be able to sneer at me. but as soon
 as i found myself alone in my little room i took out the picture and
 communed with it. each evening i pinned it on to the wall over against
 my bed, and gazed at it until i dropped off to sleep. in the morning it
 was the first object which met my gaze.
 
just at that time i began again to dream great deal, as i had
 constantly done when child. it seemed to that for years i had had
 more dreams. now they came again, quite new kind of pictures,
 and often and often the painted image appeared therein, living and
 speaking, friendly or inimical, with the features sometimes twisted
 into grimace, sometimes infinitely beautiful, harmonious and noble.
 
and one morning, as i awoke out of such dream, i suddenly realized
 who was the original of the picture, i recognized it. it gazed at me
 in such fabulously well-known way, and seemed to be calling my name.
 it seemed to know me, like mother, seemed to love as if since the
 beginning of time. with beating heart i stared at the paper, at the
 thick brown hair, at the half-womanly mouth, the strong forehead with
 the wonderful brightness (it had dried that way of itself) and more and
 more i felt in the knowledge, the certainty of having somewhere met
 the original of the picture.
 
i sprang out of bed, placed myself in front of the face, and gazed at
 it from the closest proximity, straight into the wide open, greenish,
 staring eyes, the right eye somewhat higher than the other. and all at
 once this right eye twitched perceptibly, but still decidedly, and from
 this twitching i recognized the picture....
 
how was it that i had found it out so late? it was demian’s face. later
 i often and often compared the picture with demian’s real features, as
 they had remained in my memory. they were not quite the same, although
 there was resemblance. but it was demian, nevertheless.
 
once, on an evening in early summer the red sun shone obliquely through
 my window, which looked towards the west. in the room the dusk was
 gathering. i suddenly had the idea of pinning the picture of beatrice,
 or of demian, to the cross-bar of the window and of gazing at it,
 while the evening sun was shining through. the whole outline of the
 face disappeared, but the reddish ringed eyes, the brightness of the
 forehead and the strong red mouth glowed deeply and wildly from the
 surface of the paper. i sat opposite it for long time, even after the
 light had died away. and by degrees the feeling came to that this
 was not beatrice or demian but--myself. the picture did not resemble
 me--it was not meant to, i felt--but there was that in it which seemed
 to be made up of my life, something of my inner self, of my fate or of
 my dæmon. my friend would look like that, if i ever found another. my
 mistress would look like that, if ever i had one. my life and death
 would be like that. it had the ring and rhythm of my fate.
 
in those weeks i had begun to read book which made deeper
 impression on than anything i had read before. even in later years
 i have seldom chanced upon books which have made such strong appeal
 to me, except perhaps those of nietzsche. it was volume of novalis,
 containing letters and apothegms. there was much that i did not
 understand. but the book captivated and occupied my thoughts to an
 extraordinary degree. one of the aphorisms now occurred to me. i wrote
 it with pen under the picture: “fate and soul are the terms of one
 conception.” that i now understood.
 
i frequently used to meet the girl i called beatrice. i felt emotion
 on seeing her, but i was often sensible of harmony of sentiment,
 which seemed to say: we are connected, or rather, not you and i, but
 your picture and i; you are part of my destiny.
 
* * * * *
 
my longing for max demian was again eager. i had had news of him
 for several years. on one occasion only i had met him in the holidays.
 i see now that i have failed to mention this short meeting in my
 narrative, and i see that this was owing to shame and self-conceit on
 my part. i must make up for it now.
 
so then, once in the holidays, i was parading my somewhat tired, blasé
 self through the town. as i was sauntering along, swinging my stick and
 examining the old, unchanged features of the bourgeois philistines whom
 i despised, i met my one-time friend. scarcely had i caught sight of
 him when i started involuntarily. with lightning rapidity my thoughts
 were carried back to frank kromer. i hoped and prayed demian had really
 forgotten the story! it was so disagreeable to be under this obligation
 to him--simply owing to silly, childish affair--still, i was under an
 obligation....
 
seemed to be waiting to see whether i would greet him. i did, as
 calmly as possible under the circumstances, and gave his hand.
 that was indeed his old handshake! so strong, warm and yet cool, so
 manly!
 
looked attentively in the face and said: “you’ve grown lot,
 sinclair.” himself seemed quite unchanged, just as old, just as
 young as ever.
 
proposed we should go for walk, and we talked of secondary
 matters, not of the past. i remembered that i had written to him
 several times, without having received an answer. i hoped had
 forgotten this as well, those silly, silly letters. made mention
 of them.
 
at that time there was beatrice and picture, i was still in the
 period of my dissipation. outside the town i invited him to come with
 into an inn. came. with much ostentation i ordered bottle
 of wine and filled couple of glasses. i clinked glasses with him,
 showing him how conversant i was with student drinking customs, and i
 emptied my first glass at gulp.
 
“do you frequent public houses often?” asked me.
 
“oh yes,” i said with drawl, “what else is there to do? it’s
 certainly more amusing than anything else; after all.”
 
“you think so? perhaps. it may be so. there’s certainly something very
 pleasing about it--intoxication, bacchanalian orgies! but i find, with
 most people who frequent public houses, this sense of _abandon_
 is lost. it seems to there is something typically philistine,
 bourgeois, in the public house habit. of course, for just one night,
 with burning torches, to have proper orgy and drunken revel. but
 to do the same thing over and over again, drinking one glass after
 another--that’s hardly the real thing. can you imagine faust sitting
 evening after evening drinking at the same table?”
 
i drank, and looked at him with some enmity.
 
“yes, but everyone isn’t faust,” i said curtly.
 
looked at with somewhat surprised air.
 
then laughed, in his old superior way. “what’s the good of
 quarreling about it? in any case the life of toper, of libertine,
 is, i imagine, more exciting than that of blameless citizen. and
 then--i have read it somewhere--the life of profligate is one of
 the best preparations for mystic. there are always such people as
 saint augustine, who become seers. before, was sort of rake and
 profligate.”
 
i was distrustful and wished by means to let him take superior
 attitude towards me. so i said, with blasé air: “well, everyone
 according to his taste! i haven’t the slightest intention of doing
 that, becoming seer or anything.”
 
demian flashed glance at from half-closed eyes.
 
“my dear sinclair,” said slowly, “it wasn’t my intention to hurt
 your feelings. besides--neither of us knows to what end you drink.
 there is that in you, which orders your life for you, and which knows
 why you are doing it. it is good to realize this; there is someone in
 us who knows everything, wills everything, does everything better than
 we do ourselves. but excuse me, i must go home.”
 
we did not linger over our leave-taking. i remained seated, very
 dejected, and emptied the bottle. i found, when i got up to go, that
 demian had already paid for it. that made more angry still.
 
* * * * *
 
this little event recurred to my thoughts, which were full of demian.
 and the words had spoken in the inn came back to my mind, retaining
 all their old freshness and significance: “it is good to know there is
 one in us who knows everything!”
 
i looked at the picture hanging in the window, now quite dark. the
 eyes glowed still. it was demian’s look. on it was the look of the one
 inside me, who knows all.
 
oh, how i longed for demian! i knew nothing of his whereabouts, for me
 was unattainable. i knew only that was supposed to be studying
 somewhere or other, and that after the conclusion of his school career
 his mother had left the town.
 
i called up in my mind all my reminiscences of max demian, from the
 kromer affair onwards. great deal had formerly said came back
 to me. to-day everything still had meaning, all was of real concern
 to me! and what had said at our last, not very agreeable, meeting,
 about the libertine and the saint, suddenly crossed my mind. was it not
 just so with me? had i not lived in filth and drunkenness, my senses
 blunted by dissipation, until new life impulse, the direct contrary
 of the old, awoke in me, namely the desire for purity, the longing to
 be saintly?
 
so i went on, from reminiscence to reminiscence. night had long since
 fallen, and outside it was raining. in recollection, as well, i heard
 it rain; it was the hour under the chestnut trees when first
 questioned concerning frank kromer, so guessing my first secrets.
 one after another these souvenirs came to mind, conversations on the
 way to school, the confirmation class. and then i recollected my very
 first meeting with max demian. what had we been talking about? i could
 not for the moment recollect, but i took my time, i thought deeply. at
 last i remembered. we were standing in front of our house; after he
 had imparted to his opinion about cain. then spoke to about
 the old, almost obliterated crest which stood over the door, in the
 keystone which widened as it got higher. said it interested him and
 that one ought not to let such things escape one’s notice.
 
that night i dreamt of demian and of the crest. it changed perpetually,
 now demian held it in his hands, now it was small and grey, now very
 large and multicolored, but explained to that it was always one
 and the same. but at last forced to eat the crest. as i swallowed
 it, i felt with terror that the bird on the crest was alive inside me,
 my stomach was swollen and the bird was beginning to consume me. with
 the fear of death upon me, i commenced to struggle. then i woke up.
 
i felt relieved. it was the middle of the night, and i heard the rain
 blowing into the room. i got up to close the window; and in doing
 so trod on bright object which lay on the floor. in the morning i
 found it was my painting. it was lying there in the wet and had rolled
 itself up. in order to dry it i stretched it out between two sheets of
 blotting paper and placed it under heavy book. when i looked at it
 the next day it was dry. but it had changed. the red mouth had paled
 and had become smaller. now it was exactly demian’s mouth.
 
i now began to paint new picture, namely, that of the bird on the
 crest. i could not recollect any more what it really looked like,
 neither could i form clear image of the whole, as even if one stood
 directly in front of our door, the crest was scarcely recognizable, it
 was so old and had several times been painted over. the bird stood or
 sat on something, perhaps on flower, or on basket or nest, or on a
 tree-top. i did not bother about that, and began with the part i could
 picture clearly. in answer to confused prompting, i began straight
 away with strong colors; on my paper the head of the bird was golden
 yellow. i continued my work at intervals, when i was in the mood for
 it, and after few days the thing was completed.
 
now it was bird of prey, with sharp, bold hawk’s head. the lower
 half of the body was fixed in dark terrestrial globe, out of which
 it was working to escape, as if out of giant egg. the background was
 sky-blue. the longer i gazed at the sheet, the more it seemed to me
 this was the colored crest which i had visualized in my dream.
 
it would not have been possible for to have written letter to
 demian, even if i had known where to send it. but i decided, acting
 under suggestion which came to in dreamy sort of way, as under
 all my promptings of that period, to send him the picture with the
 hawk--whether it would reach him or not. i wrote nothing thereon, not
 even my name. i carefully cut the border, bought large paper cover
 and wrote on it my friend’s former address. then i sent it off.
 
the approach of an examination caused to work harder than usual
 in school. the masters had again received into grace, since i had
 suddenly changed my vile conduct. i was not, even now, by any means a
 good pupil, but neither i nor anyone else seemed to remember that, half
 year before, my expulsion from the school had been imminent.
 
my father now wrote to as formerly, adopting his old cheerful tone,
 without reproaches or threats. yet i had impulse to explain to him
 or to anyone how the change was brought about. it was merely chance
 that this change coincided with the wishes of my parents and the
 masters. it did not bring into closer contact with the others but
 isolated still more. i myself was ignorant of the tendency of the
 change in me, it might be leading to demian, to distant fate. it
 had begun with beatrice, but for some time past i had been living in
 quite an unreal world with my paintings and my thoughts of demian, so
 that she quite disappeared from my mind, as she did from my view. i
 should not have been able to say word to anyone of my dreams, of my
 expectations, of the inner change realized in me, not even if i had
 wished to do so.
 
but i had not the faintest desire ever to broach the subject.
 



chapter five
 
the bird fights its way out of the egg
 

my painted dream-bird was on its way, searching out my friend. an
 answer came to in the most curious manner.
 
in my classroom in school i found at my desk, in the interval between
 two lessons, piece of paper slipped between the pages of my book. it
 was folded in the manner we used for passing notes to one another in
 class. i wondered who could have sent such note, as i was not so
 intimate with any of the boys that one of them should wish to write to
 me. i thought it was summons to participate in some school rag or
 other, in which however i should not have taken part, and i replaced
 the note unopened in my book. during the lesson it fell by chance into
 my hands again.
 
i toyed with the paper, unfolded it without thinking, and discovered a
 few words written thereon. i threw glance at the writing, one word
 riveted my attention. terrified, i read on, while my heart seemed to
 become numb with sense of destiny.
 
“the bird fights its way out of the egg. the egg is the world. whoever
 will be born must destroy world. the bird flies to god. the name of
 the god is abraxas.”
 
i sank into deep meditation after i had read the words through several
 times. it admitted of doubt: this was demian’s answer. none could
 know of the bird, except our two selves. had received my picture. he
 had understood and helped to explain its significance. but where was
 the connection in all this? and--what worried above all--what did
 abraxas mean? i had never read or heard of the word. “the name of the
 god is abraxas!”
 
the hour passed without my hearing anything of the lesson. the next
 lesson began, the last of the morning. it was taken by quite young
 assistant master, fresh from the university, to whom we had already
 taken liking, because was young and pretended to false dignity
 with us.
 
we were reading herodotus under doctor follen’s guidance. this was
 one of the few school subjects which interested me. but this time my
 attention wandered. i had mechanically flung open my book, but i did
 not follow the translation, and remained lost in thought. for the
 rest, i had already several times had the experience that what demian
 had said to in the confirmation class was right. if you willed a
 thing strongly enough, it happened. if during the lesson i was deeply
 immersed in thought, i need not fear that the master would disturb my
 peace. certainly, if you were absent-minded or sleepy, then stood
 suddenly there; that had already happened to several times. but if
 you were really thinking, if you were genuinely sunk in thought, then
 you were safe. and i had already put to the test what had said to me
 about fixing person with one’s eyes. when at school with demian i had
 never been successful in this attempt, but now i often realized that
 you could accomplish much simply by fixed look and deep thinking.
 
so i was sitting now, my thoughts far from herodotus and school.
 but the master’s voice unexpectedly fell on my consciousness like a
 thunder-crash, so that i started with fright. i listened to his voice,
 was standing quite close to me, i thought had already called me
 by name. but did not look at me. i breathed sigh of relief.
 
then i heard his voice again. loudly the word “abraxas” fell from his
 lips.
 
continuing his explanation, the beginning of which had escaped me,
 doctor follen said: “we must not imagine the ideas of those sects and
 mystical corporations of antiquity to be as naïve as they appear from
 the standpoint of rationalistic outlook. antiquity knew absolutely
 nothing of science, in our sense of the word. on the other hand more
 attention was paid to truths of philosophical, mystical nature, which
 often attained to very high stage of development. magic in part arose
 therefrom, and often led to fraud and crime. but none the less, magic
 had noble origin and was inspired by deep thought. so it was with the
 teaching of abraxas, which i have just cited as an example. this name
 is used in connection with greek charm formulas. many opinions coincide
 in thinking it is the name of some demon of magic, such as some savage
 people worship to-day. but it appears that abraxas had much wider
 significance. we can imagine the name to be that of divinity on
 whom the symbolical task was imposed of uniting the divine and the
 diabolical.”
 
the learned little man continued his discourse with much seriousness,
 one was very attentive, and as the name did not recur, i was soon
 immersed in my own thoughts again.
 
“to unite the divine and the diabolical,” rang in my ears. here was a
 starting-point. i was familiar with that idea from my conversations
 with demian in the very last period of our friendship. demian told me
 then, we had indeed god whom we revered, but this god represented
 part of the world only, the half which was arbitrarily separated from
 the rest (it was the official, permitted, “bright” world). but one
 should be able to hold the whole world in honor. one should either have
 god who was at the same time devil, or one should institute devil
 worship together with worship of god. and now abraxas was the god, who
 was at the same time god and devil.
 
for long time i zealously sought to follow up the trail of ideas
 farther, without success. in addition, i rummaged through whole
 library to find out more about abraxas, but in vain. however, it was
 not my nature to concentrate my energies on methodical search after
 knowledge, search which would reveal truths of dead, useless,
 documentary kind.
 
the figure of beatrice, which had for certain time occupied so much
 of my attention, vanished by degrees from my mind, or rather receded
 slowly, drawing nearer and nearer to the horizon, becoming paler, more
 like shadow, as it retreated. she satisfied my soul longer. new
 spiritual development now began to take place in the dreamy existence i
 led, this existence in which i was strangely wrapped up in myself. the
 longing for full life glowed in me, or rather the longing for love.
 the sex instinct, which for time had been merged into my worship
 of beatrice, required new pictures and aims. fulfillment was denied
 me, and it was more impossible than ever for to delude myself by
 expecting anything of the girls who seemed to have the happiness of my
 comrades in their keeping. i again dreamed vividly, even more by day
 than by night. images presented themselves to me, desires in the shape
 of pictures rose up in my imagination, withdrawing from the outside
 world, so that my relations with these pictures, with these dreams
 and shadows, were more real and more intimate than with my actual
 surroundings.
 
certain dream, or play of fantasy, which recurred to me, was full of
 significance. this dream, the most important and the most enduring of
 my life, was as follows: i returned home--over the front door shone
 the crest with the yellow bird on the blue ground--my mother came to
 meet me--but as i entered and wished to embrace her, it was not she,
 but shape i had never before seen, tall and powerful, resembling max
 demian and my painting, yet different, and quite womanly in spite of
 its size. this figure drew towards it, and held in quivering,
 passionate embrace. rapture and horror were mixed, the embrace was a
 sort of divine worship, and yet crime as well. too much of the memory
 of my mother, too much of the memory of max demian was contained in the
 form which embraced me. the embrace seemed repulsive to my sentiment
 of reverence, yet i felt happy. i often awoke out of this dream with
 deep feeling of contentment, often with the fear of death and a
 tormenting conscience as if i were guilty of terrible sin.
 
it was only gradually and unconsciously that i realized the connection
 between this mental picture and the hint which had come to from
 outside concerning the god of whom i was in search. however, this
 connection became closer and more intimate, and i began to feel that
 precisely in this dream, this presentiment, i was invoking abraxas.
 rapture and horror, man and woman, the most sacred things and the
 most abominable interwoven, the darkest guilt with the most tender
 innocence--such was the dream picture of my love, such also was
 abraxas. love was longer dark, animal impulse, as i had felt
 with considerable anxiety in the beginning. neither was it pious
 spiritualized form of worship any longer, such as i had bestowed upon
 the picture of beatrice. it was both--both and yet much more, it was
 the image of an angel and of satan, man and woman in one, human being
 and animal, the highest good and lowest evil. it was my destiny, it
 seemed that i should experience this in my own life. i longed for it
 and was afraid of it, i followed it in my dreams and took to flight
 before it; but it was always there, was always standing over me.
 
the next spring i was to leave school and go to some university to
 study, where and what i knew not. small moustache grew on my lip,
 i was grown man, and yet completely hopeless and aimless. only one
 thing was firm: the voice in me, the dream picture. i felt it my duty
 to follow this guidance blindly. but it was difficult, and daily i was
 on the point of revolting. perhaps i was mad, i often used to think;
 perhaps i was not as other men? but i could do everything the others
 did; with little pains and industry i could read plato, i could solve
 trigonometrical problem or work out chemical analysis. only one
 thing i could not do: discover the dark, concealed aim within and
 make up my mind, as others did--others, who knew well enough whether
 they wanted to be professors or judges, doctors or artists. they knew
 what career to follow and what advantages they would gain by it. but i
 was not like that. perhaps i would be like them some day, but how was
 i to know? perhaps i should have to seek and seek for years, and would
 make nothing of myself, would attain end. perhaps i should attain an
 end, but it might be wicked, dangerous, terrible.
 
i wanted only to try to live in obedience to the promptings which came
 from my true self. why was that so very difficult?
 
i often made the attempt to paint the powerful love-figure of my dream.
 but i never succeeded. if i had been successful i would have sent the
 picture to demian. where was he? i knew not. i only knew there was a
 bond of union between us. when should i see him again?
 
the pleasant tranquillity of those weeks and months of the beatrice
 period was long since gone. i thought at that time i had reached a
 haven and had found peace. but it was ever so--scarcely did i begin to
 adapt myself to circumstances, scarcely had dream done good, when
 it faded again. in vain to complain! i now lived in fire of unstilled
 desires, of tense expectation, which often rendered completely wild
 and mad. i frequently saw before the picture of my dream-mistress
 with extraordinary clearness, much more clearly than i saw my own
 hand. i spoke to it, wept over it, cursed it. i called it mother and
 knelt before it in tears. i called it my beloved and felt its ripe kiss
 of fulfilled desire. i called it devil and whore, vampire and murderer.
 it invited to the tenderest dreams of love and to the most horrible
 abominations--nothing was too good and precious for it, nothing too bad
 and vile.
 
i passed the whole of that winter in state of inward tumult difficult
 to describe. i had long been accustomed to loneliness--that did not
 depress me. i lived with demian, with the hawk, with my picture of the
 big dream-figure, which was my fate and my mistress. it sufficed to
 live in close communion with those things, since they opened up large
 and broad perspective, leading to abraxas. but i was not able to summon
 up these dreams, these thoughts, at will. i could not invest them in
 colors, as i pleased. they came of themselves, taking possession of me,
 governing and shaping my life.
 
i was secure in so far as the outside world was concerned. i was afraid
 of one. my schoolfellows had learned to recognize that, and observed
 secret respect towards me, which often caused to smile. when i
 wished, i could penetrate most of them with look, thereby surprising
 them occasionally. only, i seldom or never wanted to do this. it was my
 own self which occupied my attention, always myself. and yet i longed
 ardently to live bit of real life, to give something of myself to
 the world, to enter into contact and battle with it. sometimes as i
 wandered through the streets in the evening and could not, through
 restlessness, return home before midnight, i thought to myself: now
 i cannot fail to meet my beloved, i shall overtake her at the next
 corner, she will call to from the next window. sometimes all this
 seemed to torture unbearably, and i was quite prepared to take my
 own life some day.
 
at that time i found peculiar refuge--by “chance,” as one says. but
 really such happenings cannot be attributed to chance. when person
 is in need of something, and the necessary happens, this is not due to
 chance but to himself; his own desire leads him compellingly to the
 object of which stands in need.
 
two or three times during my wanderings through the streets i had heard
 the strains of an organ coming from little church in the suburbs,
 without, however, stopping to listen. the next time i passed by the
 church i heard it again, and recognized that bach was being played.
 i went to the door, which i found to be locked. as the street was
 practically empty i sat down on curb-stone close to the church,
 turned up the collar of my coat and listened. it was not large organ,
 but good one nevertheless. whoever was playing played wonderfully
 well, almost like virtuoso, but with peculiar, highly personal
 expression of will and perseverance, which seemed to make the music
 ring out like prayer. i had the feeling that the man who was playing
 knew treasure was shut up in the music and struggled and tapped
 and knocked to get at the treasure, as if his life depended on his
 finding it. in the technical sense i do not understand very much
 about music, but this form of the soul’s expression i have from my
 childhood intuitively understood; i feel music is something which i can
 comprehend without initiation.
 
the organist next played something modern, it might have been reger.
 the church was almost completely dark, only very narrow beam of light
 shone through the window nearest to me. i waited until the end, and
 then walked up and down till the organist came out. was still a
 young man, though older than myself, robust and thick-set. walked
 quickly, taking powerful strides, but as if forcing the pace against
 his will.
 
many an evening thereafter i sat before the church, or walked up and
 down. once i found the door open, and for half an hour i sat shivering
 and happy inside, while the organist played in the organ loft by
 the dim gas light. of the music played i heard not only what he
 himself put into it. there seemed also to be secret coherence
 in his repertory, each piece seemed to be the continuation of the
 one preceding. everything played was pious, expressing faith
 and devotion. but not pious like church-goers and clergymen, but
 like pilgrims and beggars of the middle ages, pious with reckless
 surrender to world-feeling, which was superior to all confessions of
 faith. frequently played music by the pre-bach composers, and old
 italian music. and all the pieces said the same thing, all expressed
 what the musician had in his soul: longing, longing to identify
 oneself with the world and to tear oneself free again, listening to
 the workings of one’s own dark soul, an orgy of devotion and lively
 curiosity of the wonderful.
 
i once secretly followed the organist as left the church. he
 continued his way to the outskirts of the town and entered little
 tavern. i could not resist the temptation to go in after him. for
 the first time i had clear view of him. sat at the table in the
 corner of the little room, black felt hat on his head, measure of
 wine before him, and his face was just as i had expected it to be.
 it was ugly and somewhat uncouth, with the look of seeker and of
 an eccentric, obstinate and strong-willed, with soft and childish
 mouth. the expression of what was strong and manly lay in the eyes
 and forehead; on the lower half of the face sat look of gentleness
 and immaturity, rather effeminate and showing lack of self-mastery.
 the chin indicated boyish indecision, as if in contradiction with
 the eyes and forehead. i liked the dark brown eyes, full of pride and
 hostility.
 
silently i took my place opposite him. there was one else in the
 tavern. glared at me, as if wished to chase away. nevertheless
 i maintained my position, looking at him unflinchingly, until at last
 growled testily: “what the deuce are you staring at for? do you
 want anything of me?”
 
“i don’t want anything,” i said. “you have already given much.”
 
wrinkled his forehead.
 
“ah, you’re music enthusiast, are you? i think it’s disgusting to go
 mad over music.”
 
i did not let myself be intimidated.
 
“i have so often listened to your playing, there in the church,” i
 said. “but i don’t want to bother you. i thought perhaps i should
 discover something in you, something special, i don’t know exactly
 what. but please don’t mind me. i can listen to you in the church.”
 
“why, i always lock the door!”
 
“just lately you forgot, and i sat inside. otherwise i stand outside or
 sit on the curb-stone.”
 
“is that so? another time you can come inside, it’s warmer. you’ve
 simply got to knock on the door. but loudly, and not while i’m playing.
 now--what did you want to say? but you’re quite young, apparently a
 schoolboy or student. are you musician?”
 
“no. i like music, but only the kind you play, absolute music, where
 one feels that someone is trying to fathom heaven and hell. i like
 music so much, i think, because it is not concerned with morals.
 everything else is question of morals, and i am looking for something
 different. whatever has been concerned with morals has caused only
 suffering. i don’t express myself properly. do you know that there must
 be god who is at the same time god and devil? there must have been
 one, i have heard so.”
 
the organist pushed back his broad hat and shook the dark hair from
 his forehead. looked at penetratingly and bent forward his face
 towards over the table.
 
softly and tensely questioned:
 
“what’s the name of the god of whom you are talking?”
 
“unfortunately i know practically nothing about him really, only his
 name. his name’s abraxas.”
 
the musician looked distrustfully around, as if someone might be
 eavesdropping. then bent towards and said in whisper: “i
 thought so. who are you?”
 
“i’m student from the school.”
 
“how do you know about abraxas?”
 
“by chance.”
 
thumped on the table, so that his wine spilled over.
 
“chance! don’t talk nonsense, young man! one doesn’t know of abraxas
 by chance, mark you. i will tell you something more of him. i know a
 little about him!”
 
ceased talking and pushed back his chair. i looked at him
 expectantly, and made grimace.
 
“not here! another time. there, take these!”
 
dug his hand into the pocket of his overcoat, which had not taken
 off, and pulled out couple of roasted chestnuts, which threw to me.
 
i said nothing. i took and ate them, and was very contented.
 
“well,” whispered after while. “how do you know about--him?”
 
i did not hesitate to tell him.
 
“i was lonely and perplexed,” i related. “i called to mind friend of
 former years who, i think, knows great deal. i had painted something,
 bird coming out of terrestrial globe. i sent this to him. after a
 time, when i had begun to lose hope of reply, piece of paper fell
 into my hands. on it was written: ‘the bird fights its way out of the
 egg. the egg is the world. whoever will be born must destroy world.
 the bird flies to god. the name of the god is abraxas.’”
 
answered nothing. we peeled our chestnuts and ate them, and drank
 our wine.
 
“shall we have another drink?” asked.
 
“thanks, no. i don’t care much for drinking.”
 
laughed, somewhat disappointedly.
 
“as you wish! i am different. i am staying here. you can go now!”
 
the next time i saw him after the organ recital, was not very
 communicative. conducted through an old street to an old, stately
 house and upstairs into large, somewhat gloomy and untidy room where,
 besides piano, there was nothing to indicate that its occupant was a
 musician. instead, huge bookcase and writing table gave the room a
 somewhat scholarly air.
 
“what lot of books you have!” i said appreciatively.
 
“a part of them belongs to the library of my father, with whom i
 live. yes, young man, i live with my father and mother, but i cannot
 introduce you to them, as i and my acquaintances meet with but scant
 respect at home. i am prodigal son, you see. my father is very much
 looked up to, is well-known clergyman and preacher in this town.
 and i, to let you know at once, am his talented and promising son, who,
 however, is guilty of many back-slidings, and, to certain extent,
 mad. i was studying theology, and deserted this worthy faculty shortly
 before my final examination, although really i am still in the same
 line, as far as concerns my private studies. for it is still of the
 highest importance and interest what sort of gods people have invented
 for themselves at various times. i am musician into the bargain, and
 shall soon get post as organist, i think. then i shall be in the
 church again.”
 
i glanced over the backs of the books and found greek, latin, hebrew
 titles, as far as i could see by the feeble light of the lamp on the
 table. my acquaintance, meanwhile, had taken up position on the floor
 in the dark by the wall.
 
“come here,” called after while, “we will practice little
 philosophy. that means keeping one’s mouth shut, lying on one’s stomach
 and thinking.”
 
struck match and applied it to the paper and wood in the
 fireplace, in front of which was lying. the flame leapt up; poked
 and blew the fire with great skill. i lay down near him on the ragged
 carpet. stared into the flames, which drew my attention as well, and
 we lay silent for perhaps whole hour stretched out in front of the
 flaring wood fire. we watched it flame and roar, die down and flicker
 up again, until finally it settled down into subdued glow.
 
“fire worship was not by any means the silliest form of worship
 invented,” murmured without looking up. those were the only words
 spoken. with staring eyes i gazed into the fire. lulled by the
 tranquillity of the room, i sank in dreams, seeing shapes in the smoke
 and pictures in the ashes. once i started up. my companion had thrown
 little bit of resin into the glow. little slender flame shot up,
 i saw in it the bird with the gold hawk’s head. in the glow which
 died away in the fireplace, golden glittering threads wove themselves
 together into net, letters and pictures, memories of faces, of
 animals, of plants, of worms and serpents. when i woke from my reveries
 and looked across at my companion, was absorbed, staring at the
 ashes with the fixed gaze of fanatic, his chin in his hands.
 
“i must go now,” i said softly.
 
“well, go then, good-bye!”
 
did not get up, and as the lamp had gone out, i had to feel my way
 across the dark room, through dark corridors and down the stairs, and
 so out of the enchanted old dwelling. once in the street i stopped and
 looked up at the house. in not one of the windows was light burning.
 little brass-plate shone in the gleam of the gas-lamp before the door.
 
“pistorius, vicar,” i read thereon. as i sat in my little room after
 supper i remembered that i had learnt nothing about abraxas, or
 anything else from pistorius. we had scarcely exchanged ten words.
 but i was quite contented with the visit i had paid him. and had
 promised to play next time an exquisite piece of organ music, a
 passacaglia by buxtehude.
 
without my having realized it, the organist pistorius had given a
 first lesson, as we lay on the floor in front of the fireplace of his
 melancholy hermit’s room. staring into the fire had done good, it
 had confirmed and set in activity tendencies which i had always had,
 but had never really followed. gradually and in part i saw light on the
 subject.
 
when quite child i had from time to time the propensity to watch
 bizarre forms of nature, not observing them closely, but simply
 surrendering myself to their peculiar magic, absorbed by the
 contemplation of their curling shapes. long dignified tree-roots,
 colored veins in stone, flecks of oil floating on water, flaws in
 glass--all things of similar nature had had great charm for me
 at that time, above all, water and fire, smoke, clouds, dust, and
 especially the little circulating colored specks which i saw when i
 closed my eyes. in the days following my first visit to pistorius this
 began to come back to me. i noticed that i was indebted solely to
 staring into the open fire for certain strength and pleasure, for
 the increase in my depth of feeling which i had felt since. it was
 curiously beneficial and enriching--dreaming and staring into the fire!
 
to the few experiences i had gained on the road to the attainment of my
 proper ends in life was added this new one: the contemplation of such
 shapes, the surrendering of oneself to these irrational, twisting, odd
 forms of nature, engenders in us feeling of the harmony of our inner
 being with the will which brought forth these shapes; we soon feel the
 temptation to look upon them as our own creations, as if made by our
 own moods; we see the boundary between ourselves and nature waver and
 vanish; we learn to know the state of mind by outside impressions, or
 by inward. in way so simply and so easily as by this practice do we
 discover to what great extent we are creators, to what great extent
 our souls have part in the continual creation of the world. or rather,
 it is the same indivisible godhead, which is active in us and in
 nature. if the outside world fell in ruins, one of us would be capable
 of building it up again, for mountain and stream, tree and leaf, root
 and blossom, all that is shaped by nature lies modeled in us, comes
 from the soul, whose essence is eternity, of whose essence we are
 ignorant, but which is revealed to us for the most part as love-force
 and creative power.
 
many years later i found this observation confirmed in book, one of
 leonardo da vinci’s, who in one passage remarks how good and deeply
 moving it is to look at wall on which many people have spat. felt
 the same sensation before those spots on the wet wall as pistorius and
 i before the fire.
 
at our next meeting the organist enlightened still further on the
 subject.
 
“we confine our personality within much too narrow bounds. we count as
 composing our person only that which distinguishes us as individuals,
 only that which we recognize as irregular. but we are made up from
 the entire world stock, each one of us, and just as in our body is
 displayed the genealogical table of development back to the fish
 stage and still further, so we have accumulated in our souls all the
 experiences through which human soul has ever lived. all the gods and
 devils which have ever been, whether those of the greeks or chinese
 or zulus, all are in us, are there as potentialities, as desires,
 as starting points. if all mankind died out, with the exception of
 single moderately gifted child, who had not enjoyed the slightest
 instruction, so would this child rediscover the whole process of
 things; it would be able to produce gods, demons, paradises, the
 commandments and prohibitions, old and new testaments--everything.”
 
“well and good,” i objected; “but then what does the worth of the
 individual consist of? why do we continue to strive if everything has
 already been achieved in us?”
 
“stop!” exclaimed pistorius vehemently. “there is great difference
 between whether one merely carries the world in oneself, or whether one
 is conscious of that as well. madman can have ideas which remind one
 of plato, and pious little boy in moravian boarding school will
 recreate in his thought profound mythological ideas which occur in the
 gnostics or in zoroaster. but does not realize it! is tree or
 stone, at best an animal, as long as does not know it. but, when
 the first spark of this knowledge glimmers in him becomes man. you
 will not consider all the two-legged creatures who walk out there in
 the street as human beings, simply because they walk erect and carry
 their young nine months in the womb? look how many of them are fish or
 sheep, worms or leeches, how many are ants or bees. well, in reach of
 them are the possibilities of becoming human creatures, but only when
 they feel this, it is only when, if even in part, they learn to make
 them conscious, that these potentialities become theirs.”
 
our conversations were somewhat after this style. they seldom taught
 anything completely new, anything absolutely surprising. but all,
 even the most banal, hit like light persistent hammer-stroke on the
 same point in me, all helped in my development, all helped to peel
 off skins, to break up eggshells, and after each talk i held my head
 somewhat higher, i was more sure of myself until my yellow bird pushed
 his beautiful bird-of-prey crest through the ruins of the world-shell.
 
we frequently related our dreams to one another. pistorius knew how
 to interpret them. curious example comes to my mind. i dreamed i
 was able to fly. i was flung through the air, so to speak--impelled
 by great force over which i had not the mastery. the sensation of
 this flight was exhilarating, but soon changed to fear as i saw myself
 snatched up involuntarily to risky heights. there i made the saving
 discovery that i could control my rise and fall by arresting my breath
 and by breathing again.
 
pistorius interpreted it as follows: “the swing, which sent you
 up into the air, is the great property of mankind, which everyone
 possesses. it is the feeling of close relationship with the springs
 of every force, but it soon causes anxiety. it is cursedly dangerous!
 for that reason most people willingly renounce flying, preferring to
 walk according to prescribed laws along the footpath. but not you. you
 fly higher, as befits an intelligent fellow. and behold, you make a
 wonderful discovery there, namely, you gradually get the mastery over
 the impelling force. in other words, you acquire fine little force of
 your own, an instrument, rudder. that is splendid. without that one
 goes floating into the air without any will of one’s own; madmen, for
 instance, do that. they have deeper presentiments than the people on
 the footpath. but they have key and rudder, they fall whistling
 through the air, down into the fathomless depths. but you, sinclair,
 you manage all right! and how, pray? you probably don’t even know.
 you manage with new instrument, with breath regulator. and now
 you can see, that your soul isn’t really ‘personal’ at bottom. i mean
 that you didn’t invent this regulator. it isn’t new. it is loan, it
 has existed for thousands of years. it is the balancing organ fish
 have--the air-bladder. even to-day we actually still have few very
 rare kinds of fish whose air-bladder is at the same time sort of
 lung; and on occasion can use it to breathe with. in your dream you
 made use of your lungs in exactly the same way as these fish do their
 air-bladder.”
 
even brought volume on zoölogy, and showed the original
 drawings of these ancient fish. and with peculiar thrill i felt an
 organ of early evolutionary epochs functioning in me.
 



chapter six
 
jacob wrestles with god
 

i cannot relate in brief all that i learned from the singular musician
 pistorius about abraxas. the most important result of his teaching was
 that i made further step forward on the road to self-realization. i
 was then about eighteen years old. i was young man rather out of the
 ordinary, precocious in hundred things, in hundred other things
 backward and helpless. when from time to time i used to compare myself
 with others, i was often proud and conceited, but just as frequently
 i felt depressed and humiliated. i had often looked upon myself as a
 genius, often as half mad. i could not share the pleasures and life of
 the fellows of my age, and often i heaped reproaches on myself and was
 consumed with cares, thinking i was hopelessly cut off from them, and
 that life was closed to me.
 
pistorius, himself full-grown and an eccentric, taught to preserve
 my courage and my self-esteem. in constantly finding some value in my
 words, in my dreams, in the play of my imagination and in my ideas, in
 taking them seriously and discussing them, set an example.
 
“you have told me,” said, “that you like music because it is not
 moral. well, all right. but you should be moralist yourself! you
 should not compare yourself with others. if nature had created you to
 be bat, you ought not to want to make yourself into an ostrich. you
 often consider yourself as singular, you reproach yourself with going
 ways different from most people. you must get out of that habit. look
 in the fire, look at the clouds, and as soon as you have presentiments,
 and the voices of your soul begin to speak, yield to them and don’t
 first ask what the opinion of your master or your father would be, or
 whether they would be pleasing to some god or other. one spoils oneself
 that way. in doing that one treads the common road, becomes fossil.
 sinclair, my dear fellow, the name of our god is abraxas. is god
 and is satan; has the light and the dark world in him. abraxas
 has objection to urge against any of your ideas or against any of
 your dreams. never forget that. but deserts you if you ever become
 blameless and normal. deserts you and seeks out another pot in order
 to cook his ideas therein.”
 
of all my dreams, that dark love-dream recurred most frequently. often,
 often have i dreamed of it; often i stepped under the crest with the
 bird on it into our house, and wished to draw my mother to me, but
 instead of her i found i was embracing the tall, manly, half-motherly
 woman, of whom i was afraid, and yet to whom i was drawn by most
 ardent desire. and i could never relate this dream to my friend. i kept
 it back, although i had opened my heart to him on everything else. it
 was my secret, my retreat, my refuge.
 
when i was depressed, i used to beg pistorius to play the
 passacaglia of old buxtehude. i sat in the dark church in the evening,
 engrossed in this singularly intimate music, which seemed to be
 hearkening to itself, as if entirely self-absorbed. each time it did me
 good and made more ready to follow the promptings of my inward self.
 
sometimes we stayed awhile in the church after the strains of the organ
 had died away. we sat and watched the feeble light shine through the
 high lancet window; the light seemed to lose itself in the body of the
 church.
 
“it sounds funny,” said pistorius, “that i once did theology and almost
 became parson. but it was only an error in form that i committed.
 to be priest, that is my vocation and my aim. only i was too easily
 satisfied, and gave myself to the service of jehovah before ever i knew
 abraxas. ah, every religion is beautiful! religion is soul. it is all
 one whether you take communion as christian or whether you make a
 pilgrimage to mecca.”
 
“then really you might have been clergyman,” i suggested.
 
“no, sinclair, no. i should have had to have lied in that case. our
 religion is so practised, as if it were none. it is carried on as if it
 were work of the understanding. catholic i could well be, if need
 were, but protestant clergyman--no! there are two kinds of genuine
 believers--i know such--who hold gladly to the literal interpretation.
 i could not say to them that for christ was not mere person, but a
 hero, myth, wonderful shadow-picture, in which mankind sees itself
 painted on the wall of eternity. and what should i find to say to the
 other sort, those who go to church to hear wise words, to fulfill a
 duty, in order to leave nothing undone, etc.? convert them, you think,
 perhaps? but that is not at all my idea. the priest does not wish to
 convert. only wants to live among the believers, among those of his
 own kind, so that through him they may find expression for that feeling
 out of which we make our gods.”
 
broke off. then continued: “our new faith, for which we have now
 chosen the name of abraxas, is beautiful, my friend. it is the best we
 have. but it is still nestling. its wings have not yet grown. alas, a
 lonely religion, that is not yet the true one. it must become an affair
 of many, it must have cult and orgy, feasts and mysteries....”
 
was sunk in reflection.
 
“can one not celebrate mysteries alone, or in very small circle?” i
 asked hesitatingly.
 
“yes, one can,” nodded. “i have been celebrating them for long
 time past. i have celebrated cults for which i should have been
 imprisoned for years in convict station, if they had been found out.
 but i know it is not the right thing.”
 
suddenly clapped on the shoulder, making jump. “young friend,”
 said impressively, “you also have mysteries. i know that you must
 have dreams of which you make mention to me. i don’t wish to know
 them. but i tell you: live them, these dreams, play your destined
 part, build altars to them! it is not yet the perfect religion, but
 it is way. whether you and i and few other people will one day
 renew the world remains to be seen. but we must renew it daily within
 us, otherwise we are of account. think over it! you are eighteen,
 sinclair, you don’t go with loose women, you must have love-dreams,
 desires. perhaps they are such that you are frightened by them! they
 are the best you have! believe me! i have lost great deal by doing
 violence to these love-dreams when i was your age. one should not do
 that. when one knows of abraxas, one should do that more. we should
 fear nothing. we should hold nothing forbidden which the soul in us
 desires.”
 
frightened, i objected: “but you can’t do everything which comes into
 your mind! you can’t murder man because you can’t tolerate him.”
 
pressed closer to me.
 
“there are cases where you can. only, generally it’s mistake. i don’t
 mean that you can simply do everything which comes into your mind. no,
 but you shouldn’t do injury to those ideas in which there is sense, you
 shouldn’t banish them from your mind or moralize about them. instead of
 getting oneself crucified or crucifying others, one can solemnly drink
 wine out of cup, thinking the while on the mystery of sacrifice. one
 can, without such actions, treat one’s impulses and one’s so-called
 temptations with esteem and love. then you discover their meaning, and
 they all have meaning. next time the idea takes you to do something
 really mad and sinful, sinclair, if you would like to murder someone
 or to do something dreadfully obscene, then think moment, that it is
 abraxas who is indulging in play of fancy. the man you would like to
 kill is never really mr. so and so, that is really only disguise.
 when we hate man, we hate in him something which resides in us
 ourselves. what is not in us does not move us.”
 
never had pistorius said anything to which went home so deeply as
 this. i could not reply. but what moved most singularly and most
 powerfully was that pistorius in this conversation had struck the same
 note as demian, whose words i had carried in my mind for years and
 years past. they knew nothing of one another, and both said to the
 same thing.
 
“the things we see,” said pistorius softly, “are the same things which
 are in us. there is reality except that which we have in ourselves.
 for that reason most people live so unreally, because they hold the
 impressions of the outside world for real, and their own world in
 themselves never enters into their consideration. you can be happy like
 that. but if once you know of the other, then you longer have the
 choice to go the way most people go. sinclair, the road for most people
 is easy, ours is hard. let us go.”
 
few days later, after i had on two occasions waited for him in vain,
 i met him late one evening in the street. came stumbling round a
 corner, blown along by the cold night wind. was very drunk. i did
 not like to call him. passed by without noticing me, staring in
 front of him with strange, glowing eyes, as though were moving in
 obedience to dark call from the unknown. i followed him down one
 street. drifted along as if drawn by an invisible wire, with the
 swaying gait of fanatic, or like ghost. sadly i went home, to the
 unsolved problems of my dreams.
 
“thus renews the world in himself!” i thought, and felt instantly
 that my thought was base and moral. what did i know of his dreams?
 perhaps in his intoxication was going surer way than in my anxiety.
 
* * * * *
 
in the intervals between lessons it struck once or twice that a
 boy who had never before attracted my notice was hovering about in
 my proximity. it was little, weak-looking, slim youngster with
 reddish-blond thin hair, who had something peculiar in his look and
 behavior. one evening as i came home was on the watch for in the
 street. let pass by, then walked behind me; and remained standing
 in front of the door of the house.
 
“can i do anything for you?” i asked.
 
“i only want to speak to you,” said timidly. “be good enough to come
 few steps with me.”
 
i followed him, observing that was deeply excited and full of
 expectation. his hands trembled.
 
“are you spiritualist?” asked quite suddenly.
 
“no, knauer,” i said, laughing. “not bit. how did you get hold of
 that idea?”
 
“but you are theosophist?”
 
“no again.”
 
“oh, please don’t be so reserved. i feel with absolute certitude there
 is something singular about you. it is in your eyes. i thought it
 certain you communed with spirits. i am not asking out of curiosity,
 sinclair, no! i am myself seeker, you know, and i am so lonely.”
 
“tell me, then!” i encouraged him. “i know absolutely nothing of
 ghosts. i live in my dreams: that is what you have felt about me.
 other people live in dreams as well, but not in their own, that is the
 difference.”
 
“yes, perhaps so,” whispered. “only it depends on the sort of dreams
 you live in. have you ever heard of white magic?”
 
i had to admit my ignorance.
 
“it’s when you learn to get the mastery over yourself. you can be
 immortal, and have magical powers as well. have you never practised
 such experiments?”
 
on my evincing curiosity with regard to those practices, was
 mysteriously silent, but when i turned to go burst out in
 explanation.
 
“for example, when i go to sleep or when i wish to concentrate my
 thoughts i do such exercises. i think of something or other, word
 for instance, or name, or geometrical figure. then i think it into
 myself, as strongly as i can. i try to get it into my head, until i
 feel it is there. then i think it in my neck, and so on, until i am
 quite full of it. then my thoughts are concentrated and nothing more
 can disturb my repose.”
 
i understood to certain degree what meant. yet i felt had
 something else in his mind, was oddly excited and hasty. i tried to
 make the questions easy for him, and soon gave an indication of
 what immediately concerned him.
 
“you are also continent?” asked anxiously.
 
“what do you mean by that? do you mean it from the sex point of view?”
 
“yes, yes. i have been continent for two years, since i knew of what i
 have told you. before that i practised vice, you know what. you have
 never been with woman, then?”
 
“no,” i said. “i haven’t found the right one.”
 
“but if you should find her, the one you consider the right one, then
 would you sleep with her?”
 
“yes, naturally. if she had nothing against it,” i said with some scorn.
 
“oh, then you are on false track! one can only perfect one’s inner
 forces if one remains entirely continent. i have done it, for two whole
 years. two years and little more than month! it’s so hard. often i
 can scarcely hold out any longer.”
 
“listen, knauer, i don’t believe that continency is so terribly
 important.”
 
“i know,” parried, “they all say that. but i did not expect to hear
 it from you. whoever will go the higher spiritual way must remain pure,
 unconditionally!”
 
“well, then, do so! but i don’t understand why one man should be purer
 than another, because represses his sex instincts. or can you switch
 off all sexual matters from your thoughts and dreams?”
 
looked despairingly at me.
 
“no, that’s just it. god! and yet it must be. at night i have dreams
 which i couldn’t relate even to myself. terrible dreams, terrible!”
 
i recollected what pistorius had said to me. but however much i felt
 his words to be right i could not pass them on. i could not give advice
 which did not result from my own experience, advice the observance
 of which i did not yet feel myself equal to. i was silent and felt
 humiliated that someone should come to for counsel when i had none
 to give.
 
“i have tried everything!” wailed knauer beside me. “i have done all
 that man can do, with cold water, with snow, with gymnastic exercises
 and running, but all that doesn’t help bit. each night i wake up out
 of dreams on which i dare not think. and most dreadful of all, i am by
 degrees losing everything that i had gained spiritually. it is almost
 impossible for any longer to concentrate my thoughts or to lull
 myself to sleep. often i lie awake the whole night through. i shall
 not be able to bear that much longer. finally, when i can carry on the
 struggle further, when i give in and make myself impure again, then
 i shall be worse than all the others who have never struggled against
 it. you understand that, don’t you?”
 
i nodded, but could say nothing to the point. began to bore me, and
 i was horrified at myself, because his obvious need and despair made
 deep impression on me. my only sentiment was: i can’t help you.
 
“then you know nothing that would help me?” asked at last, exhausted
 and sad. “nothing at all? there must be some way! how do you manage?”
 
“i cannot tell you anything, knauer. people can’t help one another in
 this case. one has helped me, either. you must think of something
 yourself, and you must obey the prompting which really comes from your
 own nature. there is nothing else. if you cannot find yourself, you
 won’t find any spirits, either.”
 
disappointed, and suddenly become dumb, the little fellow looked at me.
 then his look suddenly glowed with hate, made grimace at and
 cried with rage: “ah, you’re nice sort of saint! you have your vice
 as well, i know! you pretend to wisdom, and secretly you stick in the
 same filth as i and all of us! you’re swine, swine, like myself. we are
 all swine!”
 
i went away and left him standing there. made two, three steps in my
 direction, then stopped, turned round and ran away. i felt sick from
 feeling of pity and horror. i could not get rid of the feeling until
 i got home to my little room, and placing my few pictures before me, i
 surrendered myself up with passionate fervor to my dreams. my dreams
 came back at once, the dream of front door and crest, of mother and the
 strange woman, and i saw the features of the woman so very clearly
 that i began to draw her picture the same evening.
 
in few days this drawing was finished, painted in as if unconsciously
 in dreamy quarter-of-an-hour periods. in the evening i hung it on
 the wall, put the reading lamp in front of it, and stood before it
 as before spirit with whom i had to fight until victory should be
 decided one way or the other. it was face similar to the former,
 resembling my friend demian, in certain traits even resembling myself.
 one eye stood perceptibly higher than the other, the look passed over
 me, sunk in staring gaze, full of destiny.
 
i stood before it. such was my inward exertion that i became cold to
 the marrow. i questioned the picture, i abused it, i caressed it,
 i prayed to it. i called it mother, i called it beloved, called it
 strumpet and whore, called it abraxas. meanwhile words of pistorius
 crossed my mind, or of demian? i could not recollect on what occasion
 they had been spoken, but i thought i heard them again. they were the
 words of jacob wrestling with the angel of god. “i will not let thee
 go, except thou bless me.”
 
the painted face in the lamplight changed at each appeal. it was bright
 and shining, was black and gloomy; it closed pale lids over dead eyes,
 opened them again and flashed burning look. it was woman, man, girl,
 was little child, an animal, vanished to speck, was again tall and
 clear. at last, in response to strong inward prompting, i closed my
 eyes, and saw the picture inwardly in me, stronger and more powerful.
 i wished to kneel down before it, but it was so much within me, that i
 could separate it from myself more; it seemed as if it had entirely
 identified itself with me.
 
then i heard loud confused roar as of spring storm. i trembled
 in an indescribably new feeling of fear and excitement. stars darted
 before and died out, recollections even of the first forgotten years
 of my childhood, of time further back still, of pre-existence
 and the early stages of existence, pressed through me. but the
 recollections which seemed to piece together my life’s whole history
 even to its most secret details did not cease with yesterday and
 to-day, they went farther, mirrored the future, tearing away from
 to-day, changing into new forms of life, of which the pictures were
 very bright and blinding. but of none of them could i call up just
 image later.
 
in the night i woke up out of deep sleep. i was dressed and lying
 transversely across the bed. i struck light, feeling that i must try
 to remember something important that had happened. i knew nothing of
 the hours just passed. i turned on the light, and recollection came
 back gradually. i looked for the picture. it was not hanging on the
 wall, neither was it lying on the table. i thought confusedly that i
 must have burned it. or was it dream, that i had burned it in my
 hands and had eaten the ashes?
 
great inquietude convulsed and drove forth. i put on my hat,
 went out of the house and down the street, as if under coercion.
 i walked and walked through streets and squares as if blown along
 by storm, i listened in front of the gloomy church of my friend,
 searched in obedience to blind impulse, without knowing what i was
 looking for. i went through suburb, where brothels stood. here and
 there light was still shining. further on stood new buildings and
 brick heaps, covered in part with grey snow. i went on through this
 wilderness, driven forward by strange impulse, like man walking in
 dream. the thought of the new building in my native town crossed my
 mind, that building to which my tormentor kromer had drawn to settle
 accounts with him. in the grey night similar building stood there in
 front of me, its black doorway yawning wide. i was drawn towards it,
 but wanted to shun it and stumbled over sand and rubbish. the impulse
 was stronger than i, i had to go in.
 
i staggered over planks and broken bricks into the deserted room. there
 was mouldy smell of damp, cold stones. heap of sand lay there, a
 grey bright speck, otherwise all else was dark.
 
suddenly terrified voice called to me: “in god’s name, sinclair,
 where have you come from?”
 
and human figure rose out of the darkness close to me, little thin
 shape like ghost. i recognized, while yet my hair was standing on
 end, my school companion knauer.
 
“how did you get here?” asked, as if mad with excitement. “how have
 you been able to find me?”
 
i did not understand.
 
“i wasn’t looking for you,” i said, dazed. i spoke with difficulty, the
 words came from painfully, as if from dead, heavy, frozen lips.
 
“you weren’t looking for me?”
 
“no. i was drawn here. did you call me? you must have called. but what
 are you doing here? it’s still night.”
 
put his thin arms convulsively round me.
 
“yes, night. but it must soon be morning. oh, sinclair, to think that
 you didn’t forget me! can you ever forgive me?”
 
“what then?”
 
“ah, i was so hateful!”
 
then i recollected our conversation. had that taken place four, five
 days ago? it seemed to like lifetime. but suddenly i knew all. not
 only what had occurred between us, but also why i had come and what
 knauer wanted to do there.
 
“you wanted, then, to take your life, knauer?”
 
shuddered through cold and fear.
 
“yes, i wanted to. i don’t know whether i could have. i wished to wait
 until the morning came.”
 
i drew him into the open. the first oblique rays of day glimmered
 indescribably cold through the grey atmosphere.
 
i led the boy on my arm little way. i heard my own voice saying: “now
 go home, and don’t say anything to anybody. you were on false track,
 false track! and we are not swine, as you think. we are men. we make
 gods, and we wrestle with them, and they bless us.”
 
silently we went on, and separated. when i came home it was day.
 
the best that mystery in st. ---- had yet to give was the hours with
 pistorius at the organ or by the chimney fire. we read greek text
 about abraxas together. read to portions of translation of the
 veda and taught to say the sacred “om.” however, it was not this
 learned instruction which was of service to my inner self, but rather
 the contrary. what did good was the self-progression i made, the
 increasing confidence in my own dreams, thoughts and presentiments, and
 the consciousness of the power that i carried in me.
 
i had an excellent understanding with pistorius in every way. i needed
 only to think intently of him, and i could be sure that he, or a
 greeting from him, would come to me. i could ask him, just as i could
 demian, something or other, without his being there in person. i
 needed only to imagine his presence and to put my questions to him as
 intensive thoughts. then all the soul-force i had put into the question
 came back to as answer. only it was not the person of pistorius
 which i called up in my imagination; nor that of max demian, but it
 was the picture i had painted and of which i had dreamed. it was the
 half-man, half-woman, dream picture of my dæmon, to which i called. it
 lived now not only in my dreams, it was longer painted on paper, but
 it was in me, as desire-picture and an enhancement of my spiritual
 self.
 
the relation into which the unsuccessful suicide knauer entered with
 was peculiar and sometimes amusing. since the night i had been sent
 to him, dogged my steps like faithful servant or hound, sought
 to attach himself to and followed blindly. came to with
 curious questions and wishes. wanted to see spirits, to learn the
 cabbala, and did not believe when i assured him i understood
 nothing of all these things. credited with being able to do
 anything. but it was singular that often came to with his queer
 and silly questions just at the moment when i myself had mental knot
 to be disentangled. his moody ideas and concerns often gave the cue,
 the impulse which helped in the solution of my own problems. was
 often tiresome and i imperiously drove him away. i felt, however,
 that had been sent to me, and what i gave to him, i received
 twofold in return. also was guide, or rather way. the mad books
 and publications brought me, and in which sought the key to
 happiness, taught more than i realized at the time.
 
this knauer vanished later from my path, neither did i miss him. no
 arrangement, understanding was necessary with him. but it was with
 pistorius. towards the close of my school career in st. ---- i lived
 through another peculiar experience with my friend.
 
even innocuous, innocent people are not altogether spared the shock
 of conflict. even they come once in their lives in conflict with
 the beautiful virtues of piety and gratitude. each must make the step
 which parts him from his father, from his teachers. each must once feel
 something of the bitterness of loneliness, though most people cannot
 support it for long and soon creep back to their homes again. it was
 not great struggle for to part from my parents and their world,
 the “bright” world of my beautiful childhood. but slowly and almost
 imperceptibly i had got further from them and become more of stranger
 to them. i regretted it; it often caused bitter hours during my
 visits home; but it was not deep. i could bear it.
 
but when we have offered love and reverence of our own accord, and
 not out of habit, when we have been disciples and friends with our
 innermost feelings--then it is bitter and terrible moment when the
 realization is suddenly brought home to us that the guiding current of
 our life is bearing us away from those we love. then every thought of
 ours which rejects our friend and teacher enters our own heart like a
 poisoned sting, every blow of self-defense strikes back into our own
 face. then who felt that the dictates of his own conscience were an
 authentic guide reproaches himself with the terms “faithlessness” and
 “ingratitude.” then the terrified heart flees anxiously back to the
 valleys of childhood virtues, and cannot believe that the rupture must
 take place, that another bond must be severed.
 
in the course of time feeling had slowly developed in which
 refused to recognize my friend pistorius unconditionally as my guide.
 what i experienced in the most important moments of my youth was my
 friendship with him, his counsel, his consolation, his proximity.
 god had spoken to through him. through him my dreams returned to
 me, from his mouth came their explanation, from him i learned their
 significance. had given the courage to realize myself. and now,
 alas, i felt growing opposition against him. in his conversation he
 evinced too clearly desire to instruct me. i felt it was only one
 side of my nature that thoroughly understood.
 
there was quarrel, scene between us, rupture. i said to him
 only single, really harmless word, but nevertheless it was the
 moment when an illusion between us fell in colored pieces.
 
the presentiment had for some time already oppressed me, but one sunday
 in his scholarly old room this presentiment changed to definite
 feeling. we were lying on the floor before the fire. was speaking
 of mysteries and religious forms which was studying, and on which
 was meditating. occupied himself with trying to picture their
 possible future. to all this seemed curious and interesting, but
 scarcely of vital importance. it smacked of erudition. it was like a
 fatiguing search among the ruins of former worlds. and all at once i
 felt an aversion from the whole business, from this cult of mythology,
 from this sort of piecing together, this mosaic work of religious forms
 which had been handed down to posterity.
 
“pistorius,” i said suddenly, in malicious outburst which surprised
 and frightened even myself, “relate dream, real dream, one that you
 have had in the night. what you have just been talking about is so--so
 cursedly antiquarian!”
 
had never heard speak thus. with shame and terror i realized
 the very same moment that the arrow i had shot at him, and which had
 entered his heart, was taken from his own quiver--i realized that i had
 heard him reproach himself in an ironical tone on this very account,
 and that now i had maliciously turned one of his own reproaches
 against him like resharpened arrow.
 
felt it instantly, and was silent. i looked at him with terror in my
 heart and saw that had become very pale.
 
after long, heavy pause put some wood on the fire and said
 quietly: “you are quite right, sinclair. you’re wise fellow. i will
 spare you all this antiquarian business.”
 
spoke very quietly, but his tone told how deeply had been
 wounded. what had i done!
 
i was on the point of tears. i wanted to beg his pardon with all my
 heart, to assure him of my affection and gratitude. moving words came
 into my mind--but i could not utter them. was silent as well, and so
 we lay there, while the flames leaped up and then sank, and with each
 flame that paled fell something beautiful and fervid that ceased to
 glow and had vanished--never again to come back.
 
“i fear you have misunderstood me,” i said at last, much crushed,
 and with dry, hoarse voice. the silly, senseless words came as if
 mechanically from my lips, as if i had been reading them out of news
 sheet.
 
“i understood you perfectly,” said pistorius softly. “you are quite
 right.” we waited. then continued slowly: “so far as one man can be
 right in his judgment of another.”
 
no, no, voice inside said, i am wrong; but i could not say
 anything. i knew that i had aimed my single little word at his one
 essential weakness. i had touched the point of which himself
 was distrustful. his idea was “antiquarian.” was seeker, but
 retrogressive, was romantic. and suddenly i realized that it was
 just what had been to and had given that could not be and
 give to himself. had guided to point on the road, beyond which
 he, the guide, could not go.
 
god knows how i could have uttered such word! i had not meant it
 badly. i had had idea it would lead to catastrophe. i had uttered
 something, the import of which i did not myself realize at the moment
 of utterance. i had surrendered myself to somewhat witty, somewhat
 malicious inspiration, and fate used it as her instrument. i had been
 guilty of little thoughtlessness, crudeness, and had accepted it
 as judgment.
 
oh, how much i wished then that would have got angry, have defended
 himself, have shouted at me! but did nothing. i had all that to do
 within myself. would have smiled, had been able. the fact that he
 could not, showed more than anything else how hard i had hit him.
 
and because pistorius took the blow from me, his presumptuous and
 ungrateful pupil, so quietly, because silently agreed with me,
 because recognized my word as judgment of fate, caused to
 hate myself, made my thoughtlessness seem thousand times greater
 than it was. as i struck, i had thought to hit strong man, capable of
 defending himself--now was meek, suffering creature, defenseless,
 who surrendered in silence.
 
we remained long time lying before the dying fire, in which each
 glowing figure, each crumbling ash heap called to my memory happy,
 beautiful, rich hours, making my guilt and my obligation to pistorius
 greater and greater. finally i could bear it longer. i got up and
 went. long time i stood before his door, long time i listened on
 the dark staircase, long time i stood outside in front of the house,
 waiting to see whether perhaps would come out to me. then i went on,
 walking for hours and hours through town and suburbs, park and wood,
 until evening fell. at that moment i felt for the first time the mark
 of cain on my forehead.
 
i fell to pondering and rumination. i had every intention, in thinking
 matters over, to accuse myself and to defend pistorius. but all ended
 to the contrary. thousand times i was ready to repent of my rash word
 and to withdraw it--but it had been true, nevertheless. now i succeeded
 in understanding pistorius, in building up his whole dream. this dream
 had been to be priest, to proclaim new religion, to invent new
 forms of exultation, of love, of worship, to set up new symbols. but
 this was not within his province. lingered too long in the past, he
 knew too much of what had been, knew too much of egypt, of india,
 of mithras, of abraxas. his love was attached to ideas with which
 the world was already familiar. and in his inmost self probably
 recognized that the new religion had to be different, that it had to
 spring from fresh sources and not be drawn out of collections and
 libraries. his office was, perhaps, to help men to find themselves, as
 had done with me. but to found new doctrine, to give new gods to
 the world, was not his function in life.
 
and at this point the realization came upon that everyone has an
 “office,” charge. but to one is it permitted to choose his office
 for himself, and to discharge it as likes. it was wrong to want new
 gods, it was entirely wrong to wish to give the world anything. man
 has absolutely other duty than this: to seek himself, to grope his
 own way forward, matter whither it leads. that thought impressed
 itself deeply on me; that was the fruit of this new event for me.
 often had i pictured the future. i had dreamed of filling rôles which
 might be destined for me, as poet perhaps or as prophet, as painter,
 or some such rôle. all that was of account. i was not here to
 write, to preach, to paint, neither i nor anyone else was here for
 that purpose. all that was secondary. the true vocation for everyone
 was only to attain to self-realization. might end as poet or as
 madman, as prophet or as criminal--that was not his affair, that was
 of consequence in the long run. his business was to work out his
 own destiny, not any destiny, but his own, to live for that, entirely
 and uninterruptedly. everything else was merely an attempt to shun his
 fate, to fly back to the ideals of the masses, to adapt himself to
 circumstances. it was fear of his own inner being. there rose before
 this new picture, terrible and sacred, suggested to hundred
 times ere this, perhaps often already expressed, but now for the first
 time lived. i was throw from nature’s dice box, projection into the
 unknown, perhaps into something new, perhaps into the void, and my sole
 vocation was to let this throw-up from primeval depths work itself out
 in me, to feel its will in and to make it mine. that solely!
 
i had already known what it was to be very lonely. now i felt i could
 be lonelier still, and that i could not escape from it.
 
i made attempt to reconcile myself with pistorius. we remained
 friends, but our relation towards one another had changed. only one
 single time did we mention it, or rather, it was only who spoke of
 the matter. said: “i want to be priest, you know that. i would
 best of all like to be the priest of the religion of which we have
 so many presentiments. i can never be that, i know. i have known it
 already for some time, without fully admitting it. i will do some
 other priestly service, perhaps at the organ, perhaps in another way.
 but i must always be surrounded by something which i find beautiful
 and sacred, organ music and mysteries, symbol and myth, i need that
 and cannot persuade myself to leave it--that is my weakness. i often
 realize, sinclair, that i should not have such desires, that they are
 luxury and weakness. it would be greater, it would be more right,
 if i placed myself quite simply at the disposition of fate, without
 pretensions. that is the sole thing i cannot do. perhaps you will some
 time be able to do it. it is hard, it is the only thing really hard
 there is, my friend. i have often dreamed of it, but i cannot do it,
 i tremble at the thought of it. i cannot stand so completely naked
 and alone. i am poor, weak hound, who needs little warmth and
 food, who occasionally likes to feel the proximity of his own kind.
 whose only desire it is to work out his own destiny has kith or
 kin, but stands alone and has only the cold world space around him.
 do you know, that is jesus in the garden of gethsemane? there have
 been martyrs who willingly let themselves be nailed to the cross, but
 even they were not heroes, they were not free, they also wished for
 something to which they had been accustomed, which they had loved; with
 which they had felt at home. they had examples or ideals. who will
 fulfill his destiny has neither examples nor ideals, has nothing
 dear to him, nothing to comfort him. and one really ought to go this
 way. people like you and i are certainly very lonely, but we still
 have each other, we have the secret satisfaction of being different,
 of revolting, of wanting the unusual. but we must drop that, too, if
 we would go the whole way. we must not wish to be revolutionaries, or
 examples, or martyrs. to think the thought to its logical end----”
 
no, one could not think beyond that. but one could dream of it, could
 sense it, could anticipate it. few times i realized something of
 this, in very quiet hour. then i looked straight into the open,
 staring eyes of my fate. they could have been full of wisdom, or full
 of madness, they could be full of love or full of wickedness, it
 was all one. one was to choose nothing of all that; one was to want
 nothing, one was only to want oneself, one’s destiny. in that way had
 pistorius served me, for time, as guide.
 
in those days i walked about as if i were blind, storms roared within
 me, every step meant danger. i was conscious of nothing but the
 precipitous darkness in front of me, down to which all the roads i
 had trodden hitherto seemed to lead. and in my inward self i saw the
 picture of the guide, who resembled demian, and in whose eyes stood my
 fate.
 
i wrote on sheet of paper: “a guide has left me. i stand in complete
 darkness. i cannot take step alone. help me!”
 
i wished to send that to demian. yet i omitted to do this, for each
 time i wished to do it, it seemed foolish and meaningless. but i
 knew that little prayer by heart, and often said it to myself. it
 accompanied hourly. i began to realize what prayer is.
 
* * * * *
 
my school career was over. my father had arranged that during the
 holidays i was to travel and then i was to go to the university. in
 which faculty, i knew not. i was to be allowed to take philosophy for
 one semester. i should have been equally content with anything else.
 



chapter seven
 
mother eve
 

in the holidays i went once to the house in which, years before, max
 demian and his mother had lived. an old lady was walking in the garden.
 i entered into conversation and learned that the house belonged to
 her. i enquired after the demians. she remembered them very well. but
 she did not know where they were living at that moment. as she felt
 my interest, she took into the house, searched through leather
 album and showed photograph of demian’s mother. i scarcely had any
 recollections of what she was like. but when i saw the little picture
 my heart stood still. it was my dream picture! there it was, the tall,
 almost masculine woman’s figure, resembling her son, with traits
 of motherliness, traits which denoted severity, and deep passion,
 beautiful and alluring, beautiful and unapproachable, demon and mother,
 destiny and mistress. that was she!
 
i was filled with wild wonder, when i learned that my dream picture
 lived on earth! there was woman, then, who looked like that, who
 bore my fate in her features! where was she? where? and she was
 demian’s mother!
 
i started on my travels soon after. strange journey! i went
 restlessly from place to place as impulse directed, always in search of
 this woman. there were days when i met shapes which reminded of her,
 and which resembled her. these shapes led on through the streets
 of strange towns, into railway stations, into trains, as in tangled
 dream. there were other days when i saw how useless my search was. then
 i sat inactive, anywhere, in park or the garden of hotel, in a
 waiting room; i looked into myself and tried to make the picture live
 in me. but it was now shy and elusive. i could not sleep, i only nodded
 for quarter of an hour or so on railway journeys through country
 unknown to me. once in zürich, woman followed me, pretty, rather
 forward woman. i scarcely noticed her and went on, as if she were air.
 i would rather have died at once, than have shown sympathy for another
 woman, even if only for an hour.
 
i felt that my destiny was leading on. i felt that fulfillment was
 nigh. i was mad with impatience, to think that i could do nothing to
 help myself. once at station, i think it was at innsbruck, i saw, at
 the window of train which was just moving out, form which reminded
 of her, and i was miserable for days. and suddenly the form appeared
 again to at night in dream. i woke up with feeling as of shame,
 realizing the fruitlessness and senselessness of my chase, and i went
 home by the most direct route.
 
couple of weeks later i matriculated in the university of h----.
 everything disappointed me. the course of lectures i followed, on the
 history of philosophy, was just as vain and mechanical as the common
 ground of student life. everything was so much according to pattern,
 one person did as the other, and the boyish faces, although inflamed
 with forced gaiety, looked so distressingly vacant. it was like the
 gloss of ready-made article! but i was free, i had the whole day to
 myself, and lived quietly in beautiful old building outside the town.
 i had couple of volumes of nietzsche on my table. i lived with him,
 feeling the loneliness of his soul, sensing his destiny, which impelled
 him onwards unceasingly. i suffered with him, and was happy that there
 had been one who had gone his way so inflexibly.
 
late one evening i wandered through the town; an autumn wind was
 blowing and i heard the student societies singing in their taverns.
 tobacco smoke rose in clouds through the open windows; songs were being
 roared out, loudly and tensely; but the noise did not soar up, it fell
 dully on the ear, and was lifelessly uniform.
 
i stood at street corner and listened. from two cafés the flood of
 song rolled forth into the night. everywhere community, everywhere
 this huddling together, everywhere this unloading of the burden of
 destiny, this flight into the warm proximity of the herd!
 
two men passed by slowly. i caught phrase of their conversation.
 
“isn’t it just like an assembly of youths in nigger village?” said
 one. “they all do the same things. even tattooing is in fashion. look,
 that’s the young europe.”
 
the voice rang suggestively in my ear. i followed behind the two in the
 dark street. one of them was japanese, small and elegant. i saw his
 yellow smiling face shine under the lamp.
 
the other spoke again.
 
“well, i don’t suppose it’s any better with you in japan. people who do
 not follow the herd are everywhere rare. there are few here, too.”
 
every word went through me. i felt pleasure and dread. i recognized the
 speaker. it was demian.
 
in the windy night i followed him and the japanese through the dark
 streets, listening to their conversation and enjoying the ring of
 demian’s voice. it had the old tone, the old, beautiful sureness and
 tranquillity, and it had the same power over me. now everything was
 right. i had found him.
 
at the end of street in the suburbs the japanese took leave and
 closed house door behind him. demian took the way back. i had
 remained standing, and awaited him in the middle of the street. with
 beating heart i saw him approaching erect and walking with an elastic
 step. wore brown raincoat and carried thin stick, hanging from
 his arm. advanced without altering his regular stride until got
 right up to me. took off his hat, displaying his old, bright face
 with the determined mouth and the peculiar brightness on the broad
 forehead.
 
“demian!” i called.
 
stretched out his hand to me.
 
“so it’s you, then, sinclair? i expected you.”
 
“did you know i was here?”
 
“i did not know for certain, but i hoped it might be true. i saw you
 first this evening. you have been behind us the whole time.”
 
“you recognized then at once?”
 
“of course. you’re very much changed to be sure; but you have the sign.
 we used to call it the mark of cain, if you recollect. it is our sign.
 you have always had it; for that reason i became your friend. but now
 it is clearer.”
 
“i did not know. or rather i did. i once painted picture of you,
 demian, and was astonished that it was also like me. was that the sign?”
 
“that was it. it’s fine that you are here now! my mother will be glad
 as well.”
 
i started.
 
“your mother? is she here? she doesn’t know bit.”
 
“oh, she knows of you. she will know, without even my asking her, who
 you are. you haven’t let hear from you for long time.”
 
“oh, i often wanted to write, but nothing came of it. for some time
 past i have felt i should find you. i was waiting for it every day.”
 
pushed his arm through mine and we went on. tranquillity seemed to
 emanate from him and pass on to me. we were soon chatting together as
 formerly. we mentioned our schooldays, the confirmation class and that
 unlucky meeting of ours in the holidays--only mention was made of
 the earliest and closest bond between us, of the affair with frank
 kromer.
 
unexpectedly we found ourselves in the middle of singular and ominous
 conversation. having recalled demian’s discourse with the japanese,
 we spoke of student life in general and from that we had branched
 off to something else, which seemed to be rather out of the way of
 the former trend of our talk. nevertheless, from demian’s manner of
 introducing the subject, there seemed to be lack of coherence in our
 conversation.
 
spoke of the spirit of europe, and of modern tendencies. everywhere,
 said, reigned desire to come together, to form herds, but nowhere
 was freedom or love. all this life in common, from the student clubs
 and choral societies to the state, was an unnatural, forced phenomenon.
 the community owed its origin to sense of fear, of embarrassment, to
 desire for flight; inwardly it was rotten and old, and approaching a
 general break-up.
 
“community,” demian said, “is beautiful thing. but what we see
 blossoming everywhere is by means that. it will arise anew from the
 mutual understanding of individuals, and after time the world will be
 remodeled. what is now called community is merely formation of herds.
 mankind seeks refuge together because men have fear of one another--the
 masters combine for their own ends, the workmen for theirs, and the
 intellectuals for theirs! and why are they afraid? one is only afraid
 when one is not at one with oneself. they are afraid because they
 have never had the courage to be themselves. community of men who
 are afraid of the unknown in themselves! they all feel that the laws
 of their life longer hold good, that they are living according to
 outworn commandments. neither their religion nor their morals conform
 to our needs. for hundred years and more europe has simply studied
 and built factories. they know exactly how many grams of powder it
 takes to kill man, but they do not know how to pray to god. they
 have idea how to amuse themselves, even for an hour. look at these
 students drinking in their tavern! or take any place of amusement
 where rich people go! hopeless! my dear sinclair, cheerfulness,
 serenity can come of all that. these creatures, who move about so
 uneasily in crowds, are full of fear and full of wickedness, one
 trusts the other. they adhere to ideals which have ceased to exist,
 and they stone everyone who proposes new one. i feel that there
 are troubles ahead of us. they will come, believe me, they will come
 soon! of course the world won’t be bettered! whether the workmen kill
 the manufacturers, or whether the russians and germans shoot at one
 another, it will only be change of proprietors. but it will not be
 in vain. it will free the world from the chains of present-day ideals,
 there will be clearing away of stone-age gods. the world, as it is
 now, wants to die, it wants to perish, and it will.”
 
“and what will happen to us then?” i asked.
 
“to us? oh, perhaps we shall perish as well. they can also murder
 people in our position. only we shall not be entirely wiped out.
 the will of the future will realize itself from what remains of our
 influence, or with the aid of those of us who survive. the will of
 humanity will make itself felt, which our europe has for long time
 past tried to drown in its sale yard of scientifically manufactured
 articles. and then it will be seen that there is nothing in common
 between the will of humanity and that of our present-day communities,
 of the states and peoples, of the societies and churches. but what
 nature wills with man, is written in the individual few, in you and in
 me. it is found in jesus, in nietzsche. for these (the only important
 currents of thought which naturally can alter their course each day)
 there will be place when the present-day communities break up together.”
 
it was late when we made halt before garden by the river.
 
“we live here,” said demian. “come and see us soon! we shall expect
 you.”
 
i cheerfully wended my long way home through the night, which had
 become cold. here and there brawling students were lurching through
 the town. i had often felt, sometimes with feeling of privation,
 sometimes with scorn, the contrast between their curious sort of
 gaiety and my lonely life. but now, tranquil and strong in sense of
 secret power i felt as never before how little that affected me, how
 far removed was their world from mine. i reminded myself of officials
 of my native town, worthy old gentlemen, who clung to memories of the
 semesters they had passed in drinking, as they would to memories of a
 blissful paradise, and who practised cult, calling up reminiscences
 of the vanished “freedom” of their university life with all the
 seriousness which some poet or other romantic would devote to an
 account of his childhood. everywhere the same! everywhere they sought
 “liberty” and “happiness” behind them, in the past, for fear of being
 reminded of their own responsibility, of being warned they were not
 striking out for themselves, but merely going the way of all the world.
 two or three years passed in drinking and jollification, and then they
 crept under the common shelter and became serious gentlemen in the
 service of the state. yes, it was rotten, our whole system was rotten
 and these student sillinesses were less stupid and not so bad as a
 hundred others.
 
however, when i reached my distant dwelling and went to bed, all these
 thoughts had flown. everything else was in suspense as i looked forward
 to the fulfillment of the promise made to that day. as soon as i
 wished, in the morning if i liked, i could see demian’s mother. let
 the students hold their drinking bouts and tattoo their faces, let the
 world be rotten and on the brink of ruin--what had that to do with me?
 i was waiting for one single thing, that my fate might meet in new
 picture.
 
i woke up late in the morning from deep sleep. the day broke for
 as solemn festal day, such as i had not experienced since the
 christmas celebrations of my boyhood. i was full of deep unrest, yet
 entirely without fear. i felt that an important day had broken for
 me. i saw and felt the world around changed: it was full of secret
 portent, expectant and solemn. even the gently falling autumn rain was
 beautiful, full of the quiet, glad, serious music of festal day. for
 the first time the outer world was in tune with my inner world--then it
 is feast-day for the soul, then living is worth while! house, no
 shop window, face in the street disturbed me. everything was as it
 had to be, but did not wear the empty features of every day and of the
 habitual. it was like expectant nature, standing full of awe to meet
 its fate. thus, as little boy, i used to see the world on the morning
 of great feast-day, at christmas or at easter. i had not known that
 this world could still be so beautiful. i had been accustomed to
 living shut up in myself, and to content myself with the idea that my
 understanding for the outside world had been lost, that the loss of
 glistening colors was inevitably connected with the loss of childish
 vision.
 
so the hour came when i found again that garden in the suburbs, at
 the gate of which i had taken leave of max demian the night before.
 concealed behind trees in grey mist of rain stood little house,
 bright and homely, tall flowers stood behind big glass partition,
 and behind shining windows were dark room walls with pictures and
 bookcases. the front door led immediately into little hall, and a
 silent old servant, black, with white apron, showed in and took my
 raincoat from me.
 
she left alone in the hall. i looked about me. i looked round; and
 immediately i was in the middle of my dream. on the dark wood wall
 above door, under glass and in black frame, hung picture i knew
 well, my bird with the golden yellow hawk’s crest, forcing its way out
 of the sphere. much moved, i remained standing. my heart felt glad and
 sorry, as if in that moment everything i had done and had experienced
 came back to as answer and fulfillment. like lightning flash a
 crowd of pictures passed through my soul: my home, the house of my
 father, with the old stone crest over the arch of the door, the boy
 demian drawing the crest, myself as boy, fearsome under the evil
 spell of my enemy kromer, myself, as youth, at the table in my little
 room at school painting the bird of my dream, the soul caught in web
 of its own weaving, and everything, everything up to this moment found
 echo in again, and was confined, answered, approved.
 
with misty eyes i stared at my picture and read in the book of my soul.
 my glance dropped. in the open door under the picture of the bird stood
 tall lady in dark dress. it was she.
 
i could not utter word. the beautiful woman smiled at in a
 friendly way beneath features like her son’s, timeless and without
 age, full of an animated will. her look was fulfillment, her greeting
 meant home-coming. in silence i stretched out my hands to her. she
 seized both mine with her strong, warm ones.
 
“you are sinclair. i knew you at once. i am very glad to see you!”
 
her voice was deep and warm, i drank it in like sweet wine. and now i
 looked up in her tranquil face, into the black eyes of unfathomable
 depth. i looked at her fresh, ripe mouth, queenly forehead, which bore
 the sign.
 
“how glad i am!” i said to her and kissed her hands. “i believe i have
 been on my way all my life long--but now i have come home.”
 
she smiled in motherly way.
 
“one never comes home,” she said gently. “but where friendly roads
 converge, the whole world looks for an hour like home.”
 
she gave expression to what i myself had felt on my way to her.
 her voice and her words were like those of her son, and yet quite
 different. everything was more mature, warmer, more assured. but just
 as max in years past had made on one the impression of being mere
 boy, so his mother did not look like the mother of grown-up son, so
 young and sweet was the breath of her face and hair, so smooth her
 golden skin, so blossoming her mouth. more queenly still than in my
 dream she stood before me. her presence was love’s happiness, her look
 was fulfillment.
 
this, then, was the new picture, in which my fate displayed itself, no
 longer severe, longer isolating, but mature and full of promise.
 i took resolutions, i made vows. i had attained an end, i had
 reached point of vantage on the way, from which the further road
 displayed itself, broad and lovely, leading on to lands of promise,
 shaded by treetops of happiness near at hand, cooled by gardens of
 delight. come what might, i was happy to know of this woman’s existence
 in the world, to drink in her voice, to sense her presence. whether she
 would be to mother, mistress, goddess--what mattered it as long as
 she was present! as long as my way lay near to hers!
 
she indicated my picture of the hawk.
 
“you have never given max more pleasure than by sending this bird,”
 she said musingly. “and i was pleased as well. we expected you, and
 when the picture arrived we knew that you were on the way to us. when
 you were little boy, sinclair, my came one day from school and
 said: ‘there’s boy who has the sign on his forehead, must be my
 friend.’ that was you. you have not had an easy time of it, but we had
 confidence in you. once in the holidays when you were at home, max met
 you again. you were at that time about sixteen years old. max told
 me----”
 
i interrupted: “oh, that should have told you that. it was the most
 miserable time i have had!”
 
“yes, max said to me: ‘now sinclair has the hardest time before him. he
 is making an attempt to escape to the community, has even taken to
 drinking with the others; but won’t succeed in that. his sign has
 become dulled, but it shines secretly.’ was not that the case?”
 
“oh yes, it was, exactly. then i found beatrice, and finally guide
 came to me. his name was pistorius. for the first time it was clear to
 why my boyhood was so bound up with max’s, why i could not break
 away from him. dear lady--dear mother, at that time i often thought i
 should have to take my life. is the way so hard for everyone?”
 
she let her fingers stray through my hair, as gently as if light
 breeze were blowing.
 
“it is always hard, to be born. you know, it is not without effort that
 the bird comes out of the egg. look back and ask yourself: was the way
 then so hard?--only hard? was it not beautiful as well? could you have
 had one more beautiful, more easy?”
 
i shook my head.
 
“it was hard,” i said, as if in sleep, “it was hard, until the dream
 came.”
 
she nodded and looked at penetratingly.
 
“yes, one must find one’s dream, then the way is easy. but there is
 dream which endures for always. each sets new one free, to none
 should one wish to cleave.”
 
i started. was that already warning? was that already warding-off?
 but matter, i was ready to let myself be led by her, and not enquire
 after the end.
 
“i do not know,” i said, “how long my dream is to last. i wish it would
 be forever. my fate received under the picture of the bird, like a
 mother, and like mistress. to it i belong and to one else.”
 
“as long as the dream is your fate, so long must you remain true to
 it,” she said, in earnest confirmation of my remark.
 
i was very sad, and i wished ardently to die in this hour of
 enchantment; i felt the tears--for what an interminably long time had i
 not wept--rise irresistibly and overmaster me. i turned violently away
 from her. i stepped to the window, and looked out, my eyes blinded with
 tears, away over the flower-pots.
 
i heard her voice behind me; it rang out calmly and yet was so full of
 tenderness, like cup filled to the brim with wine.
 
“sinclair, what child you are! of course your fate loves you. one day
 it will belong to you entirely, just as you dreamt it, if you remain
 true to it.”
 
i had composed myself and turned my face to her again. she gave her
 hand.
 
“i have few friends,” she said, smiling, “very few, very close
 friends, who call mother eve. you may call so as well, if you
 like.”
 
she led to the door, opened it and indicated the garden. “you will
 find max out there, i think.”
 
i stood under the tall trees, stunned and stupefied. i knew not whether
 i was more awake or more dreaming than ever. softly the rain dripped
 from the branches. i went slowly through the garden, which stretched
 far along the river bank. at last i found demian. stood in an open
 summer house. naked to the waist, was doing boxing exercises with a
 little sack of sand hung from beam.
 
astonished, i remained standing there. demian looked magnificent; his
 broad chest, the firm manly head, the uplifted arms were strong and
 sturdy. the movements came from the hips, the shoulders, the joints of
 the arm, as easily as if they bubbled out of spring of strength.
 
“demian!” i called. “what are you doing there?”
 
laughed gaily.
 
“i am exercising. i have promised to box with the little jap; the
 fellow is as agile as cat, and naturally just as sly. but won’t be
 able to manage me. i owe him just one little beating.”
 
drew on shirt and coat.
 
“you have already seen mother?” asked.
 
“yes, demian, what marvellous mother you have! mother eve! the name
 suits her perfectly; she is like the mother of all being.”
 
gazed for an instant musingly in my face.
 
“you know her name already? you ought to be proud, young friend.
 you are the only one to whom she has said it in the first hour’s
 acquaintance.”
 
from this day on i went in and out of the house like and a
 brother, but also like lover. when i closed the gate behind me, even
 when i saw the tall trees of the garden emerge in the distance, i was
 happy. outside was “reality,” outside were streets and houses, human
 beings and institutions, libraries and lecture rooms--here inside were
 love and the life of the soul, here was the kingdom of fairy stories
 and dreams. and yet we lived by means shut off from the world. in
 thought and word we often lived in its midst, only on another plane. we
 were not separated from the majority of creatures by boundaries, but
 rather by different sort of vision. our task was to be, as it were,
 an island in the world, perhaps an example, in any case to proclaim
 that it was possible to live different sort of life. i, who had been
 isolated for so long, learned to what extent community of feeling is
 possible between people who have experienced complete loneliness. i no
 longer desired to be back at the tables of the happy, at the feasts
 of the merry. i longer felt envious or homesick when i saw others
 living in community. and slowly i was initiated into the mystery of
 those who bore “the sign.”
 
we, who bore the sign, were probably justly considered by the world
 as peculiar--yes, mad even, and dangerous. for we were awake, or were
 waking, and our endeavor was to be more and more completely awake,
 whereas the others strove to be happy, attaching themselves to the
 herd, the opinions and ideals of which they made their own, taking
 up the same duties, making their life and happiness depend on common
 interests. true, there was certain greatness, vigorousness, in
 their endeavor. but whereas, from our point of view, we who bore the
 sign carried out the will of nature as individuals and as men of the
 future, the others persisted in stubbornness which hindered all
 progress. for them mankind, which they loved just as we did--was
 something already complete, which must be maintained and protected. for
 us mankind was distant future, to which we were all on the way. no
 one could image this future, neither did its laws stand written in any
 book.
 
besides mother eve, max and myself, there belonged to our circle in
 greater or lesser degree of intimacy many seekers of very various
 sorts. many of them were going along their own special paths, had set
 up special aims and adhered to special opinions and duties. amongst
 these were astrologers and cabbalists, also an adherent of count
 tolstoy, and all kinds of tender, timid, sensitive people, followers of
 new sects, men who practised indian cults, vegetarians and others. with
 all these we had really nothing of spiritual nature in common, except
 the esteem which each accorded the secret life-dream of the other.
 some were in closer contact with us, such as those who traced the
 searchings of mankind after gods and new ideals in the past, and whose
 studies often reminded of my friend pistorius. they brought books
 with them, translated for us texts from ancient tongues and showed us
 illustrations of ancient symbols and rites. they taught us to see how
 all the ideals of mankind up to the present have their origin in dreams
 of the subconscious soul, dreams in which humanity is, as it were,
 feeling its way forward into the future, guided by premonitions of the
 future’s potentialities. so we went through the religious history of
 the ancient world with its thousand gods, to the dawn of christianity.
 the confessions of the isolated saints were known to us, and the
 changes of religion from race to race. and from all the knowledge
 we thus acquired resulted criticism of our and of present-day
 europe, of this continent which through enormous exertions had created
 powerful new weapons for humanity, only to fall finally into deep
 spiritual devastation, the effects of which were at last being felt.
 for it had gained the whole world, only to lose its own soul.
 
there were with us believers as well, advocates of doctrines of
 salvation, in the efficacy of which they were very hopeful. there were
 buddhists who wished to convert europe, and disciples of tolstoy, and
 of other confessions. we in our narrow circle listened, but accepted
 none of these doctrines except as symbols. we who bore the sign had no
 cares as regarded the formation of the future. to us every confession,
 every doctrine of salvation appeared in advance dead and useless. our
 whole duty, our destiny, was, we felt, to attain to self-realization,
 in order that in us nature might find scope for its full activities,
 and that the unknown future might find us ready to fill any rôle which
 should be allotted us.
 
whether we expressed our opinion in so many words or not, it was clear
 to all of us that break-up of the present-day world was approaching,
 to be followed by new birth. demian said to on more than one
 occasion: “what will come is beyond conception. the soul of europe
 is an animal which has been chained up for an immeasurably long
 period. when it is set free, its first movements will not display much
 amiability. but the way it will take, whether direct or indirect, is
 not of importance, provided that the soul’s true need is realized,
 this soul which has been deluded and dulled for so long. then our day
 will come, then we shall be needed, not as guides or new law-givers--we
 shall not live to see the new laws--but rather as volunteers, as those
 who are ready to follow and to stand wherever fate shall call us. look,
 all men are ready to perform the incredible, when their ideals are
 threatened. but one comes forward when new ideal, new, perhaps
 dangerous and uncanny impulse of spiritual growth declares itself. we
 shall be of those few who are there, ready to go forward. for that
 purpose have we been singled out just as cain was marked with the sign
 to inspire fear and hate, to drive the men of his time out of narrow
 idyllic existence into the broad pastures of greater destiny. all men
 whose influence has affected the march of humanity, all such, without
 differentiation, owe their capabilities and their efficacy to the fact
 that they were ready to do the bidding of destiny. that applies to
 napoleon and bismarck. the immediate purpose to which they direct their
 energies does not lie within their choice. if bismarck had understood
 the social democrats and had thrown in his lot with them, would have
 been prudent fellow, but would never have been the instrument of
 fate. the same applies to napoleon, to caesar, to loyola, to all of
 them! one must always look at such things from the point of view of
 biology and evolution! when the changes which took place in the earth’s
 surface transferred to the land animals which lived in water, and vice
 versa, then those specimens which were ready to fulfill their functions
 as instruments of fate, brought new and unheard-of things to pass and
 were able, through new adaptations, to save their kind. whether these
 specimens were the same that had previously been conservatives and
 preservers of the status quo or the eccentrics and revolutionaries, is
 not known. they were ready to be used by fate, and for that reason were
 able to help their race through new stage of evolution. that we do
 know. for that reason we want to be ready.”
 
mother eve was often present when such conversations took place, but
 she did not join in. for each of us who chose to express his thoughts
 she was as it were listener and an echo, full of confidence, full
 of understanding. it appeared as if our ideas all emanated from her
 and returned to her again. my happiness consisted in sitting near her,
 in hearing her voice from time to time, and in participating in that
 atmosphere of maturity and of the soul, which surrounded her.
 
she felt immediately when change was taking place in me, when my soul
 was troubled, or when renewal was in progress. it seemed to as if
 the dreams i had in my sleep were inspired by her. i often related
 them to her. she found them quite comprehensible and natural, there
 were peculiarities which she could not follow clearly. for time
 i had dreams which were like reproductions of the day’s conversation.
 i dreamed that the whole world was in revolt, and that i, alone or
 with demian, tensely waited the signal of fate. fate remained half
 concealed, but bore somehow or other the traits of mother eve--to be
 chosen or rejected by her, that was fate.
 
sometimes she said with smile: “your dream is not complete, sinclair,
 you have forgotten the best part”--and it sometimes happened that i
 recalled it then, and i could not understand how i had come to forget
 any of it.
 
at times i was discontented and was tormented by desire, i thought i
 could not bear to see her near any longer without taking her in my
 arms. she noticed that immediately. once, when i had stayed away for
 several days and had returned distraught, she took aside and said:
 “you should not give yourself up to wishes in which you do not believe,
 i know what you wish. you must give up these desires, or else surrender
 yourself to them completely. if one day you are able to ask, convinced
 that your wishes will be fulfilled, then you will find satisfaction.
 but you wish, and repent again, and are afraid. you must overcome all
 that. i will tell you fairy-tale.”
 
and she told of youth who was in love with star. stood on the
 sea-shore, stretched out his hands, and prayed to the star. dreamed
 of it and all his thoughts were of it. but knew, or thought he
 knew, that star could not be embraced by man. held it to be his
 fate to love star without hope of fulfillment, and created from
 this thought whole life-poem about renunciation, and mute, faithful
 suffering which should better him and purify him. but his dreams all
 went up to the star. once again stood at night by the sea-shore,
 on high cliff. gazed at the star, and his love for it flamed up
 within him. and in moment of great longing made spring, throwing
 himself into space to meet the star. but at the moment of leaping,
 the thought flashed through his mind: it is impossible! and so was
 dashed to pieces on the rocks below. did not know how to love. had
 had the strength of soul, at the moment of leaping, to believe in
 the fulfillment of his wish, would have flown up and have been
 united with the star.
 
“love must not beg,” she said, “nor demand either. love must have the
 force to be absolutely certain of itself. then it is attracted no
 longer, but attracts. sinclair, i am attracting your love. as soon as
 you attract my love, i shall come. i do not want to make present of
 myself. i want to be won.”
 
on later occasion she told another fairy-story. there was lover,
 who loved without hope of success. withdrew entirely into himself
 and thought his love would consume him. the world was lost to him, he
 saw the blue sky and the green wood longer, did not hear the
 murmuring of the stream, or the notes of the harp; all that meant
 nothing to him, and became poor and miserable. but his love grew,
 and would much rather have died and have made an end of it all than
 renounce the chance of possessing the beautiful woman whom loved.
 then suddenly felt that his love had consumed everything else in
 him, it became powerful and exercised an irresistible attraction, the
 beautiful woman had to follow, she came and stood with outstretched
 arms to draw her to him. but as she stood before him, she was
 completely transformed, and with thrill felt and saw that had
 drawn into his embrace the whole world, which had lost. she stood
 before him and surrendered herself to him, sky and wood and brook, all
 was decked out in lovely new colors, all belonged to him, and spoke
 his tongue. and instead of merely winning woman, had taken the
 whole world to his heart, and each star in the heaven glowed in him,
 and twinkling, communicated desire to his soul. had loved, and
 thereby had found himself. but most people love only to lose themselves
 thereby.
 
my whole life seemed to be contained in my love for mother eve. but
 every day she looked different. many times i felt decidedly that it was
 not her person for which my whole being was striving, but that she was
 symbol of my inward self, and that she wished only to lead to see
 more deeply into myself. i often heard words fall from her lips, which
 sounded like answers to the burning questions asked by my subconscious
 self. then again there were moments when in her presence i burnt with
 desire, and afterwards kissed objects she had touched. and by degrees
 sensual and unsensual love, reality and symbol merged into one another.
 then it happened that i could think of her at home in my room with
 quiet fervor. i thought i felt her hand in mine and my lips pressed
 to hers. or i was at her house, gazing up into her face, talking with
 her and listening to her voice; and i did not know whether it was
 really she, or whether it was dream. i began to foresee how one can
 have lasting and immortal love. in reading book i had acquired new
 knowledge, and it was the same feeling as kiss from mother eve. she
 stroked my hair and smiled at me, i sensed the perfume of her warm ripe
 mouth, and i had the same feeling as if i had been making progress
 within myself. all that was important and fateful for seemed to be
 contained in her. she could transform herself into each of my thoughts,
 and every one of my thoughts was transformed into her.
 
i feared that it would be torture to spend the two weeks of the
 christmas holidays, separated from mother eve, with my parents at home.
 but it was torture, it was lovely to be at home and to think of her.
 when i returned to h---- i remained away from her house another two
 days, in order to enjoy the security and independence of her actual
 presence. i also had dreams in which my union with her was accomplished
 by way of allegory. she was sea, into which i, river, flowed. she
 was star, and i myself was star on my way to her. we felt drawn to
 one another. we met, and remained together always, turning blissfully
 round one another in close-lying orbits, to the music of the spheres.
 
i related this dream to her, when i visited her again after the
 holidays.
 
“it is beautiful dream,” she said softly. “see that it comes true!”
 
there came day in early spring that i shall never forget. i entered
 the hall. window stood open and the heavy scent of hyacinths, wafted
 by warm breath of air, permeated the room. as one was to be seen,
 i went upstairs to max demian’s study. i knocked softly on the door and
 entered without waiting for permission, as i was in the habit of doing
 with him.
 
the room was dark. the curtains were all drawn. the door to little
 room adjoining stood open, where max had set up chemical laboratory.
 from there came the bright, white light of the spring sun, shining
 through rain clouds. i thought one was there and pulled back one of
 the curtains.
 
there i saw max demian, sitting on stool by curtained window. his
 attitude was cramped and was oddly changed. the thought flashed
 through me: you have seen him like this once before! his arms were
 motionless at his side, his hands in his lap; his face inclined
 slightly forward, with open eyes, was without sight, as if dead. in the
 eyes there glimmered dully little reflex of light, as in piece of
 glass. the pale face was self-absorbed and without any expression, save
 that of great rigidity. looked like very ancient mask of an animal
 at the door of temple. appeared not to be breathing.
 
the recollection came to me--thus, exactly thus, had i once seen
 him, many years ago, when i was still quite boy. thus had his eyes
 stared inwards, thus his hands had been lying motionless, close to one
 another, fly had been crawling over his face. and had then, six
 years ago perhaps, looked just as old and as ageless, not wrinkle in
 his face had changed.
 
i was frightened, and went softly out of the room and down the stairs.
 in the hall i met mother eve. she was pale and seemed tired: i had not
 seen her like that before. shadow came through the window, the bright
 white sun had suddenly disappeared.
 
“i went into max’s room,” i whispered hastily. “has anything happened?
 is asleep, or absorbed, i don’t know what; i once saw him like that
 before.”
 
“but you didn’t wake him?” she asked quickly.
 
“no. did not hear me. i came out immediately. mother eve, tell me,
 what is the matter with him?”
 
she passed her hand over her forehead.
 
“don’t worry, sinclair, nothing has happened to him. has retired
 into himself. it will not last long.”
 
she got up and went out into the garden, although it had begun to rain.
 i felt that i must not follow her. so i walked up and down in the hall,
 inhaling the scent of the hyacinths which dulled my senses, and gazing
 at my picture of the bird over the door. i felt oppressively the odd
 shadow which seemed to fill the house that morning. what was it? what
 had happened?
 
mother eve came back soon. rain drops hung in her dark hair. she sat
 down in her easy chair. she was very tired. i went to her, bent down
 and kissed the raindrops in her hair. her eyes were bright and soft,
 but the raindrops tasted like tears.
 
“shall i go and see how is?” i asked in whisper.
 
she smiled weakly.
 
“don’t be child, sinclair!” she admonished loudly, as if to relieve
 her own feelings. “go now and come back later, i cannot talk to you
 now.”
 
i went. i walked out of the house and out of the town, towards the
 mountains. the thin rain was falling obliquely, and clouds were driving
 at low altitude under heavy pressure, as if in fear. down below there
 was hardly any breeze, but on the heights above storm seemed to be
 raging. several times the sun, pale and bright, broke for an instant
 through the steely grey of the clouds.
 
there came fleecy, yellow cloud driving across the sky. it collided
 with the grey cloud wall, and in few seconds the wind formed a
 picture of the yellow and blue, of bird of giant size, which tore
 itself free from the blue mêlée and with wide fluttering wings
 disappeared in the sky. then the storm became audible and rain mixed
 with hail rattled down. short burst of thunder with an unnatural and
 terrific sound cracked over the whipped landscape. immediately after
 the sun broke through and on the mountains close at hand above brown
 woods glistened, pale and unreal, the fresh snow.
 
when i returned after several hours, wet from the rain and wind, demian
 himself opened the front door to me.
 
took with him up to his room. gas flame burned in the
 laboratory, paper lay about, appeared to have been working.
 
“sit down,” invited, “you must be tired, it was terrible storm;
 it’s evident, you were overtaken by it. tea is coming at once.”
 
“something is the matter to-day,” i began hesitatingly, “it can’t only
 be that bit of storm.”
 
looked at penetratingly.
 
“have you seen anything?”
 
“yes. i saw picture clearly in the clouds, for an instant.”
 
“what sort of picture?”
 
“it was bird.”
 
“the hawk? was it that? the bird of your dream?”
 
“yes, it was my hawk. it was yellow and of giant size, it flew up into
 the blue-black heaven.”
 
demian took deep breath. someone knocked at the door. the aged
 servant brought in tea.
 
“take cup, sinclair, do. i don’t think it was by chance you saw the
 bird.”
 
“chance? does one see such things by chance?”
 
“well, no. it means something. do you know what?”
 
“no. i only feel, it means violent shock, the approach of fate. i
 think it will affect all of us.”
 
walked violently up and down.
 
“the approach of fate!” exclaimed loudly. “i dreamed the same
 thing myself last night, and my mother yesterday had premonition,
 portending the same thing. i dreamed i was going up ladder, placed
 against tree trunk or tower. when i reached the top i saw the whole
 country. it was wide plain, with towns and villages burning. i cannot
 yet relate everything, because it isn’t all quite clear to me.”
 
“do you interpret the dream as affecting you?” i asked.
 
“me? naturally. one dreams of what does not concern him. but it
 does not concern alone, you are right. i distinguish tolerably
 well between the dreams which indicate agitation of my own soul, and
 the others, the rare ones, which bear on the fate of all humanity. i
 have seldom had such dreams, and never one of which i can say that it
 was prophecy, and that it has been fulfilled. the interpretations
 are too uncertain. but this i know for certainty, i have dreamed of
 something which does not concern alone. for the dream belongs to
 others, former ones i have had; this is the continuation. these are the
 dreams, sinclair, in which i had the premonitions which i have already
 mentioned to you. we know that the world is absolutely rotten, but
 that is reason to prophesy its ruin, or to make prophecy of like
 nature. but for several years past i have had dreams, from which i
 conclude, or feel, or what you will, which, then, give the feeling
 that the break-up of an old world is drawing near. at first they were
 simply faint presentiments, but since they have become more and more
 significant. even now i know nothing more than that something big and
 terrible is approaching, which will concern me. sinclair, we shall go
 through the experiences of which we have so often talked. the world is
 about to renew itself. it smacks of death. nothing new comes without
 death. it is more terrible than i had thought.”
 
frightened, i looked at him fixedly.
 
“can’t you tell the rest of your dream?” i begged timidly.
 
shook his head.
 
“no.”
 
the door opened and mother eve entered.
 
“there you are, sitting together! children, i hope you aren’t sad?”
 
she looked fresh, her fatigue had quite vanished. demian smiled at her,
 she came to us as mother comes to frightened children.
 
“we aren’t sad, mother. we were simply trying to solve the riddle of
 these new signs. but that is of importance; what is to come, will
 be here all of sudden, and then we shall learn what we need to know.”
 
but i did not feel happy. when i said good-bye and went down alone
 through the hall, i felt that the hyacinths were faded and withered,
 reminding of corpses. shadow had fallen over us.
 



chapter eight
 
beginning of the end
 

it had been decided that i should remain in h---- for the summer
 semester. instead of staying in the house, we were almost always in the
 garden by the river. the japanese, who by the way had been thoroughly
 beaten in the boxing match, was away, and the disciple of tolstoy was
 also missing. demian had procured horse, and went for long rides
 every day. i was often alone with his mother.
 
sometimes i wondered greatly at the peaceableness of my life. i had
 been so long accustomed to being alone, to practise renunciation, to
 fight toilfully my own battles, that these months in h---- seemed to me
 like time passed on dream island, where i might live tranquilly in
 beautiful, enchanted surroundings. i felt that this was foretaste of
 that new, higher community, on which we meditated. and now and then i
 was seized by deep feeling of sadness, for i knew that this happiness
 could not last. i was not destined to breathe in the fulness of peace
 and comfort, i needed torment to spur on. i felt that one day i
 should wake up from these dreams of beautiful love-pictures to find
 myself standing once more alone, in the cold world of others, where for
 there would be only loneliness and fighting, peace, community
 of spirit.
 
then i yielded myself to the charms of mother eve’s presence. my
 feeling for her was now doubly tender. i was glad that my fate bore
 still these beautiful, tranquil features.
 
the summer weeks passed quickly and easily. already the semester was
 drawing to close. leave-taking was near, i dared not think of it, and
 did not, but clung to the beautiful days like butterfly to honeyed
 flower. that was my period of happiness, the first fulfillment of my
 life’s wishes, and my reception into the league--what was to come next?
 i would again have to fight my battles, be consumed by longing, have
 dreams, be alone.
 
at this time the feeling, the foretaste of separation, came over me
 so strongly that my love for mother eve blazed up suddenly, causing
 pain. my god! how soon would the time come to say good-bye, and
 i should see her more, more hear her firm step in the house,
 should find more her flowers on my table! and what had i attained?
 i had dreamed and had lulled myself in comfort, instead of winning
 her, instead of fighting for her and drawing her to for always! all
 that she had said to about genuine love crossed my mind, hundreds
 of fine, suggestive words, hundred tender invitations, promises
 perhaps--and what had i made of them? nothing! nothing!
 
i took up position in the middle of my room, collected my whole
 conscious self together and thought of eve. i wished to concentrate the
 forces of my soul, in order to let her feel my love, in order to draw
 her to me. she was to come, longing for my embrace. my kisses were to
 suck insatiably the ripe fruit of her lips.
 
i stood tense, until fingers and feet became stiff with cold. i felt
 force was going out of me. for few seconds something seemed to take
 shape with me, something bright and cool; i had for moment the
 sensation as if i carried crystal in my heart, and i knew that was
 myself. cold chill pierced to my heart.
 
as i woke out of my fearful state of tension i felt something was
 approaching. i was exhausted to the point of death, but i was prepared
 to see eve step into the room, burning with passion, ravished.
 
the sound of horse’s hoofs clattering down the long street rang nearer
 and nearer, then suddenly ceased. i sprang to the window. below demian
 was dismounting.
 
“what is the matter, demian? nothing can have happened to your mother?”
 
did not listen to my words. was very pale, and perspiration ran
 down both sides of his forehead over his cheeks. his horse was flecked
 with foam. tied the reins to the garden fence, then took my arm
 and walked with down the street.
 
“have you already heard the news?” i had heard nothing.
 
demian pressed my arm and turned his face to me, with dark,
 compassionate, singular look.
 
“yes, old man, now we’re in for it. you know of the strained relations
 with russia----”
 
“what? is it war? i had never believed it.”
 
spoke in an undertone, although one was near.
 
“it is not yet declared. but it’s war. rely on it. i haven’t worried
 you lately, but i have seen three new omens since. it will be no
 foundering of the world, earthquake, revolution. it’s war. you
 will see how that strikes everybody. it will be joy to people;
 everyone already rejoices that hostilities are about to commence. so
 insipid has life become for them. but you will see now, sinclair, that
 is only the beginning. this will perhaps be great war, very great
 war. the new dispensation commences and for those who adhere to the
 old, the new will be terrible. what will you do?”
 
i was perplexed, everything sounded so strange and improbable.
 
“i don’t know--and you?”
 
shrugged his shoulders.
 
“as soon as mobilization orders are out, i join up. i am lieutenant.”
 
“you? i had idea of that.”
 
“yes. it was one of my adaptations. you know, i have never wanted to
 appear out of the ordinary, and have rather done too much, in order to
 be correct, to do the right thing. in eight days, i think, i shall be
 already in the field.”
 
“for god’s sake!”
 
“look here, old fellow, you mustn’t take things so sentimentally. at
 bottom it certainly won’t give pleasure to order machine gunfire to
 be turned on living creatures, but that is secondary matter. now each
 one of us will be seized by the great wheel of fate. you as well. you
 will certainly be called up.”
 
“and your mother, demian?”
 
then for the first time i recollected what i was doing quarter of an
 hour before. how the world had changed! i had summoned together all my
 force in order to conjure up the sweetest picture, and now fate had
 suddenly put on new, horrible mask.
 
“my mother? we need have cares for her safety. she is safe, safer
 than anyone else in the world to-day. you love her so very much?”
 
“you knew it, demian?” laughed brightly and without any
 embarrassment.
 
“you child! naturally i knew it. one has yet called my mother mother
 eve without loving her. by the way, how was that? you have called to
 either her or myself to-day, haven’t you?”
 
“yes, i called--i called to mother eve.”
 
“she felt it. she suddenly sent away, i was to come to you. i had
 just told her the news about russia.”
 
we turned back, scarcely speaking, untied his horse and mounted.
 
i first realized in my room how exhausted i was by demian’s message,
 and even more so by my previous spiritual exertions. but mother eve had
 heard me! my thoughts had reached her. she would have come herself,
 if--how wonderful all this was, and how beautiful! now it was to be
 war. now what we had so often spoken of was about to happen. and demian
 had known so much in advance. how strange that the world’s stream would
 longer flow somewhere or other by us--that now it was suddenly
 flowing through us, that fate and adventure called us, and that now, or
 soon, the moment would come when the world would need us, when it would
 be transformed. demian was right, one should not be sentimental over
 it. only it was strange that i was now to experience that lonely thing,
 “fate,” with so many, with the whole world. good then!
 
i was ready. in the evening, when i went through the town, every corner
 was alive with bustle and excitement. everywhere the word “war”!
 
i went to mother eve’s house. we had supper in the summer house. i was
 the only guest. one spoke word about the war. but later, shortly
 before i left, mother eve said: “dear sinclair, you called to-day.
 you know why i did not come myself. but don’t forget, you know the call
 now and if ever you need someone who bears the sign, call again.”
 
she rose and went out through the gloaming into the garden. tall and
 queenly, invested with mystery, she stepped between the trees, the
 foliage ceased its whispering at her approach, and over her head
 glimmered tenderly the many stars.
 
* * * * *
 
i am coming to the end. events marched quickly. war was declared.
 demian, who looked strange in uniform, with silver-grey cloak, went
 away. i brought his mother home. soon after i also said good-bye to
 her. she kissed on the lips and held moment on her breast, and
 her large eyes burned steadily close to mine.
 
and all men were like brothers. they had in mind their country and
 their honor. but it was fate, they peeped for moment into the
 unveiled face. young men came out of barracks, stepped into trains, and
 on many face i saw sign--not ours--a beautiful and dignified sign,
 signifying love and death. i as well was embraced by people i had never
 seen before. i understood and responded gladly. it was an atmosphere
 of intoxication in which they moved, not that of fated will. but the
 intoxication was sacred, it was due to the fact that they had all
 looked into the rousing eyes of destiny.
 
it was already nearly winter when i went to the front.
 
at first, in spite of the sensation of the bombardment, i was
 disappointed with everything. formerly i had often wondered why people
 so seldom were able to live for an ideal. now i saw that many, yes, all
 men, are capable of dying for an ideal, provided that such an ideal is
 not personal, not chosen of their own free will. for them it had to be
 an ideal accepted by and common to great number.
 
but with time i saw that i had underestimated men. although service and
 common danger renders them uniform, i saw many, living and dying,
 approach fate magnificently. not only in an attack, but the whole time,
 many, very many of them had fixed, far-away look, rather like that
 of person possessed, look which indicates entire ignorance of the
 end pursued, and complete surrender of self to the unknown. matter
 what they might believe and think they were ready, they were there in
 case of need, out of them would the future be formed. and, however
 strongly the world’s attention appeared to be focused on war and heroic
 deeds, on honor and other old ideals, however distantly and unnaturally
 sang the voices of humanity--all this was merely the surface, just
 as the question with regard to the foreign and political aims of the
 war was superficial. deep down, below the surface of human affairs,
 something was in process of forming. something which might be new
 order of humanity. for i could see many--many such died at my side--to
 whom the understanding was brought home that hate and rage, murder and
 destruction had connection with the real object of the war. no, the
 object, just as the aims in view, was purely matter of chance. their
 deepest and most primitive feelings, even their wildest instincts were
 not actually directed against the enemy, their murderous and bloody
 work was an expression of their own inner being, of their cleft soul,
 which wished to rave and kill, to destroy and die, in order to be able
 to be born anew. giant bird was fighting its way out of the egg, and
 the egg was the world, and the world had to go to ruin.
 
one night in early spring i was doing sentry duty in front of farm
 we had occupied. the wind was blowing in fitful gusts, shrieking and
 moaning according to the vagaries of its mood; over the high flanders
 sky rode an army of clouds, somewhere or other behind was suspicion
 of moon. i had been restless throughout the whole of that day, troubled
 by cares which i could not precisely define. now, at my dark post,
 i thought with fervor of the picture of my life up to that time, of
 mother eve, of demian. i stood leaning against poplar, staring into
 the agitated sky, the mysterious quivering brightness of which soon
 resolved itself into series of pictures. i felt by the odd slowness
 of my pulse, by the insensibility of my skin to wind and rain, by the
 lively wakefulness of my inner being, that guide was near me.
 
in the clouds large city could be seen, out of which millions of men
 were streaming, spreading in swarms over the broad countryside. in
 their very midst there appeared the mighty figure of god, as big as
 mountain, with glittering stars in its hair, and with the features
 of mother eve. into it disappeared the processions of men, as into a
 gigantic cave, and were lost to view. the goddess shrank down on the
 ground, the sign on her forehead glittered brightly. she seemed to
 be under the influence of dream. she closed her eyes and her large
 features were twisted in pain. suddenly she cried out, and out of her
 forehead sprang stars, which hurried in lovely arcs and half-circles
 over the black sky.
 
one of the stars rushed noisily through the air to meet me, as if
 seeking out. with crash it burst into thousand sparks, lifting
 off my feet and hurling on to the ground. the world broke up
 thunderously about me.
 
they found close to the poplar, covered with earth and wounded in
 several places.
 
i lay in cellar, guns growled and rumbled overhead, i lay in cart,
 and was jolted over empty fields. for the most part i was either asleep
 or unconscious. but the more deeply i slept, the more strongly i felt
 that i was being drawn, that i followed at the will of force over
 which i was not master.
 
i lay on straw in stable, it was dark, someone trod on my hand. but
 my inner self willed to go further, the mysterious force drew on.
 again i lay in cart, and later on stretcher. even more strongly
 i felt in the command to go forward, i was conscious only of the
 pressure, the force which seemed to be controlling my journeying thus
 from place to place.
 
at last i was there. it was night. i was fully conscious and i felt
 strongly the secret attraction and power which had brought to that
 place. now i was lying in room, on bed made up on the floor. i
 felt i had arrived at the place to which i had been called. i glanced
 around, close to my mattress was another, on which someone was lying,
 someone who bent over and looked at me. it was max demian.
 
i could not speak, and either could not or would not. only looked
 at me. lamp which hung over him on the wall cast light on his face.
 smiled at me.
 
for what seemed an immeasurably long time gazed unwaveringly into my
 eyes. slowly inclined his face towards me, until we almost touched.
 
“sinclair!” said in whisper.
 
i signaled to him with my eyes that i understood him.
 
smiled again, almost as if in compassion.
 
“little one!” said, smiling.
 
his mouth lay now quite close to mine. softly continued to speak.
 
“can you still remember frank kromer?” asked.
 
i winked at him, and could even manage to smile.
 
“sinclair, old man, listen: i shall have to go away. perhaps you will
 need once again, on account of kromer, or something. when you call
 me, i shall not come riding on horse, or in train. you must hearken
 to the voice inside you, then you will notice it is i, that i am in
 you. do you understand? and one other thing: mother eve said that if
 ever you were ill i was to give you kiss from her, which she gave
 me.... close your eyes, sinclair!”
 
i obediently closed my eyes. i felt light kiss on my lips, on which
 there was trace of blood, which never seemed to stop flowing. and
 then i fell asleep.
 
in the morning i was awakened to have my wounds dressed. when at last
 i was properly awake, i turned quickly to the mattress by my side. a
 stranger lay upon it, man on whom i had never before set eyes.
 
the bandaging hurt me. all that has happened to since hurt me. but
 my soul is like mysterious, locked house. and when i find the key
 and step right down into myself, to where the pictures painted by my
 destiny seem reflected on the dark mirror of my soul, then i need
 only stoop towards the black mirror and see my own picture, which now
 completely resembles him, my guide and friend.
 

the end
 



transcriber’s notes
 

perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.
 
inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.
 




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook demian ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 
the project gutenberg ebook of demian
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: demian
 
author: hermann hesse
 
release date: august 10, 2024 [ebook #74222]
 
language: english
 
original publication: new york: boni and liveright
 
credits: steve mattern and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this book was produced from images made available by the hathitrust digital library.)
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook demian ***
 




demian
 
_by_ hermann hesse
 
[illustration]
 
boni and liveright
 
publishers :: new york
 



copyright, 1923
 by
 boni & liveright, inc.
 
printed in the united states of america
 



demian
 
_the story of emil sinclair’s youth_
 
by hermann hesse
 
_i wanted only to try to live in obedience to the promptings which
 came from my true self. why was that so very difficult?_
 

in order to tell my story, i must begin far back. if it were possible,
 i should have to go back much further still, to the earliest years of
 my childhood, and even beyond, to my distant ancestry.
 
authors, in writing novels, usually act as if they were god, and could,
 by broadness of perception, comprehend and present any human story as
 if god were telling it to himself without veiling anything, and with
 all the essential details. that i cannot do, any more than can the
 authors themselves. but i attach more importance to my story than can
 any other writer to his: because it is my own, and it is the story of
 human being--not that of an invented, possible, ideal or otherwise,
 non-existent creature, but that of real, unique, living man. what
 that is, real living man, one certainly knows less to-day than ever.
 for men are shot down in heaps--men, of whom each one is precious,
 unique experiment of nature. if we were nothing more than individuals,
 we could actually be put out of the world entirely with musket-ball,
 and in that case there would be more sense in relating stories. but
 each man is not only himself, is also the unique, quite special,
 and in every case the important and remarkable point where the world’s
 phenomena converge, in certain manner, never again to be repeated.
 for that reason the history of everyone is important, eternal, divine.
 for that reason every man, so long as lives at all and carries out
 the will of nature, is wonderful and worthy of every attention. in
 everyone has the spirit taken shape, in everyone creation suffers, in
 everyone is redeemer crucified.
 
few to-day know what man is. many feel it, and for that reason die the
 easier, as i shall die the easier, when i have finished my story.
 
i must not call myself one who knows. i was seeker and am still,
 but i seek more in the stars or in books; i am beginning to listen
 to the promptings of those instincts which are coursing in my very
 blood. my story is not pleasant, it is not sweet and harmonious like
 the fictitious stories. it smacks of nonsense and perplexity, of
 madness and dreams, like the lives of all men who do not wish to delude
 themselves any longer.
 
the life of everyone is way to himself, the search for road,
 the indication of path. man has ever yet attained to
 self-realization; yet strives thereafter, one ploddingly, another
 with less effort, each as best can. each one carries the remains
 of his birth, slime and eggshells of primeval world, with him to
 the end. many one will remain frog, lizard, an ant. many one
 is top-part man and bottom-part fish. but everyone is projection
 of nature into manhood. to us all the same origin is common, our
 mothers--we all come out of the womb. but each of us--an experiment,
 one of nature’s litter, strives after his own ends. we can understand
 one another; but each one is able to explain only himself.
 



chapter one
 
two worlds
 

i will begin my story with an event of the time when i was ten or
 eleven years old and went to the latin school of our little town. much
 of the old-time fragrance is wafted back to me, but my sensations
 are not unmixed, as i pass in review my memories--dark streets and
 bright houses and towers, the striking of clocks and the features of
 men, comfortable and homely rooms, rooms full of secrecy and dread of
 ghosts. i sense again the atmosphere of cosy warmth, of rabbits and
 servant-girls, of household remedies and dried fruit. two worlds passed
 there one through the other. from two poles came forth day and night.
 
the one world was my home, but it was even narrower than that, for it
 really comprised only my parents. this world was for the most part
 very well known to me; it meant mother and father, love and severity,
 good example and school. it was world of subdued lustre, of clarity
 and cleanliness; here were tender friendly words, washed hands, clean
 clothes and good manners. here the morning hymn was sung, and christmas
 was kept.
 
in this world were straight lines and paths which led into the future;
 here were duty and guilt, evil conscience and confession, pardon and
 good resolutions, love and adoration, bible texts and wisdom. to this
 world our future had to belong, it had to be crystal-pure, beautiful
 and well ordered.
 
the other world, however, began right in the midst of our own
 household, and was entirely different, had another odor, another
 manner of speech and made different promises and demands. in this
 second world were servant-girls and workmen, ghost stories and breath
 of scandal. there was gaily colored flood of monstrous, tempting,
 terrible, enigmatical goings-on, things such as the slaughter house and
 prison, drunken men and scolding women, cows in birth-throes, plunging
 horses, tales of burglaries, murders, suicides. all these beautiful and
 dreadful, wild and cruel things were round about, in the next street,
 in the next house. policemen and tramps passed to and fro, drunken
 men beat their wives, crowds of young girls flowed out of factories
 in the evening, old women were able to bewitch you and make you ill,
 robbers dwelt in the wood, incendiaries were rounded up by mounted
 policemen--everywhere seethed and reeked this second, passionate world,
 everywhere, except in our rooms, where mother and father were. and
 that was good thing. it was wonderful that here in our house there
 were peace, order and repose, duty and good conscience, pardon and
 love--and wonderful that there were also all the other things, all
 that was loud and shrill, sinister and violent, yet from which one
 could escape with one bound to mother.
 
and the oddest thing was, how closely the two worlds bordered each
 other, how near they both were! for instance, our servant lina, as
 she sat by the sitting-room door at evening prayers, and sang the
 hymn with her bright voice, her freshly washed hands laid on her
 smoothed-out apron, belonged absolutely to father and mother, to us,
 to what was bright and proper. immediately after, in the kitchen or in
 the woodshed, when she was telling the tale of the headless dwarf,
 or when she quarreled with the women of the neighborhood in the little
 butcher’s shop, then she was another person, belonged to the other
 world, and was enveloped in mystery. it was the same with everything
 and everyone, especially with myself. to be sure, i belonged to the
 bright, respectable world, i was my parents’ child, but the other
 world was present in everything i saw and heard, and i also lived in
 it, although it was often strange and foreign to me, although one had
 there regularly bad conscience and anxiety. sometimes i even liked
 to live in the forbidden world best, and often the homecoming into the
 brightness--however necessary and good it might be--seemed almost like
 return to something less beautiful, to something more uninteresting
 and desolate. at times i realized this: my aim in life was to grow
 up like my father and mother, as bright and pure, as systematic and
 superior. but the road to attainment was long, you had to go to school
 and study and pass tests and examinations. the road led past the other
 dark world and through it, and it was not improbable that you would
 remain there and be buried in it. there were stories of prodigal sons
 to whom that had happened--i was passionately fond of reading them.
 there the return home to father and to the respectable world was always
 so liberating and so sublime, i quite felt that this alone was right
 and good and desirable. but still that part of the stories which dealt
 with the wicked and profligate was by far the most alluring, and if one
 had been allowed to acknowledge it openly, it was really often great
 pity that the prodigal repented and was redeemed. but one did not say
 that, nor did one actually think it. it was only present somehow or
 other as presentiment or possibility, deep down in one’s feelings.
 when i pictured the devil to myself, i could quite well imagine him
 down below in the street, openly or in disguise, or at the annual fair
 or in the public house, but i could never imagine him with us at home.
 
my sisters also belonged to the bright world. it often seemed to me
 that they approached more nearly to father and mother; that they were
 better and nicer mannered than myself, without so many faults. they had
 their failings, they were naughty, but that did not seem to to be
 deep-rooted. it was not the same as for me, for whom the contact with
 evil was strong and painful, and the dark world so much nearer. my
 sisters, like my parents, were to be treated with regard and respect.
 if you had had quarrel with them, your own conscience accused you
 afterwards as the wrongdoer and the cause of the squabble, as the
 one who had to beg pardon. for in opposing my sisters i offended my
 parents, the representatives of goodness and law. there were secrets
 which i would much sooner have shared with the most depraved street
 urchins than with my sisters. on good, bright days when i had good
 conscience, it was often delightful to play with my sisters, to be
 gentle and nice to them, and to see myself under halo of goodness.
 that was how it must be if you were an angel! that was the most sublime
 thing we knew, to be an angel, surrounded by sweet sounds and fragrance
 like christmas and happiness. but, oh, how seldom were such days and
 hours perfect! often when we were playing one of the nice, harmless,
 proper games i was so vehement and impetuous, and i so annoyed my
 sisters that we quarreled and were unhappy. then when i was carried
 away by anger i did and said things, the wickedness of which i felt
 deep and burning within me, even while i was doing and saying them.
 then came sad, dark hours of remorse and contrition, the painful moment
 when i begged pardon, then again beam of light, peaceful, grateful
 happiness without discord, for minutes or hours.
 
i used to go to the latin school. the sons of the mayor and of the head
 forester were in my class and sometimes used to come to our house. they
 were wild boys, but still they belonged to the world of goodness and of
 propriety. in spite of that i had close relations with neighbors’ boys,
 children of the public school, whom in general we despised. with one of
 these i must begin my story.
 
one half-holiday--i was little more than ten at the time--i went
 out with two boys of the neighborhood. public-school boy of about
 thirteen years joined our party; was bigger than we were, coarse
 and robust fellow, the of tailor. his father was drunkard, and
 the whole family had bad reputation. i knew frank kromer well, i
 was afraid of him, and was very much displeased when joined us. he
 had already acquired manly ways, and imitated the gait and manner of
 speech of the young factory hands. under his leadership we stepped down
 to the bank of the stream and hid ourselves from the world under the
 first arch of the bridge. the little bank between the vaulted bridge
 wall and the sluggishly flowing water was composed of nothing but
 trash, of broken china and garbage, of twisted bundles of rusty iron
 wire and other rubbish. you sometimes found there useful things. we
 had to search the stretch under frank kromer’s direction and show him
 what we found. then either kept it himself or threw it away into the
 water. bid us note whether the things were of lead, brass or tin.
 everything we found of this description kept for himself, as well as
 an old horn comb. i felt very uneasy in his company, not because i knew
 that father would have forbidden our playing together had known of
 it, but through fear of frank himself. i was glad that treated me
 like the others. commanded and we obeyed; it seemed habitual to me,
 although that was the first time i was with him.
 
at last we sat down. frank spat into the water and looked like full
 grown man; spat through gap in his teeth, directing the sputum in
 any direction wished. began conversation, and the boys vied
 with one another in bragging of schoolboy exploits and pranks. i was
 silent, and yet, if i said nothing, i was afraid of calling attention
 to myself and inciting kromer’s anger against me. my two comrades had
 from the beginning turned their backs on me, and had sided with him;
 i was stranger among them, and i felt my clothes and manner to be
 provocation. it was impossible that frank should like me, latin
 schoolboy and the of gentleman, and the other two, i felt, as
 soon as it came to the point, would disown and leave in the lurch.
 
at last, through mere fright, i also began to relate story. i
 invented long narration of theft, of which i made myself the hero. in
 garden by the mill on the corner, i recounted, i had one night with
 the help of friend stolen whole sack of apples, and those none of
 the ordinary sorts, but russets and golden pippins, the very best. in
 the danger of the moment i had recourse to the telling of this story,
 which i invented easily and recounted readily. in order not to have to
 finish off immediately, and so perhaps be led from bad to worse, i gave
 full scope to my inventive powers. one of us, i continued, always had
 to stand sentinel, while the other was throwing down apples from the
 tree, and the sack had become so heavy that at last we had to open it
 again and leave half the apples behind; but we returned at the end of
 half an hour and took the rest away with us.
 
i hoped at the end to gain some little applause, i had warmed to my
 work and had let myself go in my narration. the two small boys waited
 quiet and expectant, but frank kromer looked at penetratingly
 through half-closed eyes and asked in threatening tone:
 
“is that true?”
 
“yes,” i said.
 
“really and truly?”
 
“yes, really and truly,” i asserted defiantly, though inwardly i was
 stifling through fear.
 
“can you swear to it?”
 
i was terribly frightened, but i answered without hesitation: “yes.”
 
“then say: ‘i swear by god and all that’s holy’!”
 
i said: “i swear by god and all that’s holy!”
 
“aw, gwan!” said and turned away.
 
i thought that everything was now all right, and was glad when got
 up and made for the town. when we were on the bridge i said timidly
 that i must now go home. “don’t be in such hurry,” laughed frank,
 “we both go the same way.” dawdled on, and i dared not tear myself
 away, especially as was actually taking the road to our house. as we
 arrived, i looked at the heavy brass-knocker, the sun on the window and
 the curtains in my mother’s room, and i breathed sigh of relief. home
 at last! what blessing it was to be at home again, to return to the
 brightness and peace of the family circle!
 
as i quickly opened the door and slipped inside, ready to shut it
 behind me, frank kromer forced his way in as well. stood beside
 in the cool, dark stone corridor which was only lighted from the
 courtyard, held by the arm and said softly: “not so fast, you!”
 
terrified, i looked at him. his grip on my arm was one of iron. i tried
 to think what had in his mind, whether was going to maltreat me.
 i wondered, if i should scream, whether anyone would come down quickly
 enough to save me. but i gave up the idea.
 
“what’s the matter?” i asked. “what d’you want?”
 
“nothing much. i only want to ask you something--something the others
 needn’t hear.”
 
“well, what do you want to tell you? i must go upstairs, you know.”
 
“you know, don’t you, whose orchard that is by the mill on the corner?”
 said frank softly.
 
“no, i don’t know; i think it’s the miller’s.”
 
frank had wound his arm round me, and drew quite close to him, so
 that i had to look up directly into his face. his look boded ill, he
 smiled maliciously, and his face was full of cruelty and power.
 
“now, kid, i can tell you whose the garden is. i have known for long
 time that the apples had been stolen, and i also know that the man said
 would give two marks to anyone who would tell him who stole the
 fruit.”
 
“good heavens!” i exclaimed. “but you won’t tell him anything?” i felt
 it was useless to appeal to his sense of honor. came from the other
 world; for him betrayal was crime. i felt that for certainty. in
 these matters people from the “other” world were not like us.
 
“say nothing?” laughed kromer. “look here, my friend, d’you think i am
 minting money and can make two shilling pieces myself? i’m poor chap,
 and i haven’t got rich father like yours, and when i get the chance
 of earning two shillings i must take it. might even give more.”
 
suddenly let go free. our house longer gave an impression
 of peace and safety, the world fell to pieces around me. would
 report as criminal, my father would be told, perhaps even the
 police might come for me. the terror of utter chaos menaced me, all
 that was ugly and dangerous was aligned against me. the fact that i
 had not stolen at all did not count in the least. i had sworn to it
 besides. dear, dear!
 
i burst into tears. i felt i must buy myself off. despairingly i
 searched all my pockets. not an apple, not penknife, absolutely
 nothing. all at once i thought of my watch. it was an old silver one
 which wouldn’t go. i wore it for special reason. it came down to me
 from my grandmother. i drew it out quickly.
 
“kromer,” i said, “listen, you mustn’t give away, that wouldn’t be
 nice of you. look here, i will give you my watch; i haven’t anything
 else, worse luck! you can have it, it’s silver one; the mechanism is
 good, there is one little thing wrong, that’s all, it needs repairing.”
 
smiled and took the watch in his big hand. i looked at his hand and
 felt how coarse and hostile it was, how it grasped at my life and peace.
 
“it’s silver,” i said, timidly.
 
“i wouldn’t give straw for your silver and your old watch!” said
 with deep scorn. “get it repaired yourself!”
 
“but, frank,” i exclaimed, quivering with fear lest should go away.
 “wait minute. do take the watch! it’s really silver, really and
 truly. and i haven’t got anything else.” gave cold and scornful
 look.
 
“very well, then, you know who i am going to; or i can tell the police.
 i know the sergeant very well.”
 
turned to go. i held him back by the sleeve. i could not let that
 happen. i would much rather have died than bear all that would take
 place if went away like that.
 
“frank,” i implored, hoarse with emotion, “please don’t do anything
 silly! tell it’s only joke, isn’t it?”
 
“oh, yes, joke, but it might cost you dear.”
 
“do tell me, frank, what to do. i’ll do anything!” examined me
 critically through his screwed-up eyes and laughed again.
 
“don’t be silly,” said with affected affability. “you know as well
 as i do. i’ve got the chance of earning couple of marks, and i’m not
 such rich fellow that i can afford to throw it away, you know that
 well enough. but you’re rich, why, you’ve even got watch. you need
 only give just two marks and everything will be all right.”
 
i understood his logic. but two marks! for that was as much, and
 just as unobtainable, as ten, as hundred, as thousand marks. i
 had money. there was money box that my mother kept for me, with a
 couple of ten and five pfennig pieces inside which i received from my
 uncle when paid us visit, or from similar sources. i had nothing
 else. at that age i received pocket-money at all.
 
“i have nothing,” i said sadly. “i have money at all. but i’ll give
 you everything i have. i’ve got book about red indians, and also
 soldiers, and compass. i’ll get that for you.”
 
but kromer only screwed up his evil mouth, and spat on the ground.
 
“quit your jawing,” said commandingly. “you can keep your old trash
 yourself. compass! don’t make angry, d’you hear? and hand over the
 money!”
 
“but i haven’t any. i never get money. i can’t help it.”
 
“very well, then, you’ll bring the two marks in the morning. i shall
 wait for you in the market after school. that’s all. if you don’t bring
 any money, look out!”
 
“yes; but where shall i get it, then? good lord! if i haven’t any----”
 
“there’s enough money in your house. that’s your business. to-morrow
 after school, then. and i tell you: if you don’t bring it----”
 
his eyes darted terrible look at me, spat again and vanished like
 shadow.
 
i could not go upstairs. my life was ruined. i wondered if i should
 run away and never come back, or go and drown myself. but these
 thoughts were not clearly formulated. i sat crouched in the dark on the
 bottom step and i surrendered myself to my misfortune. there lina found
 in tears as she came down with basket to get wood.
 
i begged her to say nothing on her return and i went up. my father’s
 hat and my mother’s sunshade hung on the rack near the glass door. all
 these things reminded of home and tenderness, my heart went out to
 them imploringly and, grateful for their existence, i felt like the
 prodigal when looked into his old homely room and sensed its
 familiar atmosphere. all this, the bright father-and-mother world, was
 mine longer, and i was buried deeply and guiltily in the strange
 flood, ensnared in sinful adventures, beset by enemies and dangers,
 menaced by shame and terror. the hat and sunshade, the good old
 sandstone floor, the big picture over the hall cupboard, and the voice
 of my elder sister in the living-room, all this was dearer and more
 precious to than ever, but it was longer consolation and secure
 possession. all of it was now reproach. all this belonged to no
 more, i could share more in its cheerfulness and peace. i carried
 mud on my shoes that i could not wipe off on the mat, i brought shadows
 in with me, of which the home-world had knowledge. how many secrets
 had i already had, how many cares--but that was play, mere nothing
 compared with what i was bringing in with that day.
 
fate was overtaking me, hands were stretched out after me, from which
 even my mother could not protect me, of which she was to be allowed no
 knowledge. it was all the same, whether my offense was thieving, or
 lie (had i not taken false oath by god?). my was not this or
 that, i had tendered my hand to the devil. why did i follow him? why
 had i obeyed kromer, more than ever i did my father? why had i falsely
 invented the story of the theft? why had i plumed myself on having
 committed crime, as if it had been deed of heroism? now the devil
 had by the hand, now the evil one was pursuing me.
 
for moment i felt further dread of the morrow, but i had the
 terrible certainty that my way was leading further and further
 downhill and into the darkness. i realized clearly that from my
 wrongdoing other wrongdoings must result, that the greetings and kisses
 i gave to my parents would be lie, that secret destiny i should
 have to conceal hung over me.
 
for an instant confidence and hope came to like lightning flash
 as i gazed at my father’s hat. i would tell him everything, would
 accept his judgment and the punishment might mete out; would
 be my confidant and would save me. confession was all that would be
 necessary, as i had made so many confessions before--a difficult
 bitter hour, serious, remorseful plea for forgiveness.
 
how sweetly that sounded! how tempting that was! but nothing came of
 it. i knew that i should not do it. i knew that i had now secret,
 that i was burdened with guilt for which i myself would have to bear
 the responsibility alone. perhaps i was at this very moment at the
 cross-roads, perhaps from this hour henceforth i should have to belong
 to the wicked, forever share secrets with the bad, depend on them, obey
 them, and become as one of themselves. i had pretended to be man and
 hero, now i had to take the consequences.
 
i was glad that my father, as entered, found fault with my wet
 boots. it diverted his attention from something worse, and i allowed
 myself to suffer his reproach, secretly thinking of the other. that
 gave birth to peculiar new feeling in me, an evil cutting feeling
 like barbed hook. i felt superior to my father! i felt, for an
 instant’s duration, certain scorn of his ignorance; his scolding over
 the wet boots seemed to petty. “if you only knew!” i thought, and
 looked upon myself as criminal who is being tried for having stolen a
 loaf of bread, while ought to confess to having committed murder. it
 was an ugly and repugnant feeling, yet strong and not without certain
 charm, and it chained to my secret and my guilt more securely than
 anything else. perhaps kromer has already gone to the police and given
 away, i thought, and storm is threatening to break over my head,
 while here i am looked upon as mere child!
 
this was the important and permanent element of the whole event up to
 this point of my narration. it was the first cleft in the sacredness of
 parenthood, it was the first split in the pillar on which my childhood
 had reposed, and which everyone must overthrow, before can attain to
 self-realization. the inward, fundamental basis of our destiny is built
 up from these events, which outsider observes. such split or cleft
 grows together again, heals up and is forgotten, but in the most secret
 chamber of the soul it continues to live and bleed.
 
i myself felt immediate terror in the presence of this new feeling, i
 would have liked to embrace my father’s feet there and then, to beg his
 forgiveness. but one cannot beg pardon for something fundamental, and a
 child knows and feels that as well and as deeply as any adult.
 
i felt the need to think over the affair and to consider ways and means
 for the morrow; but i did not get around to it. my whole evening was
 taken up solely in accustoming myself to the changed atmosphere of our
 living-room. clock and table, bible and looking-glass, bookcase and
 pictures seemed all to be saying good-bye to me. with freezing heart i
 had to stand by and watch my world, the good happy time of my life,
 sever itself from me, to be relegated to the past. i was forced to
 realize that i was being held fast to new sucking roots in the darkness
 of the unfamiliar world outside. for the first time i tasted death, and
 death tasted bitter, for it is birth, with the terror and fear of a
 formidable renewal.
 
i was glad to be lying at last in bed. but first i had passed through
 purgatory in the form of evening prayers, and we had sung hymn, one
 of my favorite ones. alas! i did not join in, and each note was gall
 and poison for me. i did not join in the common prayer, either, when
 my father gave the blessing, and when finished: “be with us all!”
 i tore myself convulsively from the circle. the grace of god was with
 them all, but with longer. cold and very tired, i went away.
 
after i had lain awhile in bed, wrapped around in warmth and safety,
 my troubled heart strayed back once again, and fluttered uneasily in
 the past. mother had wished good-night, as she always did, her step
 sounded yet in the room, the light of her candle gleamed through the
 crack in the door. now, i thought, now she will come back again--she
 has felt my need, she will give kiss and will ask, in tones kind
 and full of promise, what is the matter. then i can weep, the lump in
 my throat will melt away, i will throw my arms about her and will tell
 her, and everything will be right--i shall be saved! and when the crack
 in the door had become dark again i still listened for while and
 thought--she must come, she must.
 
then i came back to reality, and looked my enemy in the face. i saw him
 clearly, had one eye closed, his mouth laughed uncouthly. while i
 gazed at him and the inevitable gnawed at my heart, became bigger
 and more ugly, and his wicked eye lit up devilishly. was close
 beside me, until i dropped off to sleep. but i did not dream of him,
 nor of the day’s events. i dreamed instead that we were in boat, my
 parents, my sisters and i, lapped in peace and the brightness of a
 holiday. i woke up in the middle of the night, with the aftertaste of
 bliss. i still saw the white summer dresses of my sisters glistening in
 the sun, and then fell from my paradise back to reality, and the enemy
 with the wicked eye stood opposite me.
 
i looked ill when mother came in quickly in the morning and told how
 late it was and wanted to know why i was still in bed, and when she
 asked what was the matter with me, i vomited.
 
but i seemed to have gained point. i rather liked to be somewhat ill
 and to be allowed to spend the morning in bed drinking chamomile tea,
 to listen to mother clearing-up in the next room, and to hear lina
 outside in the corridor opening the door to the butcher. to stay away
 from morning school was rather like fairy-story, and the sun which
 played in the room was not the same you saw through the green curtains
 at school. but to-day all this had lost its charm for me. it had a
 false ring about it.
 
if i had died! but i was only slightly ill, as i had often been before,
 and nothing was gained by that. it prevented from going to school,
 but it did not protect in any way from kromer, who would be waiting
 for in the market at eleven o’clock. and mother’s friendliness
 was this time without comfort; it was burdensome and painful. i soon
 pretended to be asleep again, and thought the matter over, but all
 to purpose--i had to be in the market at eleven o’clock. for that
 reason i got up at ten, and said that i was better. as usual in such
 cases i was told that either i must go back to bed or go to school in
 the afternoon. i said i would rather go to school. i had formed plan.
 
i dared not go to kromer without money. i had to get possession of the
 little savings box which belonged to me. there was not enough money in
 it, far from enough, i knew; but it was still little, and something
 told that little was better than nothing; for at least kromer had
 to be appeased.
 
i felt horrible as i crept in my socks into my mother’s room and took
 my box from her writing table; but it was not so horrible as the
 previous day’s experience. my heart beat so fast i nearly died, and
 it was better when i found, at the first look, down below on the
 stairs, that the box was locked. it was easy to break it open, it
 was only necessary to cut through thin plate of tin; but the action
 caused pain, for only in doing this was i committing theft. up to
 then i had only taken lumps of sugar and fruit on the sly. now i had
 stolen something, although it was my own money. i realized i had taken
 step nearer kromer and his world, that i was slipping gradually
 downwards--and i adopted an attitude of defiance. the devil could run
 away with if liked, there was way out. i anxiously counted
 the money, it had sounded so much in the box, now in my hand it was
 miserably little. there were sixty-five pfennigs. i hid the box in the
 basement, held the money in my closed fist and went out of the house,
 with feeling different from any with which i had ever left the portal
 before. someone called to from above, i thought, but i went quickly
 on my way.
 
there was still plenty of time. i sneaked by roundabout way through
 the streets of changed town, beneath clouds i had never seen before,
 by houses which seemed to spy on me, and people who suspected me. on
 the way i recollected that one of my school friends had once found a
 thaler in the cattle market. i would have liked to pray to god to work
 miracle and allow to make such treasure-trove. but i had no
 longer the right to pray. and even then the box would not be made whole
 again.
 
frank kromer saw in the distance. however, came along very
 slowly and seemed not to be looking out for me. as approached he
 beckoned commandingly to follow. passed on tranquilly, without
 once looking round, went down straw street and over the bridge, and
 stopped on the outskirts of the town in front of new building. no
 one was working there, the walls stood bare, without doors or windows.
 kromer looked round and then went through the doorway. i followed him.
 stepped behind the wall, beckoned to and stretched out his hand.
 
“that makes sixty-five pfennigs,” said and looked at me.
 
“yes,” i said timidly. “that’s all i have--it’s too little, i know, but
 it’s all. i haven’t any more.”
 
“i thought you were cleverer than that,” exclaimed, blaming in
 what were almost mild terms. “between men of honor there must be honest
 dealing. i will not take anything from you, except what is right.
 you know that. take your pfennigs back, there! the other--you know
 who--doesn’t try to beat down. pays.”
 
“but i have absolutely nothing else. that was my money box.”
 
“that’s your affair. but i don’t want to make you unhappy. you still
 owe one mark thirty-five pfennig. when can i have it?”
 
“oh, you will soon have it, certainly, kromer. i don’t know
 yet--perhaps to-morrow, or the day after, i shall have some more. you
 understand that i can’t tell my father, don’t you?”
 
“that’s concern of mine. i don’t want to harm you. if i liked, i
 could get the money before noon, you see, and i’m poor. you wear nice
 clothes, and you get something better to eat for dinner than i do. but
 i won’t say anything. i am willing to wait few days. the day after
 to-morrow, in the afternoon, i will whistle for you, then you will
 bring it along. you can recognize my whistle?”
 
gave whistle that i had often heard before.
 
“yes,” i said, “i know it.”
 
went away, as if i didn’t belong to him. it had been only a
 transaction between us, nothing further.
 
even to-day, i believe, kromer’s whistle would terrify if i heard
 it again suddenly. from then on i heard it often. it seemed i heard it
 continually and always. place, game, work, idea in which
 this whistle would not sound. i was dependent on it, it was now the
 messenger of my fate. on mild, glowing autumn afternoons i was often in
 our little flower garden, which i loved dearly. peculiar impulse made
 take up again boyish games which i had played formerly. i played, as
 it were, that i was boy who was younger than i, who was still good
 and free, innocent and secure. but in the middle of the game, always
 expected and yet always terribly disturbing and surprising sounded
 kromer’s whistle, destroying the picture my imagination had painted.
 
then i had to go, i had to follow my tormentor to evil and ugly places,
 had to render an account and let myself be dunned. the whole business
 may have lasted few weeks, but it seemed to like year, or an
 eternity. i seldom had money--a five or ten pfennig piece stolen from
 the kitchen table when lina left the market basket standing there.
 each time i was blamed by kromer, and heaped with abuse; it was i who
 deceived him and kept back what was his due, it was i who robbed him
 and made him unhappy! seldom in life has need so oppressed me, seldom
 have i felt greater helplessness, greater dependence.
 
i had filled up the savings box with toy money--no one made any
 enquiries. but that as well could be discovered any day. i was even
 more afraid of mother than of kromer’s harsh whistle, especially when
 she stepped up to softly--was she not going to ask about the
 money box?
 
as i presented myself to my evil genius several times without money he
 began to torment and to make use of after different fashion. i
 had to work for him. had to see to various things for his father.
 i did that for him or made do something more difficult, hop on
 one leg for ten minutes, or fasten scrap of paper on to the coat of
 passer-by. many nights these torments realized themselves in my
 dreams, and i wept and broke out in cold sweat in my nightmare.
 
for time i was ill. i often vomited and felt cold, but at night i
 lay in fever, bathed in perspiration. mother felt that something was
 wrong and displayed much sympathy on my behalf, but this tortured me
 because i could not respond by confiding in her.
 
one evening, after i had already gone to bed, she brought piece
 of chocolate. this action was souvenir of former years when, if i
 had been good, i was often rewarded in this way before going off to
 sleep. now she stood there and held the piece of chocolate out to me.
 this so pained that i could do nothing but shake my head. she asked
 what was the matter with and stroked my hair. i could only sob out:
 “nothing! nothing! i won’t have anything.” she put the chocolate on my
 bed table and went away. when she wished subsequently to question me
 on the matter i made as if i knew nothing about it. once she brought
 the doctor to me, who examined and prescribed cold ablutions in the
 morning.
 
my state at that time was sort of insanity. i was shy and lived in
 torment like ghost in the midst of the well-ordered peace of our
 house. i had part in the others’ lives, and could seldom, even for
 as much as an hour, forget my miserable existence. in the presence of
 my father, who often took to task in an irritated fashion, i was
 reserved and wrapped up in myself.
 



chapter two
 
cain
 

deliverance from my troubles came from quite an unexpected quarter, and
 with it something new entered into my life, which has up to the present
 day exercised strong influence.
 
short time before we had had new boy at our latin school. was
 the of well-to-do widow who had moved to our town. was in
 mourning and wore crape band round his sleeve. his form was above
 mine, and was several years older, but i soon began to take notice
 of him, as did all of us. this remarkable boy impressed one as being
 much older than looked. made on one the impression of being a
 mere schoolboy. with us childish youngsters was as distant and as
 mature as man, or rather, as gentleman. was by means popular,
 took part in the games, much less in the fooling. it was only the
 self-conscious and decided tone which adopted towards the masters
 that pleased the others. his name was max demian.
 
one day it happened, as it occasionally did in our school, that for
 some cause or other, another class was sent into our large schoolroom.
 it was demian’s form. we little ones were having biblical history, the
 big ones had to write an essay. while we were having the story of cain
 and abel knocked into us, i kept looking across at demian, whose face
 fascinated strangely, and saw his wise, bright, more than ordinarily
 strong features bent attentively and thoughtfully over his task. did
 not look at all like schoolboy doing an exercise, but like research
 worker solving problem. i did not find him really agreeable. on the
 contrary, i had one or two little things against him. with was
 too distant and superior, was much too provokingly sure of himself,
 and the expression of his eyes was that of an adult--which children
 never like--rather sad with occasional flashes of scorn. yet i could
 not resist looking at him, whether i liked him or not. but the minute
 looked in my direction i looked away, somewhat frightened. if to-day
 i consider what looked like as schoolboy, i can say that was
 in every respect different from the others, and bore the stamp of a
 striking personality and therefore attracted attention. but at the same
 time did everything to prevent himself from being remarked--he bore
 and conducted himself like disguised prince who finds himself among
 peasant boys and makes every effort to appear like them.
 
was behind on the way home from school. when the others had run
 on, overtook and said: “hello!” even his manner of greeting,
 although imitated our schoolboy tone of voice, was polite and like
 that of grown-up person.
 
“shall we go little way together?” questioned in friendly way. i
 was flattered and nodded. then i described to him where i lived.
 
“oh, there?” said laughingly. “i know the house already. there is a
 remarkable work of art over your door, which interested at once.”
 
i did not guess immediately to what was referring, and was
 astonished that seemed to know our house better than i did. there
 was indeed sort of crest which served as keystone over the arch of
 the door, but in course of time it had become faint and had often been
 painted over. as far as i knew, it had nothing to do with us, or with
 our family.
 
“i don’t know anything about it,” i said timidly. “it’s bird, or
 something like it; it must be very old. they say that the house at one
 time belonged to the abbey.”
 
“very likely,” nodded. “we’ll have another good look at it. such
 things are often interesting. it is hawk, i think.”
 
we continued our way. i was considerably embarrassed. suddenly demian
 laughed, as if something funny had struck him.
 
“oh, i was present at your lesson,” said with animation. “the story
 of cain, who carried the mark on his forehead, was it not? do you like
 it?”
 
generally i used not to like anything of all the things we had to
 learn. but i did not dare to say so--it was as though grown-up person
 were talking to me. i said i liked the story very much.
 
demian tapped on the shoulder. “no need to impose on me, old fellow.
 but the story is really rather remarkable. i think it is much more
 remarkable than most of the others we get at school. the master didn’t
 say very much about it, only the usual things about god and sin, et
 cetera. but i believe----” broke off, smiled, and questioned: “but
 does it interest you?”
 
“well,” continued, “i think one can conceive this story of cain
 quite differently. most things we are taught are certainly quite true
 and right, but one can consider them all from different standpoint
 from the master’s, and most of them have much better meaning then.
 for instance, we can’t be quite content with the explanation given us
 with regard to this fellow cain and the mark on his forehead. don’t
 you find it so, too? it certainly might happen that should kill
 one of his brothers in quarrel, it is also possible that should
 afterwards be afraid, and have to come down peg. but that should
 be singled out into the bargain with decoration for his cowardice,
 which protects him and strikes terror into everyone else, that is
 really rather odd.”
 
“certainly,” i said, interested. the case began to interest me. “but
 how else should one explain the story?” clapped on the shoulder.
 
“quite simply! the essential fact, and the point of departure of the
 story, was the sign. here was man who had something in his face which
 terrified other people. they did not dare to molest him, made big
 impression on them, and his children. perhaps, or rather certainly,
 it was not really sign on his forehead like an office stamp--things
 are not as simple as that in real life. i would sooner think it was
 something scarcely perceptible, of peculiar nature--a little more
 intelligence and boldness in his look than people were accustomed to.
 this man had power, other people shrank from him. had ‘sign.’
 one could explain that as one wished. and one always wishes what is
 convenient and agrees with one’s opinions. people were afraid of cain’s
 children, they had ‘sign.’ and so they explained the sign not as it
 really was, distinction, but as the contrary. the fellows with this
 sign were said to be peculiar, and they were courageous as well. people
 with courage and character are always called peculiar by other people.
 that race of fearless and peculiar men should rove about was very
 embarrassing. and so people attached surname and story to this
 race, in order to revenge themselves on it, in order to compensate
 themselves more or less for all the terror with which it had inspired
 them. do you understand?”
 
“yes--that means to say, then--that cain was not at all wicked? and the
 whole story in the bible isn’t really true?”
 
“yes and no. such ancient, primitive stories are always true, but they
 have not always been recorded and explained in the proper manner. in
 short, i mean that cain was thundering good fellow, and this story
 got attached to his name simply because people were afraid of him. the
 story was merely report, something people might have set going in a
 gossiping way, and it was true in so far as cain and his children did
 actually wear sort of ‘sign’ and were different from most people.”
 
i was much astonished.
 
“and do you believe then, that the affair of the murder is absolutely
 untrue?” i asked, much impressed.
 
“not at all! it is certainly true. the strong man killed weak one.
 one may doubt of course whether it was really his brother or not. it
 is not important, for, in the end, all men are brothers. strong man,
 then, has killed weak one. perhaps it was deed of heroism, perhaps
 it was not. but in any case the other weak people were terrified,
 they lamented and complained, and when they were asked: ‘why don’t
 you simply kill him as well?’ they did not answer, ‘because we are
 cowards,’ but they said instead: ‘you can’t. has sign. god has
 singled him out!’ the humbug must have arisen something after this
 style---- oh, i am keeping you from going in. good-bye, then!”
 
turned into old street and left alone, more astonished than i
 had ever been before. scarcely had gone when everything that he
 had said seemed to quite unbelievable! cain noble fellow, abel a
 coward! cain’s sign distinction! it was absurd, it was blasphemous
 and infamous. what was god’s part in the matter? had not accepted
 abel’s sacrifice, did not love abel? demian’s story was nonsense!
 i suspected him of making fun of and of wishing to mislead me. the
 devil of clever fellow, and could talk, but--well----
 
still, i had never thought so much about any of the biblical or other
 stories before. and for some time past i had never so completely
 forgotten frank kromer, for hours, for whole evening. at home i
 read through the story once again, as it stands in the bible, short
 and clear. it was quite foolish to try to find special, secret
 meaning. if it had one, every murderer could look upon himself as a
 favorite of god! no, it was nonsense. but demian had nice way of
 saying such things, so easily and pleasantly, as if everything were
 self-evident--and then his eyes!
 
my ideas were certainly little upset, or rather they were very much
 confused. i had lived in bright, clean world, i myself had been a
 sort of abel, and now i was so firmly fixed in the other and had
 sunk so deeply, but really what could i do to help it? what was my
 position now? reminiscence glowed in which for the moment almost
 took away my breath. i remembered that wretched evening, from which my
 present misery dated, when i looked for an instant into the heart of my
 father’s bright world and despised his wisdom! then i was cain and bore
 the sign; i imagined that it was in way shameful, but distinction,
 and in my wickedness and unhappiness i stood on higher level than my
 father, higher than good and pious people.
 
it was not in such clear-thinking way that my experience then
 presented itself to me, but all this was contained therein. it was only
 flaming up of feeling, of strange emotions which caused pain and
 yet filled with pride.
 
when i considered the matter, i saw how strangely demian had spoken of
 the fearless and the cowards! how curiously had explained the mark
 on cain’s forehead. how singularly his eyes had lit up, those peculiar
 eyes of grown person! and indistinctly it shot through my brain: is
 not himself, this demian, sort of cain? why did defend him, if
 did not feel like him? why had this force in his gaze? why did he
 speak so scornfully of the “others,” of the fearsome, who are really
 the pious and the well-considered of god?
 
this thought led to definite conclusion. stone had fallen into
 the well, and the well was my young soul. and this business with cain,
 the murder and the sign, was for long, very long, time the point
 from which my seekings after knowledge, my doubts and my criticisms
 took their departure.
 
i noticed that the other boys also occupied themselves good deal with
 demian. i had not told anyone of his version of the story of cain,
 but appeared to interest the others as well. at least, many rumors
 concerning the “new boy” became current. if only i still knew all of
 them, each would help to throw fresh light on him, each would serve
 to interpret him. i only remember the first rumor was that demian’s
 mother was very rich. it was also said that she never went to church,
 nor the either. another rumor had it that they were jews, but they
 could just as easily have been, in secret, mohammedans. furthermore,
 tales were told of max demian’s strength. so much was certain, that the
 strongest boy in his form, who challenged him to fight, and who at
 his refusal branded him coward, suffered terrible humiliation at his
 hands. those who were there said that demian had simply taken him by
 the nape of the neck with one hand and had brought such pressure to
 bear that the boy went white and afterwards crawled away, and that for
 several days was unable to use his arm. for whole evening rumor
 even ran that was dead. for time everything was asserted and
 believed, everything that was exciting and wonderful. then there was
 satiety of rumors for while. little later new ones circulated,
 which asserted that demian had intimate relations with girls and “knew
 everything.”
 
meanwhile my affair with frank kromer took its inevitable course. i
 could not get away from him, for although left in peace for
 days together, i was still bound to him. in my dreams lived as my
 shadow, and thus my fantasy credited him with actions which did not,
 in reality, do; so that in dreams i was absolutely his slave. i lived
 in these dreams--i was always deep dreamer--more than in reality.
 these shadowy conceptions wasted my strength and my life force. i often
 dreamed, among other things, that kromer ill-treated me, that spat
 on and knelt on and, what was worse, that led to commit
 grave crimes--or rather i was not led, but simply forced, through his
 powerful influence. the most terrible of these dreams, from which i
 woke up half mad, presented itself as murderous attack on my father.
 kromer whetted knife and put it in my hand, as we were standing
 behind the trees of lane, and lying in wait for someone--whom i knew
 not; but when someone came along and kromer through pressure of the
 arm informed that this was the man, whom i was to stab, it turned
 out to be my father! then i woke up.
 
with all these troubles, i still thought great deal about cain and
 abel, but much less about demian. it was, strangely enough, in dream
 that first came in contact with again. i dreamed once more, of
 assault and ill-treatment which i suffered, but instead of kromer,
 this time it was demian who knelt upon me. and, what was quite new and
 profoundly impressive, everything that i suffered resistingly and in
 torment at the hands of kromer, i suffered willingly from demian, with
 feeling which was composed as much of joy as of fear. i had this
 dream twice, then kromer occupied his old position in my thoughts.
 
for long time i have not been able to separate what i experienced in
 these dreams from what i underwent in reality. but in any case my evil
 relation with kromer took its course, and was by means at an end,
 when i had at last, by petty thefts, paid the boy the sum owed. no, for
 now knew of these thefts, as always asked where the money came
 from, and i was more in his hands than ever. frequently threatened
 to tell my father everything, and my terror then was scarcely as
 great as the profound regret that i had not myself done that in the
 beginning. however, miserable as i was, i did not repent of everything,
 at least not always, and sometimes felt, i thought, that things could
 not have helped being as they were. the hand of fate was upon me, and
 it was useless to want to break away.
 
i conjecture that my parents suffered not little in these
 circumstances. strange spirit had come over me, i longer fitted
 into our community which had been so intimate, and for which i often
 felt maddening homesickness, as for lost paradise. i was treated,
 particularly by mother, more like sick person than like miserable
 wretch. but the actual state of affairs i was able to observe best
 in the conduct of my two sisters. it was quite evident from their
 behavior, which was very considerate and which yet caused endless
 pain, that i was sort of person possessed, who was more to be pitied
 than blamed for his condition, but yet in whom evil had taken up
 residence. i felt that i was being prayed for in different way from
 formerly, and realized the fruitlessness of these prayers. i often felt
 burning within an intense longing for relief, an ardent desire for
 full confession, and yet i realized in advance that i should not be
 able to tell everything to father and mother properly, in explanation
 of my conduct. i knew that i should be received in friendly way,
 that much consideration and compassion would be shown me, but that i
 should not be completely understood. the whole affair would have been
 looked upon as sort of backsliding, whereas it was really the work of
 destiny.
 
i know that many people will not believe that child scarcely eleven
 years old could feel thus. but i am not relating my affairs for their
 benefit. my narration is for those who know mankind better. the
 grown-up person who has learned to convert part of his feelings into
 thoughts, feels the absence of these ideas in child, and comes to
 believe that the experiences are likewise lacking. but they have seldom
 been so vivid and not often in my life have i suffered as keenly as
 then.
 
one rainy day i was ordered by my tormentor to castle place, and there
 i stood, waiting and digging my feet in the wet chestnut leaves, which
 were still falling regularly from the black, dripping branches. money
 i had none, but i had brought with two pieces of cake that i had
 stolen in order at least to be able to give kromer something. i had
 long since been accustomed to stand about in any odd corner waiting for
 him often for very long time, and i put up with the unalterable.
 
kromer came at last. that day did not stay long. poked several
 times in the ribs, laughed, took the cake, and even offered mouldy
 cigarette, which however i did not accept. was more friendly than
 usual.
 
“oh,” said, as went away, “before i forget--next time you can
 bring your sister along, the elder one. what’s her name? now tell the
 truth.”
 
i did not understand, and gave answer. i only looked at him
 wonderingly.
 
“don’t you get me? you must bring your sister along.”
 
“but kromer, that won’t do. i mustn’t do that, and besides she wouldn’t
 come.”
 
i thought this was only another pretext for vexing me. often did
 that, requiring to do something impossible, and so terrifying me.
 and often, after humiliating me, would by degrees become more
 tractable. i then had to buy myself off with money or with some other
 gift.
 
this time was quite different. was really not at all angry at my
 refusal.
 
“well,” said airily, “you’ll think about it, won’t you? i should
 like to make your sister’s acquaintance. it will not be so difficult.
 you simply take her out for walk, and then i come along. to-morrow
 i’ll whistle for you, and then we can talk more about it.”
 
when had gone, glimpse of the meaning of his request dawned on me.
 i was still quite child, but i knew by hearsay that boys and girls,
 when they were somewhat older, did things which were forbidden, things
 of secret and scandalous nature. and now i should also have to--it
 was suddenly quite clear to how monstrous it was! i immediately
 resolved never to do that. but i scarcely dared think of what would
 happen in that case and how kromer would revenge himself on me. new
 torment began, i had not yet been tortured enough.
 
i walked disconsolately across the empty square, my hands in my
 pockets. fresh torments, new servitude!
 
suddenly fresh, deep voice called to me. i was terrified and began to
 run on. someone ran after me, hand gripped from behind. it was max
 demian.
 
i let myself be taken prisoner. i surrendered.
 
“it’s you?” i said uncertainly. “you frightened so!”
 
looked at me, and never had his glance been more like that of an
 adult, of superior and penetrating person. for long time past we
 had not spoken with one another.
 
“i am sorry,” said in his courteous and at the same time very
 determined manner. “but listen, you mustn’t let yourself be frightened
 like that.”
 
“oh, that can happen sometimes.”
 
“so it appears. but look here: if you shrink like that from someone
 who hasn’t hurt you, then this someone begins to think. it makes him
 curious, wonders what can be the matter. this somebody thinks to
 himself, how awfully frightened you are, and thinks further: one is
 only like that when one is terrified. cowards are always frightened;
 but i believe you aren’t really coward. ain’t i right? of course, you
 aren’t hero either. there are things of which you are afraid. there
 are also people of whom you are afraid. and that should never be. no
 one should ever be afraid of other people. you aren’t afraid of me? or
 are you, perhaps?”
 
“oh no, of course not.”
 
“there, you see. but there are people you are afraid of?”
 
“i don’t know ... let go, what do you want of me?”
 
kept pace with me--i was going quicker with the idea of escaping--i
 felt his look directed on from the side.
 
“just assume,” began again, “that i mean well with you. in any
 case you needn’t be afraid of me. i would very much like to try
 an experiment with you--it’s funny, and you can learn something
 that’s very useful. listen: i often practise an art which is called
 mind-reading. there’s witchcraft in it, but it seems very peculiar
 if one doesn’t know how to do it. you can surprise people very much
 with it. well, let us try it. i like you, or i interest myself in
 you, and i would like to find out what your real feelings are. i have
 already made the first step towards doing that. i have frightened
 you--you are, then, easily frightened. there are things and people of
 which and of whom you are afraid. why is it? one need be afraid of no
 one. if you fear somebody then it is due to the fact that has power
 over you. for example, you have done something wrong, and the other
 person knows it--then has power over you. d’you get me? it’s clear,
 isn’t it?”
 
i looked helplessly into his face, which was serious and prudent as
 always, and kind as well, but without any tenderness--his features were
 rather severe. righteousness or something akin lay therein. i was not
 conscious of what was happening; stood like magician before me.
 
“have you understood?” questioned again.
 
i nodded. i could not speak.
 
“i told you mind-reading looked rather strange, but the process is
 quite natural. i could for example tell you more or less exactly what
 you thought about when i once told you the story of cain and abel.
 but that has nothing to do with the matter in hand. i also think it
 possible that you have dreamed of me. but let’s leave that out! you’re
 clever kid, most of ’em are so stupid. i like talking now and then
 with clever fellow whom i can trust. you have objections, have
 you?”
 
“oh, no! only i don’t understand.”
 
“let’s keep to our old experiment! we have found that: the boy s. is
 easily frightened--he is afraid of somebody--he apparently shares a
 secret with this other person, which causes him much disquietude. is
 that about right?”
 
as in dream i lay under the influence of his voice, of his
 personality. i only nodded. was not voice talking there, which could
 only come from myself? which knew all? which knew all in better,
 clearer way than i myself?
 
demian gave powerful slap on the shoulder.
 
“that’s right then. i thought so. now just one question more: do you
 know the name of the boy who has just gone away?”
 
i sank back, had the key to my secret, this secret which twisted
 back inside as if it did not want to see the light.
 
“what sort of fellow? there was one there, except myself.”
 
laughed.
 
“don’t be afraid to tell me,” said laughingly. “what’s his name?”
 
i whispered: “do you mean frank kromer?”
 
nodded contentedly.
 
“bravo! you’re smart chap, we shall be good friends yet. but now i
 must tell you something else: this kromer, or whatever his name is, is
 nasty fellow. his face tells he’s rascal! what do you think?”
 
“oh yes,” i sobbed out, “he is nasty, he’s devil! but mustn’t know
 anything! for god’s sake, mustn’t know anything. d’you know him?
 does know you?”
 
“don’t worry! he’s gone, and doesn’t know me--not yet. but i should
 like to make his acquaintance. goes to the public school?”
 
“yes.”
 
“in which standard?”
 
“in the fifth. but don’t say anything to him! please, don’t say
 anything to him!”
 
“don’t worry, nothing will happen to you. i suppose you wouldn’t like
 to tell little more about this fellow kromer?”
 
“i can’t! no, let go!”
 
was silent for while.
 
“it’s pity,” said, “we might have been able to carry the
 experiment still further. but i don’t want to bother you. you know,
 don’t you, that it is not right of you to be afraid of him? such fear
 quite undermines us, you must get rid of it. you must get rid of it, if
 you want to become real man. d’you understand?”
 
“certainly, you are quite right ... but it won’t do. you don’t know....”
 
“you have seen that i know lot, more than you thought. do you owe him
 any money?”
 
“yes, i do, but that isn’t the essential point. i can’t tell, i can’t!”
 
“it won’t help matters, then, if i give you the amount you owe him? i
 could very well let you have it.”
 
“no, no, that is not the point. and please: don’t say anything to
 anybody! not word! you are making miserable!”
 
“rely on me, sinclair. later you can share your secrets with me.”
 
“never, never!” i exclaimed vehemently.
 
“just as you please. i only mean, perhaps you will tell something
 more later on. only of your own free will, you understand. surely you
 don’t think i shall act like kromer?”
 
“oh no--but you don’t even know anything about it!”
 
“absolutely nothing. but i think about it. and i shall never act like
 kromer, believe me. besides, you don’t owe anything.”
 
we remained long time silent, and i became more tranquil. but
 demian’s knowledge became more and more of puzzle to me.
 
“i’m going home now,” said, and in the rain drew his coat more
 closely about him. “i should only like to repeat one thing to you,
 since we have gone so far in the matter--you ought to get rid of this
 fellow! if there is nothing else to be done, then kill him! it would
 impress and please me, if you were to do that. besides, i would help
 you.”
 
i was again terrified. i suddenly remembered the story of cain. i had
 an uncanny feeling and i began to cry softly. so much that was weird
 seemed to surround me.
 
“all right,” max demian said, smilingly. “go home now! we will put
 things square, although murder would have been the simplest. in such
 matters the simplest way is always the best. you aren’t in good hands,
 with your friend kromer.”
 
i came home, and it seemed to as if i had been away year.
 everything looked different. between myself and kromer there now stood
 something like future freedom, something like hope. i was lonely no
 longer! and then i realized for the first time how terribly lonely i
 had been for weeks and weeks. and i immediately recollected what i had
 on several occasions turned over in my mind: that confession to my
 parents would afford relief and yet would not quite liberate me. now
 i had almost confessed, to another, to stranger, and as if strong
 perfume had been wafted to me, sensed the presentiment of salvation!
 
still my fear was far from being overcome, and i was still prepared for
 long and terrible mental wrestlings with my evil genius. so it was all
 the more remarkable to that everything passed off so very secretly
 and quietly.
 
kromer’s whistle remained absent from our house for day, two days,
 three days, whole week. i dared not believe my senses, and lay
 inwardly on the watch, to see whether would not suddenly stand
 before me, just at that moment when i should expect him longer. but
 was, and remained, away! distrustful of my new freedom, i still
 could not bring myself to believe in it whole-heartedly. until at
 last i met frank kromer. was coming down the street, straight in
 my direction. when saw me, drew himself together, twisted his
 features in brutal grimace, and turned away without more ado, in
 order to avoid meeting me.
 
that was wonderful moment for me! my enemy ran away from me! my devil
 was afraid of me! surprise and joy shook through and through!
 
in few days demian showed himself once again. waited for me
 outside school.
 
“hullo,” i said.
 
“good morning, sinclair. i only wanted to hear how you’re getting on.
 kromer leaves you in peace, doesn’t he?”
 
“did you manage that? but how did you do it? how? i don’t understand
 it. hasn’t come near me.”
 
“splendid. if should come again--i don’t think will, but he’s a
 cheeky fellow--then simply tell him to remember demian.”
 
“but what does it all mean? have you had fight with him and thrashed
 him?”
 
“no, i’m not so keen on that. i simply talked to him, as i did to you,
 and i made it clear to him that it is to his own advantage to leave you
 in peace.”
 
“oh, but you haven’t given him any money?”
 
“no, kid. you have already tried that way yourself.”
 
i attempted to pump him on the matter, but disengaged himself. the
 old, embarrassed feeling concerning him came over me--an odd mixture of
 gratitude and shyness, of admiration and fear, of affection and inward
 resistance.
 
i had the intention of seeing him again soon, and then i wanted to talk
 more about everything, about the cain affair as well. but i did not see
 him. gratitude is not one of the virtues in which i believe, and to
 require it of child would seem to wrong. so i do not wonder very
 much at the complete ingratitude which i evinced towards max demian.
 to-day i believe positively that i should have been ruined for life if
 had not freed from kromer’s clutches. at that time also i already
 felt this release as the greatest event of my young life--but i left
 the deliverer on one side as soon as had accomplished the miracle.
 
as i have said, ingratitude seems to nothing strange. solely, the
 lack of curiosity i evinced is odd. how was it possible that i could
 continue for single day my quiet mode of life without coming nearer
 to the secrets with which demian had brought in contact? how could
 i restrain the desire to hear more about cain, more about kromer, more
 about the thought-reading?
 
it is scarcely comprehensible, and yet it is so. i suddenly saw myself
 extricated from the demoniacal toils, saw again the world lying
 bright and cheerful before me. i was longer subject to paroxysms
 of fear. the curse was broken, i was longer tormented and
 condemned creature, i was schoolboy again. my temperament sought
 to regain its equilibrium and tranquillity as quickly as possible,
 and so i took pains above all things to put behind all that had
 been ugly and menacing, and to forget it. the whole, long story of my
 guilt, of my terrifying anxiety, slipped from my memory wonderfully
 quick, apparently without having left behind any scars or impressions
 whatsoever.
 
the fact that i likewise tried as quickly to forget my helper and
 deliverer, i understand to-day as well. instinctively my mind turned
 from the damning recollection of my awful servitude under kromer, and
 i sought to recover my former happy, contented mental outlook, to
 regain that lost paradise which opened once more to me, the bright
 father-and-mother world, where my sisters dwelt in the fragrant
 atmosphere of purity, in loving kindness such as god had extended to
 abel.
 
on the very next day after my short conversation with demian, when i
 was at last fully convinced of my newly-born freedom and feared no
 longer relapse to my condition of slavery, i did what i had so often
 and so ardently desired to do--i confessed. i went to mother and showed
 her the little savings box with the broken lock, filled with toy mark
 pieces instead of with real money, and i told her how long i had been
 in the thrall of an evil tormentor, through my own guilt. she did not
 understand everything, but she saw the money box, she saw my altered
 look and heard my changed voice--she felt that i was healed, that i had
 been restored to her.
 
and then with lofty feelings i celebrated my readmission into the
 family, the prodigal son’s return home. mother took to father, the
 story was repeated, questions and exclamations of wonder followed in
 quick succession, both parents stroked my hair and breathed deeply, as
 in relief from long oppression. it was all lovely, like the stories
 i had read, all discords were resolved in happy ending.
 
i surrendered myself passionately to this harmonious state of affairs.
 i could not have enough of the idea that i was again free and trusted
 by my parents. i was model boy at home and played more frequently
 than ever with my sisters. at prayers i sang the dear, old hymns with
 the blissful feeling of one converted and redeemed. it came straight
 from my heart, it was lie this time.
 
and yet it was not at all as it should have been. and this is the point
 which alone can truly explain my forgetfulness of demian. i ought to
 have made confession _to him_! the confession would have been
 less touching and less specious, but for it would have borne more
 fruit. i was now clinging fast to my former paradisaical world, i had
 returned home and had been received in grace. but demian belonged in no
 wise to this world, did not fit into it. also--in different way
 from kromer--but nevertheless also was seducer, too bound to
 the second, evil, bad world, and of this world i never wanted to hear
 anything more. i could not now, and i did not wish to give up abel and
 help to glorify cain, now when i myself had again become an abel.
 
so much for the outward correlation of events. but inwardly it was like
 this: i had been freed from the hands of kromer and the devil, but not
 through my own strength and effort. i had ventured footing on the
 paths of the world, and they had been too slippery for me. now that
 the grasp of friendly hand had saved me, i ran back, without another
 glance round, to mother’s lap, to the protecting, godly and tender
 security of childhood. i made myself younger, more dependent on others,
 more childlike than i really was. i had to replace my dependence on
 kromer by new one, since i was powerless to strike out for myself.
 so i chose, in the blindness of my heart, the dependence on father
 and mother, on the old, beloved, “bright world,” on this world which
 i knew already was not the sole one. had i not done this, i should
 have had to hold to demian, to entrust myself to him. the fact that i
 did not, appeared to then to be due to justifiable distrust of his
 strange ideas; in reality it was due to nothing else than fear. for
 demian would have required more of than did my parents, much more.
 by stimulation and exhortation, by scorn and irony would have tried
 to make more independent. alas, i know that to-day: nothing in the
 world is so distasteful to man as to go the way which leads him to
 himself!
 
and yet, about half year later, i could not resist the temptation to
 ask my father while we were out for walk, what was to be made of the
 fact that many people declared cain to be better than abel.
 
was much surprised, and explained to that this was conception
 by means novel. it had even emerged in the early christian era, and
 had been professed by sects, one of which was called the “cainites.”
 but naturally this foolish doctrine was nothing else than an attempt of
 the devil to undermine our belief. for, if one believes that cain was
 right and abel was wrong, then it follows that god has erred, and that
 the god of the bible is not the true and only god, but false one. the
 cainites really used to profess and preach something approximating this
 doctrine; but this heresy vanished from among mankind long time ago
 and wondered the more that school friend had been able to learn
 something on the subject. nevertheless, earnestly exhorted not to
 let these ideas occupy my attention.
 



chapter three
 
the thief on the cross
 

i could describe scenes of my childhood, spent in peaceful security at
 the side of father and mother, relate how i passed this period of my
 life, playing contentedly in the midst of surroundings brightened by
 love and tenderness. but others have done that. i am only interested
 in the steps i took in life, in order to attain self-realization. all
 the pretty resting-places, happy isles and children’s paradises, whose
 charm is not unknown to me, i leave lying behind in the shimmer of a
 distant horizon, and i have desire to set foot there again.
 
for that reason i will speak, so far as i intend to dwell on the period
 of my childhood, only of new events which overtook me, of what impelled
 forward enabling to throw off my shackles.
 
these impulses always came from the “other” world, they always brought
 fear, coercion and bad conscience in their train, they were always
 of revolutionary tendency and danger to the peace in which i would
 willingly have been allowed to remain.
 
there came the years in which i had to discover anew that there was
 within an instinct which had to lie close and concealed in the
 bright world of moral sanction. as to every man, the slowly awakening
 sense of sex came to as an enemy and destroyer, as something
 forbidden, as seduction and sin. what my curiosity sought to know, what
 caused dreams, desire and fear, the great secret of puberty, that
 was not at all in keeping with the guarded happiness of my peaceful
 childhood. i did as everyone else. i led the double life of child,
 who is yet child longer. my conscious self lived under the
 conditions sanctioned at home; it denied the existence of the new world
 whose dawn glimmered before me. but i lived as well in dreams, impelled
 by desires of secret nature, upon which my conscious self anxiously
 attempted to build new fabric, as the world of my childhood fell in
 ruins about me. like almost all parents, my own did nothing to help
 the awakening life-instincts, about which not syllable was uttered.
 they only aided, with untiring care, my hopeless attempts to deny the
 reality, and to continue my existence in child-like world which was
 ever becoming more unreal and more mendacious. i do not know whether
 parents can do much in such case, and i make mine reproach. it
 was my own affair, to settle my difficulties and to find my way, and
 i carried through the business badly, like most of those who are well
 brought up.
 
every man passes through this difficulty. for the average person, this
 is the point in his life where the demands of his own life come most
 in conflict with his surroundings, where the road forward has to be
 attained through the bitterest fighting. for many people this is the
 only time in their lives that they experience the sequence of death
 and rebirth that is our fate, when they become conscious of the slow
 process of the decay and breaking up of the world of their childhood,
 when everything beloved of us leaves us, and we suddenly feel the
 loneliness and deathly cold of the universe around us. and for very
 many this pitfall is fatal. they cling their whole life long painfully
 to the irrevocable past, to the dream of lost paradise, the worst and
 most deadly of all dreams.
 
but to return to the story. the sensation and dream pictures in which
 the close of childhood presented itself to are not important
 enough to be described. the important point was that i was once again
 conscious of the existence of the “dark” world, the “other” world. what
 frank kromer had once been to me, was now present within myself. and
 so, from the outside as well, the other world once more gained power
 over me.
 
several years had passed since my affair with kromer. that dramatic
 and guilty time of my life lay far behind at that time and seemed
 to have passed like quick nightmare into nothingness. frank kromer
 had long since disappeared from my life; i scarcely gave it moment’s
 thought if i chanced to meet him. but the other important figure in my
 tragedy, max demian, never entirely disappeared from my life. however,
 for long time stood on the far horizon, visible, but not affecting
 me. only by degrees approached again, and i came once more under
 the ray of his power and influence.
 
i will try to recollect what i know of demian in that period. perhaps
 for year, or longer, i did not have single conversation with him.
 i avoided him, and in wise forced himself on me. once or twice,
 when we met, nodded to in friendly greeting. then it seemed to
 at times that there was note of scorn or ironical reproach in his
 friendliness, but that might only have been imagination on my part. my
 relation with him, and the strange influence had exercised over me,
 were as if forgotten, by him as well as by me.
 
i try to recall his face--as i recollect him, i see that i was
 conscious of his existence after all, and took notice of him. i can
 see him going to school, alone or with some of the other big boys. i
 see him walking among them like stranger, lonely and still like a
 celestial body, enveloped in different atmosphere and subject to
 his own laws. one liked him, was intimate with one, except
 his mother, and his relations with her did not seem like those of a
 child, but those of grown-up person. the masters left him as much as
 possible in peace. was good pupil, but did not go out of his
 way to please them. from time to time we heard, in gossip, of word, a
 comment or retort had made to master, and which left nothing to
 be desired in the way of blunt challenge or irony.
 
i call him to mind, as i close my eyes, and i see his picture emerge.
 where was it? ah, now i have it again. it was in the street, in front
 of our house. there one day i saw him standing, note book in his
 hand. i saw that was drawing. was drawing the old crest with the
 bird over the door of our house. and i stood at window, concealed
 behind curtain, and gazed at him. i saw with astonishment his
 attentive, cool, bright features turned to the crest, the features
 of man, of research worker, or an artist, superior and full of
 will-power, oddly bright and cool, with knowing eyes.
 
and again i can see him. it was little later, in the street; we had
 come out of school and were all standing round horse that had fallen
 down. it lay, still harnessed to the shaft, in front of peasant’s
 cart, and sniffed the air pitifully with open nostrils, while blood
 flowed from an invisible wound, so that the white dust in the street
 darkened as it became slowly saturated. as i, with feeling of nausea,
 turned my gaze away, i saw demian’s face. had not pressed forward,
 stood furthest back of all, rather elegant, quite at his ease, as
 was proper to him. his gaze seemed to be directed at the horse’s
 head, and expressed again that deep, quiet, almost fanatical and yet
 calm attentiveness. i could not resist watching him some considerable
 time, and i remember feeling, though quite unconsciously, that there
 was something very peculiar about him. i saw demian’s face, i saw not
 only that had not the face of boy, but that of man; i saw still
 more, i thought i saw, or felt, that it was not the face of man
 either but something else besides. there seemed to be also something
 of the woman in his features, and particularly it seemed to for a
 moment, not manly or boyish, nor old or young, but somehow or other a
 thousand years old, not to be measured by time, bearing the stamp of
 other epochs. animals could look like that, or trees, or stones--i did
 not realize that precisely, i did not experience the exact sensation
 which i, grown-up person, am now describing, but what i felt then
 approximated in some way to what i have just related. perhaps was
 beautiful, perhaps pleased me, perhaps even was repugnant--i
 could not then determine. i saw only that was different from us, he
 was like an animal, or spirit, or picture, i know not what was
 like, but was different, inconceivably different from us all.
 
my reminiscence tells nothing more, and perhaps even what has been
 described has arisen, in part, from later impressions.
 
until i was several years older, i did not come into close contact
 with him again. contrary to custom, demian had not been confirmed with
 the boys of his year, and in consequence fresh rumors concerning him
 were set afloat. in school they were again saying that was really
 jew, or no, heathen, and others pretended to know that and his
 mother professed religion, or that they belonged to bad sect in
 mythology. in connection with this i seem to remember that was
 suspected of living with his mother as with mistress. presumably
 the facts were that had been, up to that time, brought up without
 any denominational creed, and that it was now thought that this might
 be disadvantageous for his future career. in any case, his mother now
 decided after all to allow him to be prepared for confirmation, two
 years later than the boys of his own age. hence it came about that for
 months was my classmate in the confirmation class.
 
for time i kept out of his way, i did not want to have anything to do
 with him; too many mysterious rumors had become attached to his name.
 but above all things i was worried by sense of obligation, implanted
 in since my affair with kromer. and just at that time i had enough
 to do with my own secrets. for the confirmation class coincided with
 the period when i was definitively enlightened on matters of sex, and
 in spite of my good will, my interest in the pious instruction was on
 that account greatly diminished. the things of which the clergyman
 spoke lay far from in still, sacred unreality; they may have been
 quite beautiful and valuable, but in way real and stirring, as were
 in the highest degree, these other things.
 
the more indifferent i became, under these conditions, to our spiritual
 instruction, the more was my interest drawn towards max demian again.
 something or other seemed to unite us. as nearly as i remember it began
 in class early one morning, while the light was still burning in the
 schoolroom. the clergyman taking the confirmation class happened to be
 talking about cain and abel. i hardly paid any attention, i was sleepy
 and scarcely listened. then with raised voice the clergyman began to
 speak fervently of cain’s sign. at this moment i felt sort of contact
 or exhortation and looking up i saw demian’s face turned toward from
 row of desks in front, with bright speaking look, which could have
 expressed scorn as much as seriousness. looked at for moment
 only, and suddenly i was listening intently to the clergyman’s words.
 i heard him speak of cain and the mark on his forehead, and suddenly i
 felt deep within the knowledge that the story could have different
 signification, that it could be looked at from another view, that it
 was possible to be critical.
 
from that instant the bond of communication between demian and myself
 was again established. and oddly enough, scarcely had this sense of
 certain solidarity between us presented itself to my mind, than i
 saw it transferred as if by magic from the ideal world to the world of
 space. i did not know whether had been able to arrange it himself,
 or whether it was pure chance--at that time i believed firmly in
 chance--but few days after i noticed demian had suddenly changed his
 place and was now sitting directly in front of me. (i recollect still
 how pleasant it was, in the midst of the miserable workhouse atmosphere
 of the overcrowded schoolroom, to sense the delicate, fresh aroma of
 soap from his neck in the morning.) few days later had changed
 again, and now sat next to me. and there stayed, occupying the same
 place through the whole of that winter and spring.
 
morning lessons had quite changed. they were longer sleepy and
 boring. i looked forward to them. sometimes we both listened to the
 clergyman with the greatest attention. glance from my neighbor would
 suffice, calling my attention to strange story or peculiar text.
 and another glance from him, very decided one, acted on as an
 admonition, arousing criticism and doubt.
 
but very often we were bad pupils and heard nothing of the lesson.
 demian was always courteous towards masters and schoolfellows. i never
 saw him commit schoolboy prank, never heard him laugh out loud or
 talk in class; never drew on himself the master’s blame. but
 noiselessly, rather by signs and glances than by whispered words, he
 knew how to let share in his own occupations. these were, in part,
 of peculiar nature.
 
for instance, told which of the fellows interested him; and in
 what manner studied them. judged many of them with accuracy.
 used to say to before the lesson: “when i signal to you with
 my thumb, so and so will look round at us, or will scratch his neck,
 etc.” then during the lesson, when i scarcely gave thought to what
 had told me, max would attract my attention by suddenly bending
 his thumb. i would look up quickly at the boy already designated, and
 every time, as if attached to wire, the fellow would make the gesture
 required of him. i bothered max to try this on the master, but did
 not want to do it. but once, when i came into class and told him i
 had not done my preparation, and that i hoped the clergyman would not
 question that day, helped me. the master looked round for boy
 to recite portion of the catechism, and his roving eye rested on me.
 approached slowly, stretched out his finger in my direction, and
 already had my name on his lips--when suddenly became absent-minded
 or uneasy, put his hand to his collar, stepped up to demian who looked
 fixedly into his face. seemed to want to ask him something but he
 turned away, to our surprise, coughed little, and put his question to
 another boy.
 
these jokes amused very much, but only gradually did i notice that
 my friend frequently played the same game with me. it would happen
 that on my way home from school i had suddenly the feeling demian was
 little way behind me, and when i turned round, there was, sure
 enough.
 
“can you really make another person think what you want him to?” i
 asked him.
 
gave information on the subject readily enough, quietly and
 pertinently, in his grown-up manner.
 
“no,” said, “that can’t be done. that is to say, one hasn’t free
 will, even if the person acts that way. neither can the other person
 think as will, nor can i make him think what i want him to. but you
 can observe someone well, and then you can say fairly exactly what he
 thinks or feels; in this way you can generally predict what will do
 the moment after. it’s quite simple, but people merely do not know it.
 naturally it requires practice. to take an example from the butterfly
 world, there is certain species of moth, of which the female is much
 rarer than the male. the moths reproduce like other animals, the male
 impregnates the female, who then lays the egg. suppose you have in your
 possession female of this type of moth--naturalists have often made
 the experiment--then the male moths fly in the night to this female,
 they even make flight of several hours’ duration! think of it! for
 many miles around all the males are conscious of the whereabouts of the
 only female moth in the district. people have tried to explain that,
 but it is not easy. moths must have sense of smell, or something like
 it, which allows them to pick up and follow an almost imperceptible
 scent, like good hound. you understand? there are such things, nature
 is full of them, and one can explain them. now i draw the conclusion
 that if among this class of moths the females were as abundant as
 the males, then these latter would not have such refined sense of
 smell! they have it simply because they have been trained like that.
 if an animal or man concentrates his whole attention and his whole
 will-power on certain thing then attains it. that’s all. and it is
 just the same with what you have asked me. observe man sufficiently
 well, and you will know more about him than does himself.”
 
it lay on the tip of my tongue to mention the word “mind-reading,” and
 so to remind him of the scene with kromer, now relegated to such a
 distant past. but the odd thing between us both was that neither nor
 i ever made the slightest reference to the fact that several years ago
 had intervened so decisively in my life. it was as if formerly there
 had been nothing between us, or as if each of us reckoned that the
 other had forgotten the affair. it even happened once or twice when we
 were together that we met frank kromer in the street, but we exchanged
 look, neither did we speak of him.
 
“but what has that got to do with will-power?” i asked. “you said there
 was such thing as free will. and then you said one only had to
 concentrate one’s will on something to be able to attain one’s ends.
 that doesn’t agree! if i am not master of my will, then i can’t direct
 it here or there as i wish.”
 
“a good question!” said, laughing. “you should always ask questions,
 you must always doubt. but the explanation is very simple. if moth
 for instance wants to concentrate his will-power on star or something
 like that, can’t do it. only--he doesn’t try. seeks only what
 has sense and value for him, satisfies his needs, gets what he
 absolutely must have. and it is just there that the unbelievable
 succeeds--he develops marvelous sixth sense, that other animal
 besides him has! people in our position have more elbow-room,
 certainly, and more interests than an animal. but even we are confined
 to comparatively small space, beyond which we cannot go. to be sure,
 i can imagine this or that, or make myself believe that i absolutely
 want to get to the north pole or somewhere, but i can only carry that
 out and wish it strongly enough when the desire lies right in myself,
 when my whole being is really filled with it. as soon as that is the
 case, as soon as you try to carry out an inward command, then you
 succeed, then you can harness your will as you would good nag. if
 for instance i resolved that our good mr. parson shall not wear his
 spectacles for the future, then that wouldn’t work. that is merely
 play. but when last autumn i had the fixed intention of getting myself
 moved to another desk, i succeeded. someone suddenly arrived who came
 before in the alphabet and who up to then had been ill. because
 someone had to make room for him, it was naturally i who did it,
 because my willing it had made ready to seize the opportunity.”
 
“yes,” i said, “that seemed to very strange at the time. from the
 moment we began to get interested in one another, you managed to get
 nearer and nearer to me. but how was that? you did not immediately take
 place next to me; for few lessons at first you were sitting in the
 row of desks in front of me, weren’t you? how did that come about?”
 
“it was like this. i wasn’t quite certain where i wanted to go when
 i wished to move from my first place. i only knew that i wanted to
 sit further back. it was my wish to move towards you, but i was not
 conscious of this at the time. simultaneously your own will was working
 with mine and helped me. it was only when i sat in front of you that i
 realized my wish was only half fulfilled--i noticed that really i had
 desired nothing else than to sit next to you.”
 
“but on that occasion newcomer arrived.”
 
“no, but then i simply did what i wished, and sat next to you without
 hesitation. the boy with whom i changed places was simply surprised,
 and let do it without further say. and the parson indeed noticed
 once that change had taken place--in fact, whenever looks at me
 something worries him secretly. that is to say, knows my name is
 demian, and that something must be wrong that i, whose initial is d,
 am sitting back there among the s’s! but that does not penetrate his
 consciousness because my will is against it, because i prevent him
 again and again from becoming conscious of it. notices now and
 then that something is wrong. looks at and begins to study the
 question, the good fellow. but i have simple means at my disposal.
 i look at him very, very fixedly in the eyes. hardly anyone can bear
 that. they always get restive. if you want to get something out of a
 person, and you fix him unexpectedly with your eyes, and if doesn’t
 get restive, then give it up! you won’t get anything out of him, ever!
 but that happens seldom. i know only one single person with whom this
 trick won’t help me.”
 
“who is that?” i asked quickly.
 
looked at me, with eyes somewhat closed; as his fashion was when he
 meditated. then looked away and gave answer, and in spite of my
 lively curiosity i could not bring myself to repeat the question.
 
but i believe was referring to his mother. seemed to live on
 very intimate terms with her, but never spoke about her, never
 invited to his house. i scarcely knew what his mother looked like.
 
* * * * *
 
several times i attempted to imitate his example by concentrating my
 will-power on something so firmly that i would have to attain it. i had
 desires which seemed to sufficiently pressing. but nothing came of
 it. i could not bring myself to talk matters over with demian. i should
 not have been able to make him understand what i wanted. did not
 ask, either.
 
my faith in matters of religion had meanwhile suffered many breach.
 yet in my manner of thinking, which was entirely under the influence of
 demian, i was to be distinguished from those of my schoolfellows who
 professed an entire disbelief. there were few such who let occasional
 phrases be overheard, to the effect that it was laughable and unworthy
 of man’s dignity to believe in god, and that stories such as those
 of the trinity and the immaculate conception of the virgin mary were
 simply joke. it was disgraceful, they said, that such rubbish was
 peddled about to-day. this was by means my way of thinking. even
 where i had doubts, the whole experience of my childhood taught to
 believe in the efficacy of godly life such as that led by my parents,
 which i knew to be neither contemptible nor hypocritical. on the
 contrary, now as before, i had the greatest reverence for the spirit
 of religion. only demian had accustomed to consider and explain the
 stories and articles of belief from more liberal and more personal
 point of view, point of view in which fantasy and imagination had
 their share. at least, i always took great pleasure and enjoyment in
 the interpretations suggested to me. to be sure much seemed to me
 too crude; such as the affair of cain. and once, during the preparation
 for confirmation, i was terrified by conception, which, if that were
 possible, seemed to even still more daring. the master had been
 speaking of golgotha. the biblical account of the passion and death of
 christ had, from my earliest years, made deep impression on me. as a
 little boy, on such days as good friday, after my father had read out
 to us the story of the passion, i had lived in imagination and with
 much emotion in gethsemane and on golgotha, in that world so poignantly
 beautiful, pale and ghostlike, and yet so terribly alive. and when i
 listened to the passion according to st. matthew by bach, i felt the
 mystical thrills of this dark, powerful, mysterious world of passion
 and suffering. i find in this music, even to-day and in the “actus
 tragicus,” the essence of all poetry and of all artistic expression.
 
at the conclusion of the lesson demian said to contemplatively:
 
“there’s something in this, sinclair, which i don’t like. read through
 the story, consider it, there’s something there which sounds insipid. i
 mean this business of the two thieves. it’s sublime, the three crosses
 standing side by side on the hill! but what about this sentimental
 story of the honest thief, which reads more like tract? first was
 criminal who had perpetrated crimes, and god knows what, and now
 breaks out in tears and is consumed by feelings of contrition and
 repentance. i ask you what’s the sense of such repentance two steps
 from the grave? it’s nothing but real parson’s story, mawkish and
 mendacious, larded with emotion, and having most edifying background.
 if to-day you had to choose one of the two thieves as your friend, or
 if you consider which of the two you would the sooner have trusted, it
 would most certainly not be this weeping convert. no, it’s the other,
 who’s real fellow with plenty of character. doesn’t care straw
 about conversion, which in his case can mean simply nothing more than
 pretty speeches. goes his way bravely to the end, without being
 such coward as to renounce the devil in the last moment who up to
 that point has had to help him. is character, and in biblical
 history people of character always come off second best. perhaps he’s a
 descendant of cain. don’t you think so?”
 
i was dismayed. i had believed myself to be quite familiar with the
 story of the crucifixion, and now i saw for the first time what
 little personal judgment i had brought to bear on it, with what little
 force of imagination and of fantasy i had listened to it and read
 it. demian’s new ideas, therefore, were quite annoying, threatening
 to overthrow conceptions, the stability of which i had believed it
 necessary to maintain. no, one could not deal with anything and
 everything like that, certainly not with the all holiest.
 
as always, noticed my opposition immediately, even before i had
 spoken word.
 
“i know,” said he, in tone of resignation, “it’s the old story.
 everything is all right until you’re serious about it! but i’ll tell
 you something: this is one of the points where one can clearly see
 the shortcomings of this religion. the fact is that this god, of the
 old and of the new dispensation, may be an excellent conception, but
 is not what really ought to be. is everything that is good,
 noble, fatherly, beautiful, sublime and sentimental certainly! but the
 world consists of other things which are simply ascribed to the devil.
 all this part of the world, good half, is suppressed and hushed up.
 just the same as they praise god as the father of all life, but pass
 over the whole sex-life, on which all life depends, and declare it to
 be sinful and the work of the devil! i have nothing to say against
 honoring this god jehovah, nothing at all. but i think we should
 reverence everything and look upon the whole world as sacred, not
 merely this artificially separated, official half of it! we ought then
 to worship the devil as well as god. i should find that quite right.
 or we ought to create god, who would embody the devil as well, and
 before whom we should not have to close our eyes, when the most natural
 things in the world take place.”
 
contrary to his custom, had become almost vehement, but smiled
 again immediately and pressed further.
 
but in these words encountered the riddle of my whole boyhood,
 which i had hourly carried with me, but of which i had never spoken
 to anyone. what demian had said about god and the devil, about the
 official godly world and the suppressed devil’s world, that was exactly
 my own idea, my own myth, the idea of the two worlds or two halves of
 the world--the light and the dark. the realization that my problem
 was problem of humanity as whole, of life and thought in general,
 suddenly dawned on me, and this recognition inspired with fear and
 awe as i suddenly felt to what an extent my own innermost personal
 life and thought were part of the eternal stream of great ideas. the
 realization was not joyful, although it confirmed my mode of thought
 and made happy to certain extent. it was hard and tasted raw,
 because hint of responsibility lay therein, telling to put away
 childish things and to stand alone.
 
i told my friend--the first time in my life i had revealed so deep a
 secret--of my conception of the “two worlds,” conception which had
 been formed since the earliest years of my childhood. at once saw
 that i was in thorough agreement with him. but was not the kind to
 make the most of this. listened with greater attention than had
 ever given me, and looked in the eyes until i had to turn away. i
 again noticed in his look this odd, animal-like timelessness, this
 inconceivably old age.
 
“we will talk more about that another time,” said considerately: “i
 see that you think more than you can express. but if that is so, then
 you also know that you have never lived in experience all that you have
 thought, and that is not good. only the thought that we live through in
 experience has any value. you knew that your ‘world of sanction’ was
 simply one-half of the world, and yet you tried to suppress the other
 half in you, as do the parsons and teachers. you will not succeed. no
 one succeeds who has once began to think.”
 
this impressed deeply.
 
“but,” i almost shouted, “there _are_ horrible things which are
 really and actually forbidden--you can’t deny that fact. and they are
 forbidden once for all, and so we must renounce them. i know of course
 that there are such things as murder, and all possible kinds of vice,
 but shall i then, simply because such things exist, go and become a
 criminal?”
 
“we shan’t be able to finish our discussion to-day,” said max, in a
 milder tone. “you must certainly not commit murder or rape, no. but you
 haven’t yet reached that point where one can see what is ‘permitted’
 and what is really ‘taboo.’ you have realized only part of the truth.
 the remainder will come after, rely on it. for instance, for the past
 year or so you have had in you an instinct which is stronger than
 all the others, and which is held to be ‘taboo.’ the greeks and many
 other people, on the contrary, made sort of divinity out of this
 instinct, and honored it by great celebrations. what is now ‘taboo’ is
 therefore not eternally so, it can change. to-day everyone is permitted
 to sleep with woman as soon as has been with her to parson and
 has gone through the ceremony of marriage. with other races it is
 different, even to-day. for that reason each one of us must find out
 for himself what is permitted and what is forbidden--forbidden, that
 is, to himself. you need never do anything that is forbidden and yet be
 thorough rascal. and vice versa. it is really merely question of
 convenience. whoever is too lazy to think for himself and to constitute
 himself his own judge simply conforms to the taboos, whatever they
 happen to be. has an easy time of it. others realize they carry laws
 in themselves. for them things are forbidden which every man of honor
 does daily. on the other hand things are permitted them which are
 otherwise taboo. everyone must stand up for himself.”
 
suddenly seemed to regret having said so much, and broke off. i felt
 i could understand to certain extent what his sentiment was. that
 is to say, however agreeably used to present his ideas (apparently
 in cursory manner) could on account tolerate conversation
 made simply “for the sake of talking,” as once said. realized
 in my case that, although my interest was genuine enough, i was too
 much inclined to look upon discussion as game, too fond of clever
 talking--in short i was lacking in perfect seriousness.
 
* * * * *
 
as i read again the words i have just written--“perfect
 seriousness”--another scene suddenly comes into my mind, the most
 impressive experience i lived through with max demian in those still
 half-childlike times.
 
our confirmation classes were drawing to an end, and the closing
 lessons were devoted to the last supper. the clergyman thought this
 very important, and took pains to make us feel something of the
 inspiration and sacred character of his teaching. however, precisely
 in those last few lessons, thoughts were diverted to another object,
 to the person of my friend. looking forward to my confirmation, which
 was explained to us as being our solemn admission into the community
 of the church, the thought presented itself imperatively to that
 the value of this half-year’s religious instruction did not lie for
 in what i had learned in class, but rather in demian’s presence and
 influence. it was not into the church that i was ready to be received,
 but into something else, into an order of ideas and of personalities
 which surely existed somewhere or other on earth, and of which i felt
 my friend was the representative or messenger.
 
i tried to repress this thought. in spite of everything, i earnestly
 intended to go through the ceremony of confirmation with certain
 dignity, and the new notions i was forming seemed scarcely compatible
 with this. yet do what i would, the idea was there, and gradually
 identified itself with the approaching religious ceremony. i was ready
 to celebrate it in different fashion from the other confirmation
 candidates. for it would mean admission into world of ideas, with
 which i had become acquainted through demian.
 
in those days it happened that i had another discussion with him; it
 was just before lesson. my friend was wrapped up in himself and took
 little pleasure in my talk, which was perhaps rather precocious and
 bombastic.
 
“we talk too much,” said with unwonted gravity. “wise speeches have
 value at all, absolutely none. you only escape from yourself. to
 escape from yourself is sin. you should be able to creep right into
 yourself, like tortoise.”
 
we entered the schoolroom immediately after. the lesson began. i took
 pains to listen, and demian did not disturb in my effort. after a
 while i began to feel something peculiar at my side where his place
 was, sort of emptiness or coolness or something like that, as if his
 seat had suddenly become vacant. the feeling became oppressive and i
 turned round.
 
there i saw my friend sitting, upright and in his customary attitude.
 but looked quite different from usual. something i did not know
 went out from him, enveloped him. i thought his eyes were closed,
 until i saw held them open. but they were stiff as if gazing within
 or directed to an object great way off. sat there perfectly
 motionless; seemed not to be breathing and his mouth was as if
 carved out of wood or stone. his face was white, uniformly white, as
 stone. his brown hair showed more signs of life than did any other
 feature. his hands lay before him on the desk, without life, as still
 as inanimate objects, like stones or fruit, white and motionless, yet
 not relaxed, but as if controlling the secret springs of powerful
 life force.
 
the sight made tremble. is dead, i thought. i almost said it out
 loud. but i knew was not dead. mesmerized, i hung on his look; my
 eyes were riveted to this white, stone mask. i felt it was the real
 demian. the demian who was in the habit of walking and talking with me,
 that was only one side of him, half. demian, who from time to time
 played part, who accommodated himself to circumstances out of mere
 complacence. but the real demian looked like this, with just this look
 of stone, prehistorically old, like an animal, beautiful and cold, dead
 yet secretly full of fabulous life force. and around him this still
 emptiness, this infinite ethereal space, this lonely death!
 
“now has quite retired into himself,” i felt with shudder. never
 had i been so isolated. i had part in him, was unattainable, he
 was further from than if had been on the most distant isle in the
 world.
 
i scarcely understood why one besides myself noticed it. i thought
 that everyone would have to remark him, that everyone would shudder.
 but one gave him any attention. sat like picture and, as i
 could not prevent myself from thinking, as stiff as strange idol.
 fly settled on his forehead, moved slowly down over his nose and
 lips--not muscle, not nerve in his face twitched.
 
where, where was now? what was thinking, what was feeling? was
 in heaven or in hell?
 
it was impossible for to question him. when i saw him at the end of
 the lesson living and breathing again, when his glance met mine, was he
 as formerly had been? where did come from? where had been? he
 seemed tired. his face had its normal color, his hands moved again,
 but his brown hair was lustreless and fatigued, as it were.
 
in the days following i practised new exercise in my bedroom several
 times. i sat stiffly on chair, kept my eyes fixed, and held myself
 perfectly motionless. i waited to see how long i could maintain this
 attitude, and what the sensation would be like. however, i merely got
 very tired, and suffered from violent twitching of the eyelids.
 
the confirmation took place soon after, of which important
 recollections remain with me.
 
everything was now quite changed. childhood fell about in ruins. my
 parents used to look at with certain embarrassment. my sisters had
 become quite strange in their conduct towards me. disillusionment
 falsified and weakened the old sentiments and pleasures, the garden was
 without fragrance, the wood was longer inviting, the world around
 seemed like clearance-sale of old articles, insipid and without
 charm, books were merely paper, music noise. the leaves fall thus
 from tree in autumn, the tree feels it not, rain drips on it, sun
 comes and frost, and the life in it recedes slowly into the narrowest
 and most inward recess. the tree is not dying. it is waiting.
 
it was decided that after the holidays i should go to another school,
 leaving home for the first time. my mother meanwhile approached me
 with especial tenderness, sort of preliminary good-bye, endeavoring
 to charm with love from which i should go with homesickness and
 unforgetfulness in my heart. demian had gone away. i was alone.
 



chapter four
 
beatrice
 

without having seen my friend again, i traveled at the end of the
 holidays to st. ----. both my parents came with me, and handed over
 with all possible care to the protection of master of the school, in
 whose house i was to board. they would have been numb with horror, had
 they only known to what sort of fate they were leaving me.
 
it still hung in the balance whether i should become with time good
 and useful citizen, or whether my nature would break out in other
 directions. my last attempt to be happy under the roof of my father’s
 house and the spirit prevailing there had lasted for considerable
 period, and at times had almost succeeded, only in the end to fail
 completely.
 
the curious emptiness and isolation which i had begun to feel for
 the first time in the holidays after my confirmation (how i learned
 to know it later, this emptiness, this thin atmosphere) did not pass
 immediately. the parting from home was for peculiarly easy. i was
 really rather ashamed of not being sadder--my sisters wept without
 reason, i could not. i was astonished at myself. i had always been
 an emotional child, and at bottom, tolerably good. now i was quite
 changed. i was completely indifferent towards the outside world. for
 days together my sole occupation was hearkening to my inner self,
 listening to the flood of dark, forbidden instincts which roared
 subterraneously within me. i had grown very quickly in that last
 half-year, and appeared lanky, thin and immature. the amiability of
 boyhood had completely disappeared from my character; i realized myself
 that it was impossible to like thus, and i by means loved myself.
 i had often great longing for max demian; on the other hand, i hated
 him not seldom, and looked upon him as responsible for the moral
 impoverishment of my life, to which i resigned myself as to sort of
 nasty disease.
 
in the beginning i was neither liked nor respected in our school
 boarding house. first they ragged me, then kept out of my way, looking
 upon as rotter and an eccentric character; i was pleased with
 myself and i even overplayed my part, withdrawing into my solitary
 self, growling occasional cynicisms. superficially i appeared to
 despise the world in most manly fashion, whereas in reality i was
 secretly consumed by melancholy and despair. in school i could fall
 back on knowledge amassed at home. the form i was in was not so
 advanced as the same form in the school i had just left, and so i
 acquired the habit of despising my school contemporaries, regarding
 them as mere children.
 
this attitude lasted year and longer. my first holiday visits at home
 brought change, i went gladly away again.
 
it was in the beginning of november. i had formed the habit of taking
 short, meditative walks in all kinds of weather, during which i often
 experienced sort of joy, joy full of melancholy, contempt of the
 world and contempt of self. i was sauntering thus one evening through
 the damp, foggy twilight in suburb of the town. the broad drive of a
 public park stood completely deserted, inviting to enter. the road
 lay thick with fallen leaves, into which i dug voluptuously with my
 feet. it smelt damp and bitter; in the distance the trees stood up tall
 and shadowy, ghostlike in the fog.
 
at the end of the drive i stood still and undecided, staring into the
 black foliage, scenting eagerly the damp odor of decomposition and
 death, which seemed to be in harmony with my own mood. oh, how insipid
 life tasted!
 
man, with the collar of his raincoat blowing about him, came out of a
 side path. i was just going on when called to me.
 
“hello, sinclair!”
 
it happened to be alphonse beck, the senior boy of the house. i was
 always glad to see him and had nothing against him, except that he
 always treated as did all the younger boys, in an ironical and
 grandfatherly manner. passed for being as strong as bear, was
 said to have great influence on the house master, and was the hero of
 many school stories.
 
“what are you doing here?” asked affably, in the tone the seniors
 always used when they condescended on occasion to talk to us.
 “composing verse, i bet?”
 
“shouldn’t dream of it,” i disclaimed gruffly.
 
laughed, came up to me, and we chatted together in manner to which
 i had not been accustomed for some time past.
 
“you needn’t be afraid, sinclair, that i shouldn’t understand. i know
 the feeling, when one goes for walk on foggy evening--the thoughts
 autumn inspires in one. and one writes poetry about dying nature, of
 course, and spent youth; which is very much like it. read heinrich
 heine?”
 
“i am not so sentimental,” i said in self-defense.
 
“oh, all right. but in this weather, i think, it does man good to
 find quiet place where one can take glass of wine or something. are
 you coming with for bit? i happen to be quite alone. or wouldn’t
 you care to? i wouldn’t like to lead you astray, old man, if you are
 one of those model boys.”
 
little while after we sat clinking our thick glasses in little
 tavern in the suburbs, drinking wine of doubtful quality. at first
 i wasn’t much pleased, still it was rather novelty for me. but
 unaccustomed to wine, i soon became talkative. it was as if window
 had been flung open within me, and the world shining in--for how long,
 how terribly long, had i not eased my heart by talking. i gave full
 play to my imagination, and once started, i related the story of cain
 and abel.
 
beck listened to with pleasure--someone at last, to whom i was
 giving something! clapped on the shoulder, told i was
 the devil of good fellow and clever rascal. how i reveled in
 communicating my opinions, as i relieved myself of all the pent-up
 thought of the past months! my heart swelled with pride at finding my
 talents recognized by someone older than i was. when called a
 clever rascal the effect was like sweet, strong wine running through
 me. the world lit up in new colors, thoughts came to as from a
 hundred sources, wit and fire blazed up in me. we spoke of masters and
 schoolfellows, and i thought we understood one another wonderfully
 well. we talked of greeks and of pagans, and beck wished absolutely
 to draw out on the subject of women. but on this point i could not
 converse. i had experience, nothing to relate. true, all that i
 had felt and imagined was burning within me, but i could not impart
 my thoughts, not even under the influence of wine. beck knew much
 more about girls, and i listened to his tales with glowing eyes. the
 things i heard were unbelievable. what i should never have conceived
 to be possible entered the sphere of commonplace reality and seemed
 self-evident. alphonse beck, who was perhaps eighteen years old, was
 already man of experiences. among other things, told that
 girls liked boys to play the gallant with them, but in general were
 too frightened to go any further. you could hope for more success with
 women. women were much cleverer. for instance, there was mrs. jaggelt,
 who sold pencils and copybooks, who was much easier to deal with. all
 that had happened behind the counter in her shop was unprintable in any
 book.
 
i sat on captivated; my head was swimming. to be sure, i could not
 exactly have loved mrs. jaggelt, but still, it was unheard of. it
 seemed as if things happened, at least to older people, of which i had
 never dreamed. there was false ring about it, to be sure, everything
 seemed more trivial and commonplace, and did not coincide with my own
 ideas about love, but still, it was reality, it was love and adventure,
 someone sat next to who had lived it in experience, to whom it
 seemed matter of course.
 
our conversation had reached lower level, had deteriorated. i was
 longer clever little fellow, i was just mere boy listening
 to man. but even then--in comparison with what my life had been
 for months and months, this was delicious, this was heaven. besides,
 as i gradually began to realize, all this was forbidden, absolutely
 forbidden, everything from sitting in public house, down to the
 subject of our conversation. in any case, i thought i was showing
 spirit; i was in revolt.
 
i can recollect that night with the greatest clearness. we both of us
 wended our way home at late hour under the dimly burning gas lamps
 through the cool, damp night, and for the first time in my life i was
 drunk. it was not agreeable, it was in the highest degree unpleasant,
 but there was sort of charm about it, sweetness--it smacked of
 orgy and revolt, of spirit and life. beck bravely took in hand, and
 although grumbled at as being bloody novice, half carried,
 half dragged home, where, by good fortune, was able to smuggle us
 both through window which stood open on the ground floor.
 
but maddening pang accompanied the sobering up as i painfully awoke
 after short heavy sleep. i sat up in bed and saw that i was still
 wearing my shirt. my clothes and shoes lay round about on the floor,
 smelling of tobacco and vomit. and between headache, nausea and a
 maddening thirst, picture came before my mind on which i had not
 set eyes for many long day. i saw my home, the house where dwelt my
 parents. i saw father and mother, my sisters and the garden. i saw
 my peaceful, homely bedroom, the school and the marketplace. demian
 and the confirmation class--and all this was bright, lustrous, all
 was wonderful, godly and pure, all that, i realized now, had until
 yesterday belonged to me, had waited for me. but now, in this hour, it
 was mine longer, it spurned and looked upon with disgust. all
 that was loving and intimate, all that i had received from my parents
 since the first golden days of my childhood, each kiss mother had given
 me, each christmas, each godly bright sunday morning there at home,
 each flower in the garden, all that was laid waste, i had trampled on
 it all with my foot! if the police had come for then and had bound
 and led away to the gallows as desecrator and as the scum of
 humanity, i should have acquiesced; should have gone gladly. i would
 have found it right and fitting.
 
that was the state of my feelings. i, who had gone about despising the
 world! i, who had been so proud in spirit and who had shared demian’s
 thoughts! so i appeared filthy pig, to be classed with the scum of
 the earth, drunk and befouled, disgusting and common, dissolute
 beast, carried away by abominable instincts. so i appeared, i who came
 from those gardens whose bright flowers had been purity and sweet
 gentleness, i who had loved bach’s music and beautiful poetry! i could
 still hear, with aversion and disgust, my own laugh, the drunken,
 uncontrolled, convulsive and silly laugh which escaped me. that was i!
 
but in spite of everything there was certain enjoyment in suffering
 these torments. i had lived for so long blind, dull existence, for
 so long had my heart been silent, impoverished and shut up, that
 even this self-accusation, this self-aversion, this entirely dreadful
 feeling was welcome. at least it was feeling; flowers were flaring up,
 emotion was quivering therein. i experienced in the midst of my misery
 confused sensation of liberation, of the approach of spring.
 
however, as far as outward appearances went, i was going fast down
 the hill. the first debauch was soon followed by others. there was
 much drinking at school, and other things not in accord with study.
 i was among the youngest who carried on in this way, but from being
 just tolerated and looked upon as mere youngster, i soon rose to be
 considered as leader and star. i was renowned as daredevil and
 could drink with the best. once again i belonged entirely to the dark
 world, to the devil, and i passed in this world for being splendid
 fellow.
 
but at the same time i was in pitiful state of mind. i lived in a
 whirl of self-destroying debauchery, and while i was looked up to by
 my friends as leader and the devil of good fellow, as cursed
 witty and spirited drinking companion, my anxious soul was full of
 apprehension. i remember on one occasion tears started to my eyes when,
 on coming out of tavern one sunday morning, i saw children playing
 in the street, bright and contented, with freshly combed hair, and
 in their sunday clothes. and while i amused and often terrified my
 friends with monstrous cynicisms, as we sat at dirty tables stained
 with puddles of beer, in low public houses, i had in my heart secret,
 deep reverence for everything at which i scoffed--inwardly i was
 weeping bitterly at the thought of my past life, of my mother, of god.
 
there is good reason for the fact that i was never one with my
 companions, that i remained lonely even in their midst, that i suffered
 in the manner above described. i was hero of drinking bouts, with
 the roughest of them, i was scoffer after their own heart. i showed
 courage and wit in my ideas and in my talks about masters, school,
 parents, the church--i listened to their smutty stories unflinchingly
 and even ventured one or two myself--but i was never about when my
 boon companions went off with girls. i remained behind alone, filled
 with an ardent desire for love, hopeless longing, whereas to judge
 from my conversation i must have been hardened rake. one was more
 vulnerable, one more chaste than i. and when from time to time i saw
 young girls pass by in the town, pretty and clean, bright and charming,
 they seemed to like wonderful, pure dream women, thousand times
 too good and too pure for me. for long time i could not bring myself
 to enter mrs. jaggelt’s stationery shop, because i blushed when i saw
 her and thought of what alphonse beck had told about her.
 
the more i realized how different i was from the members of my new
 set, how isolated i was in their midst, the less easy was it for that
 very reason to break with them. i do not really know whether the
 toping and bragging ever caused much pleasure, and i could never
 so accustom myself to hard drinking that i did not feel the painful
 consequences after each bout. i was as if coerced into doing this. i
 did it because i had to, because i was otherwise absolutely ignorant of
 course to follow, i knew not where to begin. i was afraid of being
 long alone. i was frightened of the many tender, chaste, intimate moods
 to which i constantly felt myself inclined, i was afraid of the tender
 notions of love which so often came to me.
 
one thing i lacked most of all--a friend. there were two or three
 schoolfellows whom i liked very much. but they belonged to the good set
 and my vices had for long time been secret to one. they avoided
 me. with all i passed for hopeless gamester under whose feet the very
 earth quaked. the masters knew much about me, severe punishments were
 several times inflicted on me, my final expulsion from the school was
 waited for with more or less certainty. i knew that myself; for long
 time i had ceased to be good pupil; i got through my work by hook or
 by crook, with the feeling that the state of affairs could not last
 much longer.
 
there are many ways by which god can make us feel lonely and lead us
 to consciousness of ourselves. with it was in this way: it was
 like bad dream, in which i saw myself ostracized, foul and clammy,
 creeping restlessly and painfully over broken beer glasses, down an
 abominably unclean road. there are such dreams, when you imagine you
 have set out to find beautiful princess, but you stick in stinking
 back streets full of rubbish and dirty puddles. so it was with me. in
 this scarcely refined way i was destined to become lonely and to put
 between myself and my childhood locked door of eden over against
 which stood merciless sentinels on guard in beaming rays of light. it
 was beginning, an awakening of that homesickness, that longing to
 return to my true self.
 
i was terribly frightened when my father, alarmed by letter from my
 house master, appeared for the first time in st. ---- and faced me
 unexpectedly. when came for the second time, towards the end of that
 winter, i was hard and indifferent, i let him heap blame on me, i let
 him beg to think of my mother, i was unmoved. finally grew very
 angry and said that if i did not turn over new leaf would have me
 disgraced and chased out of the school, and would have placed in a
 reformatory. little i cared! when went away i felt sorry for him,
 but had accomplished nothing; had found approach to me, and
 for few moments i felt that it served him right.
 
i was indifferent as to what might become of me. in my peculiar and
 unlovely manner, with my carrying on and my frequenting of public
 houses, i was at odds with the world--this was my way of protesting.
 i was ruining myself thereby, but what of it? sometimes the case
 presented itself to in this wise: if the world had use for such
 as me, if there was better place for us, if there were higher
 duties, then people like myself simply went to the devil. so much the
 worse for the world.
 
the christmas holidays of that year were exceedingly unpleasant. my
 mother was terrified when she saw again. i had grown taller, and
 my thin face looked gray and ravaged by dissipation, with flabby
 features and inflamed rings round the eyes. the first indications
 of moustache, and the spectacles which i had but lately taken to
 wearing, made look stranger still. my sisters started back and
 giggled when they saw me. it was all very pleasant. unpleasant was
 the conversation with my father in his study, unpleasant the greeting
 of couple of relations, unpleasant above all things was christmas
 night. that has been since my birth the great day of our house, the
 evening of festivity and love, of gratitude, of the renewal of the bond
 between my parents and myself. this time everything was depressing
 and embarrassing. as usual my father read the portion of the gospel
 about the shepherds in the field “keeping watch over their flock by
 night”; as usual my sisters stood radiantly before the table on which
 the presents were laid out. but my father’s voice was sad, and he
 looked old and constrained. mother was unhappy; for everything was
 equally painful and unwished for, presents and good wishes, gospel and
 christmas tree. the ginger-bread smelt delicious and exhaled thick
 clouds as of sweet remembrances. the christmas tree was fragrant and
 told of things which existed longer. i longed for the end of the
 evening and of the holidays.
 
so passed the whole winter. it was not long before i was severely
 reprimanded by the faculty and threatened with expulsion. it could not
 last much longer. well it made difference to me.
 
i had special grudge against max demian, whom i had not seen for the
 whole of this period. in my first term at st. ---- i had written to him
 twice, but had received reply; for that reason i had not paid him a
 visit in the holidays.
 
* * * * *
 
in the same park, where i had met alphonse beck in the autumn, it
 chanced that in the first days of spring, just as the thorn hedges were
 beginning to turn green, girl attracted my attention. i was out for a
 walk by myself, full of gnawing cares and thoughts, for my health was
 bad. besides that i was in continual financial embarrassment. i owed
 various sums to my friends and had to invent excuses to procure some
 money from home. in several shops i had run up accounts for cigars and
 such things. not that these cares were very pressing--if the end of my
 school career was approaching, and if i drowned myself or was sent to
 reform school, these trifles would not make much difference either.
 but i was nevertheless constantly facing these unpleasant things and i
 suffered from it.
 
on that spring day in the park i met girl who had strong attraction
 for me. she was tall and slender, elegantly dressed, and had wise,
 boyish face. she pleased at once, she belonged to the type that i
 loved, and she began to work upon my imagination. she was scarcely
 older than i, but she was more mature; she was elegant and possessed
 good figure, already almost woman, but with touch of youthful
 exuberance in her features, which pleased exceedingly.
 
it was never my good fortune to approach girl with whom i could
 have fallen in love, neither was it my luck in this case. but the
 impression was deeper than all the former ones, and the influence of
 this infatuation on my life was powerful.
 
suddenly i had again picture standing before me, revered
 picture--ah, and need, impulse was so deep or so strong in me
 as the desire to revere, to adore. i gave her the name of beatrice,
 of whom, without having read dante, i knew something from an english
 painting, reproduction of which i had in my possession. the picture
 was of an english pre-raphaelite girlish figure, very long-limbed and
 slender, with small, long head and spiritualized hands and features.
 my beautiful young girl did not completely resemble this, although
 she had the same slenderness and boyish suppleness of figure, which i
 loved, and something of the spiritualization of the face, as if her
 soul lay therein.
 
i never spoke single word to beatrice. yet at that time she exercised
 the deepest influence over me. her picture fastened itself on my mind;
 in my imagination she opened sanctuary for me, she caused to
 pray in temple. from one day to another i remained absent from the
 drinking bouts and the nightly excursions. once more i could bear being
 alone, i read gladly, i liked to go for walks again.
 
i was much scoffed at for my sudden conversion. but i had now something
 to love and to worship, i had again an ideal, life was once more full
 of suggestion, of gaily colored secret nuances, that made insensible
 to the jeers of my companions. i again felt at home with myself,
 although i was now the servant and slave of picture which i revered.
 
i cannot think of that time without certain emotion. with earnest
 striving, i again endeavored to build “bright world” out of the ruins
 of that period of my life which had broken up around me, i again lived
 entirely and single-mindedly in the desire to put away the dark and
 the bad, and to dwell completely in the light, on my knees before my
 gods. still, this “bright world” i built up was to certain extent my
 own creation. it was not the action of flying back or of crawling back
 to mother, to security without responsibilities. it was new service
 upon which i entered, invented by myself for my own requirements, with
 responsibilities and discipline of self. the sex consciousness from
 which i suffered and before which i was in constant flight was now
 transmuted in this sacred fire to spirit and devotion. the grim and
 horrible would disappear, i should groan through more agonizing
 nights, there would be more heart-beatings in front of lewd
 pictures, more listening at forbidden doors, more lasciviousness.
 instead of all this, i set up my altar, with the picture of beatrice,
 and in dedicating myself to her i dedicated myself to the spirit and
 to the gods. that part of myself which i withdrew from the powers of
 darkness i brought as sacrifice to the powers of light. not lust was
 my aim, but purity; not happiness, but beauty and spirituality.
 
this cult for beatrice completely changed my life. precocious cynic
 but short while before, i had now become servant in the temple,
 whose aim it was to be saint. i not only renounced the evil life to
 which i had accustomed myself, but i endeavored to change everything,
 to set myself standard of purity, nobility and dignity, which i even
 applied to eating and drinking, to my manner of speech and dress. i
 began each morning to wash with cold water, to the use of which i had,
 in the beginning, to force myself. i behaved with gravity and dignity,
 carried myself erect and acquired slower and more dignified gait. to
 an observer it might have seemed rather ludicrous, but to it was the
 performance of divine worship.
 
of all the ways in which i sought to find expression for my new faith,
 one bore fruit. i began to paint. to start with, the english picture of
 beatrice i had in my possession did not bear sufficient resemblance
 of beatrice. i wanted to try to paint her for myself. full of new
 pleasure and hope i carried into my room--i had recently been given
 room to myself--beautiful paper, colors, and paint-brush. i made
 ready my palette, porcelain bowls, glass and pencils. the fine water
 colors in little tubes which i had bought captivated me. there was a
 bright chromic green which i think i can see yet as it flashed out for
 the first time from the little white tube.
 
i began with caution. to paint face was difficult; i wished first
 of all to try something else. i painted ornaments, flowers, and small
 landscapes from imagination, tree near chapel, roman bridge with
 cypresses. i often lost myself completely in this pastime, i was
 as happy as child with box of paints. at last i began to paint
 beatrice.
 
the first few attempts were abortive, and i threw them away. the more
 i tried to conjure up in my mind the face of the girl, whom i met from
 time to time in the street, the less i seemed able to transfer my
 impressions to paper. finally i gave up the idea, and began simply to
 paint face according to the guidance of my imagination, face which
 gradually grew out of the one already begun, as if by itself, at the
 mercy of color and brush. the result was face i had dreamed of, and i
 was not ill pleased with it. yet i made another essay immediately, and
 each new picture was clearer, and approached more nearly to the type,
 but was by means like the reality.
 
more and more i accustomed myself, in dreamy sort of way, to draw
 lines with my brush, to fill in surfaces. my sketches grew out of a
 few strokes of the brush, out of the unconscious. at last one day i
 finished face, almost unconsciously, which made stronger appeal to
 than the former ones. it was not the face of the girl, for i had
 long since given up the idea of trying to paint my beatrice to the
 life. it was something else, something unreal, and yet not of less
 value for on that account. it looked more like the head of youth
 than of girl. the hair was not blond like that of my pretty girl,
 but brown with tinge of red; the chin was strong and firm, but the
 mouth was red as blossom. the features were rigid, like mask, but
 impressive and full of secret life.
 
as i sat before the finished sketch, it made peculiar impression on
 me. it seemed to sort of picture of god or of sacred mask,
 half man, half woman, ageless, the expression being at once dreamy
 and strong-willed, stiff and yet secretly alive. this face seemed to
 have something to say to me, it belonged to me; its look was rather
 imperative, as if requiring something of me. and there was certain
 resemblance to someone or other, to whom i knew not.
 
the picture played an important rôle for while, sharing my thoughts
 and my life. i kept it concealed in drawer, in order that one should
 not get possession of it and so be able to sneer at me. but as soon
 as i found myself alone in my little room i took out the picture and
 communed with it. each evening i pinned it on to the wall over against
 my bed, and gazed at it until i dropped off to sleep. in the morning it
 was the first object which met my gaze.
 
just at that time i began again to dream great deal, as i had
 constantly done when child. it seemed to that for years i had had
 more dreams. now they came again, quite new kind of pictures,
 and often and often the painted image appeared therein, living and
 speaking, friendly or inimical, with the features sometimes twisted
 into grimace, sometimes infinitely beautiful, harmonious and noble.
 
and one morning, as i awoke out of such dream, i suddenly realized
 who was the original of the picture, i recognized it. it gazed at me
 in such fabulously well-known way, and seemed to be calling my name.
 it seemed to know me, like mother, seemed to love as if since the
 beginning of time. with beating heart i stared at the paper, at the
 thick brown hair, at the half-womanly mouth, the strong forehead with
 the wonderful brightness (it had dried that way of itself) and more and
 more i felt in the knowledge, the certainty of having somewhere met
 the original of the picture.
 
i sprang out of bed, placed myself in front of the face, and gazed at
 it from the closest proximity, straight into the wide open, greenish,
 staring eyes, the right eye somewhat higher than the other. and all at
 once this right eye twitched perceptibly, but still decidedly, and from
 this twitching i recognized the picture....
 
how was it that i had found it out so late? it was demian’s face. later
 i often and often compared the picture with demian’s real features, as
 they had remained in my memory. they were not quite the same, although
 there was resemblance. but it was demian, nevertheless.
 
once, on an evening in early summer the red sun shone obliquely through
 my window, which looked towards the west. in the room the dusk was
 gathering. i suddenly had the idea of pinning the picture of beatrice,
 or of demian, to the cross-bar of the window and of gazing at it,
 while the evening sun was shining through. the whole outline of the
 face disappeared, but the reddish ringed eyes, the brightness of the
 forehead and the strong red mouth glowed deeply and wildly from the
 surface of the paper. i sat opposite it for long time, even after the
 light had died away. and by degrees the feeling came to that this
 was not beatrice or demian but--myself. the picture did not resemble
 me--it was not meant to, i felt--but there was that in it which seemed
 to be made up of my life, something of my inner self, of my fate or of
 my dæmon. my friend would look like that, if i ever found another. my
 mistress would look like that, if ever i had one. my life and death
 would be like that. it had the ring and rhythm of my fate.
 
in those weeks i had begun to read book which made deeper
 impression on than anything i had read before. even in later years
 i have seldom chanced upon books which have made such strong appeal
 to me, except perhaps those of nietzsche. it was volume of novalis,
 containing letters and apothegms. there was much that i did not
 understand. but the book captivated and occupied my thoughts to an
 extraordinary degree. one of the aphorisms now occurred to me. i wrote
 it with pen under the picture: “fate and soul are the terms of one
 conception.” that i now understood.
 
i frequently used to meet the girl i called beatrice. i felt emotion
 on seeing her, but i was often sensible of harmony of sentiment,
 which seemed to say: we are connected, or rather, not you and i, but
 your picture and i; you are part of my destiny.
 
* * * * *
 
my longing for max demian was again eager. i had had news of him
 for several years. on one occasion only i had met him in the holidays.
 i see now that i have failed to mention this short meeting in my
 narrative, and i see that this was owing to shame and self-conceit on
 my part. i must make up for it now.
 
so then, once in the holidays, i was parading my somewhat tired, blasé
 self through the town. as i was sauntering along, swinging my stick and
 examining the old, unchanged features of the bourgeois philistines whom
 i despised, i met my one-time friend. scarcely had i caught sight of
 him when i started involuntarily. with lightning rapidity my thoughts
 were carried back to frank kromer. i hoped and prayed demian had really
 forgotten the story! it was so disagreeable to be under this obligation
 to him--simply owing to silly, childish affair--still, i was under an
 obligation....
 
seemed to be waiting to see whether i would greet him. i did, as
 calmly as possible under the circumstances, and gave his hand.
 that was indeed his old handshake! so strong, warm and yet cool, so
 manly!
 
looked attentively in the face and said: “you’ve grown lot,
 sinclair.” himself seemed quite unchanged, just as old, just as
 young as ever.
 
proposed we should go for walk, and we talked of secondary
 matters, not of the past. i remembered that i had written to him
 several times, without having received an answer. i hoped had
 forgotten this as well, those silly, silly letters. made mention
 of them.
 
at that time there was beatrice and picture, i was still in the
 period of my dissipation. outside the town i invited him to come with
 into an inn. came. with much ostentation i ordered bottle
 of wine and filled couple of glasses. i clinked glasses with him,
 showing him how conversant i was with student drinking customs, and i
 emptied my first glass at gulp.
 
“do you frequent public houses often?” asked me.
 
“oh yes,” i said with drawl, “what else is there to do? it’s
 certainly more amusing than anything else; after all.”
 
“you think so? perhaps. it may be so. there’s certainly something very
 pleasing about it--intoxication, bacchanalian orgies! but i find, with
 most people who frequent public houses, this sense of _abandon_
 is lost. it seems to there is something typically philistine,
 bourgeois, in the public house habit. of course, for just one night,
 with burning torches, to have proper orgy and drunken revel. but
 to do the same thing over and over again, drinking one glass after
 another--that’s hardly the real thing. can you imagine faust sitting
 evening after evening drinking at the same table?”
 
i drank, and looked at him with some enmity.
 
“yes, but everyone isn’t faust,” i said curtly.
 
looked at with somewhat surprised air.
 
then laughed, in his old superior way. “what’s the good of
 quarreling about it? in any case the life of toper, of libertine,
 is, i imagine, more exciting than that of blameless citizen. and
 then--i have read it somewhere--the life of profligate is one of
 the best preparations for mystic. there are always such people as
 saint augustine, who become seers. before, was sort of rake and
 profligate.”
 
i was distrustful and wished by means to let him take superior
 attitude towards me. so i said, with blasé air: “well, everyone
 according to his taste! i haven’t the slightest intention of doing
 that, becoming seer or anything.”
 
demian flashed glance at from half-closed eyes.
 
“my dear sinclair,” said slowly, “it wasn’t my intention to hurt
 your feelings. besides--neither of us knows to what end you drink.
 there is that in you, which orders your life for you, and which knows
 why you are doing it. it is good to realize this; there is someone in
 us who knows everything, wills everything, does everything better than
 we do ourselves. but excuse me, i must go home.”
 
we did not linger over our leave-taking. i remained seated, very
 dejected, and emptied the bottle. i found, when i got up to go, that
 demian had already paid for it. that made more angry still.
 
* * * * *
 
this little event recurred to my thoughts, which were full of demian.
 and the words had spoken in the inn came back to my mind, retaining
 all their old freshness and significance: “it is good to know there is
 one in us who knows everything!”
 
i looked at the picture hanging in the window, now quite dark. the
 eyes glowed still. it was demian’s look. on it was the look of the one
 inside me, who knows all.
 
oh, how i longed for demian! i knew nothing of his whereabouts, for me
 was unattainable. i knew only that was supposed to be studying
 somewhere or other, and that after the conclusion of his school career
 his mother had left the town.
 
i called up in my mind all my reminiscences of max demian, from the
 kromer affair onwards. great deal had formerly said came back
 to me. to-day everything still had meaning, all was of real concern
 to me! and what had said at our last, not very agreeable, meeting,
 about the libertine and the saint, suddenly crossed my mind. was it not
 just so with me? had i not lived in filth and drunkenness, my senses
 blunted by dissipation, until new life impulse, the direct contrary
 of the old, awoke in me, namely the desire for purity, the longing to
 be saintly?
 
so i went on, from reminiscence to reminiscence. night had long since
 fallen, and outside it was raining. in recollection, as well, i heard
 it rain; it was the hour under the chestnut trees when first
 questioned concerning frank kromer, so guessing my first secrets.
 one after another these souvenirs came to mind, conversations on the
 way to school, the confirmation class. and then i recollected my very
 first meeting with max demian. what had we been talking about? i could
 not for the moment recollect, but i took my time, i thought deeply. at
 last i remembered. we were standing in front of our house; after he
 had imparted to his opinion about cain. then spoke to about
 the old, almost obliterated crest which stood over the door, in the
 keystone which widened as it got higher. said it interested him and
 that one ought not to let such things escape one’s notice.
 
that night i dreamt of demian and of the crest. it changed perpetually,
 now demian held it in his hands, now it was small and grey, now very
 large and multicolored, but explained to that it was always one
 and the same. but at last forced to eat the crest. as i swallowed
 it, i felt with terror that the bird on the crest was alive inside me,
 my stomach was swollen and the bird was beginning to consume me. with
 the fear of death upon me, i commenced to struggle. then i woke up.
 
i felt relieved. it was the middle of the night, and i heard the rain
 blowing into the room. i got up to close the window; and in doing
 so trod on bright object which lay on the floor. in the morning i
 found it was my painting. it was lying there in the wet and had rolled
 itself up. in order to dry it i stretched it out between two sheets of
 blotting paper and placed it under heavy book. when i looked at it
 the next day it was dry. but it had changed. the red mouth had paled
 and had become smaller. now it was exactly demian’s mouth.
 
i now began to paint new picture, namely, that of the bird on the
 crest. i could not recollect any more what it really looked like,
 neither could i form clear image of the whole, as even if one stood
 directly in front of our door, the crest was scarcely recognizable, it
 was so old and had several times been painted over. the bird stood or
 sat on something, perhaps on flower, or on basket or nest, or on a
 tree-top. i did not bother about that, and began with the part i could
 picture clearly. in answer to confused prompting, i began straight
 away with strong colors; on my paper the head of the bird was golden
 yellow. i continued my work at intervals, when i was in the mood for
 it, and after few days the thing was completed.
 
now it was bird of prey, with sharp, bold hawk’s head. the lower
 half of the body was fixed in dark terrestrial globe, out of which
 it was working to escape, as if out of giant egg. the background was
 sky-blue. the longer i gazed at the sheet, the more it seemed to me
 this was the colored crest which i had visualized in my dream.
 
it would not have been possible for to have written letter to
 demian, even if i had known where to send it. but i decided, acting
 under suggestion which came to in dreamy sort of way, as under
 all my promptings of that period, to send him the picture with the
 hawk--whether it would reach him or not. i wrote nothing thereon, not
 even my name. i carefully cut the border, bought large paper cover
 and wrote on it my friend’s former address. then i sent it off.
 
the approach of an examination caused to work harder than usual
 in school. the masters had again received into grace, since i had
 suddenly changed my vile conduct. i was not, even now, by any means a
 good pupil, but neither i nor anyone else seemed to remember that, half
 year before, my expulsion from the school had been imminent.
 
my father now wrote to as formerly, adopting his old cheerful tone,
 without reproaches or threats. yet i had impulse to explain to him
 or to anyone how the change was brought about. it was merely chance
 that this change coincided with the wishes of my parents and the
 masters. it did not bring into closer contact with the others but
 isolated still more. i myself was ignorant of the tendency of the
 change in me, it might be leading to demian, to distant fate. it
 had begun with beatrice, but for some time past i had been living in
 quite an unreal world with my paintings and my thoughts of demian, so
 that she quite disappeared from my mind, as she did from my view. i
 should not have been able to say word to anyone of my dreams, of my
 expectations, of the inner change realized in me, not even if i had
 wished to do so.
 
but i had not the faintest desire ever to broach the subject.
 



chapter five
 
the bird fights its way out of the egg
 

my painted dream-bird was on its way, searching out my friend. an
 answer came to in the most curious manner.
 
in my classroom in school i found at my desk, in the interval between
 two lessons, piece of paper slipped between the pages of my book. it
 was folded in the manner we used for passing notes to one another in
 class. i wondered who could have sent such note, as i was not so
 intimate with any of the boys that one of them should wish to write to
 me. i thought it was summons to participate in some school rag or
 other, in which however i should not have taken part, and i replaced
 the note unopened in my book. during the lesson it fell by chance into
 my hands again.
 
i toyed with the paper, unfolded it without thinking, and discovered a
 few words written thereon. i threw glance at the writing, one word
 riveted my attention. terrified, i read on, while my heart seemed to
 become numb with sense of destiny.
 
“the bird fights its way out of the egg. the egg is the world. whoever
 will be born must destroy world. the bird flies to god. the name of
 the god is abraxas.”
 
i sank into deep meditation after i had read the words through several
 times. it admitted of doubt: this was demian’s answer. none could
 know of the bird, except our two selves. had received my picture. he
 had understood and helped to explain its significance. but where was
 the connection in all this? and--what worried above all--what did
 abraxas mean? i had never read or heard of the word. “the name of the
 god is abraxas!”
 
the hour passed without my hearing anything of the lesson. the next
 lesson began, the last of the morning. it was taken by quite young
 assistant master, fresh from the university, to whom we had already
 taken liking, because was young and pretended to false dignity
 with us.
 
we were reading herodotus under doctor follen’s guidance. this was
 one of the few school subjects which interested me. but this time my
 attention wandered. i had mechanically flung open my book, but i did
 not follow the translation, and remained lost in thought. for the
 rest, i had already several times had the experience that what demian
 had said to in the confirmation class was right. if you willed a
 thing strongly enough, it happened. if during the lesson i was deeply
 immersed in thought, i need not fear that the master would disturb my
 peace. certainly, if you were absent-minded or sleepy, then stood
 suddenly there; that had already happened to several times. but if
 you were really thinking, if you were genuinely sunk in thought, then
 you were safe. and i had already put to the test what had said to me
 about fixing person with one’s eyes. when at school with demian i had
 never been successful in this attempt, but now i often realized that
 you could accomplish much simply by fixed look and deep thinking.
 
so i was sitting now, my thoughts far from herodotus and school.
 but the master’s voice unexpectedly fell on my consciousness like a
 thunder-crash, so that i started with fright. i listened to his voice,
 was standing quite close to me, i thought had already called me
 by name. but did not look at me. i breathed sigh of relief.
 
then i heard his voice again. loudly the word “abraxas” fell from his
 lips.
 
continuing his explanation, the beginning of which had escaped me,
 doctor follen said: “we must not imagine the ideas of those sects and
 mystical corporations of antiquity to be as naïve as they appear from
 the standpoint of rationalistic outlook. antiquity knew absolutely
 nothing of science, in our sense of the word. on the other hand more
 attention was paid to truths of philosophical, mystical nature, which
 often attained to very high stage of development. magic in part arose
 therefrom, and often led to fraud and crime. but none the less, magic
 had noble origin and was inspired by deep thought. so it was with the
 teaching of abraxas, which i have just cited as an example. this name
 is used in connection with greek charm formulas. many opinions coincide
 in thinking it is the name of some demon of magic, such as some savage
 people worship to-day. but it appears that abraxas had much wider
 significance. we can imagine the name to be that of divinity on
 whom the symbolical task was imposed of uniting the divine and the
 diabolical.”
 
the learned little man continued his discourse with much seriousness,
 one was very attentive, and as the name did not recur, i was soon
 immersed in my own thoughts again.
 
“to unite the divine and the diabolical,” rang in my ears. here was a
 starting-point. i was familiar with that idea from my conversations
 with demian in the very last period of our friendship. demian told me
 then, we had indeed god whom we revered, but this god represented
 part of the world only, the half which was arbitrarily separated from
 the rest (it was the official, permitted, “bright” world). but one
 should be able to hold the whole world in honor. one should either have
 god who was at the same time devil, or one should institute devil
 worship together with worship of god. and now abraxas was the god, who
 was at the same time god and devil.
 
for long time i zealously sought to follow up the trail of ideas
 farther, without success. in addition, i rummaged through whole
 library to find out more about abraxas, but in vain. however, it was
 not my nature to concentrate my energies on methodical search after
 knowledge, search which would reveal truths of dead, useless,
 documentary kind.
 
the figure of beatrice, which had for certain time occupied so much
 of my attention, vanished by degrees from my mind, or rather receded
 slowly, drawing nearer and nearer to the horizon, becoming paler, more
 like shadow, as it retreated. she satisfied my soul longer. new
 spiritual development now began to take place in the dreamy existence i
 led, this existence in which i was strangely wrapped up in myself. the
 longing for full life glowed in me, or rather the longing for love.
 the sex instinct, which for time had been merged into my worship
 of beatrice, required new pictures and aims. fulfillment was denied
 me, and it was more impossible than ever for to delude myself by
 expecting anything of the girls who seemed to have the happiness of my
 comrades in their keeping. i again dreamed vividly, even more by day
 than by night. images presented themselves to me, desires in the shape
 of pictures rose up in my imagination, withdrawing from the outside
 world, so that my relations with these pictures, with these dreams
 and shadows, were more real and more intimate than with my actual
 surroundings.
 
certain dream, or play of fantasy, which recurred to me, was full of
 significance. this dream, the most important and the most enduring of
 my life, was as follows: i returned home--over the front door shone
 the crest with the yellow bird on the blue ground--my mother came to
 meet me--but as i entered and wished to embrace her, it was not she,
 but shape i had never before seen, tall and powerful, resembling max
 demian and my painting, yet different, and quite womanly in spite of
 its size. this figure drew towards it, and held in quivering,
 passionate embrace. rapture and horror were mixed, the embrace was a
 sort of divine worship, and yet crime as well. too much of the memory
 of my mother, too much of the memory of max demian was contained in the
 form which embraced me. the embrace seemed repulsive to my sentiment
 of reverence, yet i felt happy. i often awoke out of this dream with
 deep feeling of contentment, often with the fear of death and a
 tormenting conscience as if i were guilty of terrible sin.
 
it was only gradually and unconsciously that i realized the connection
 between this mental picture and the hint which had come to from
 outside concerning the god of whom i was in search. however, this
 connection became closer and more intimate, and i began to feel that
 precisely in this dream, this presentiment, i was invoking abraxas.
 rapture and horror, man and woman, the most sacred things and the
 most abominable interwoven, the darkest guilt with the most tender
 innocence--such was the dream picture of my love, such also was
 abraxas. love was longer dark, animal impulse, as i had felt
 with considerable anxiety in the beginning. neither was it pious
 spiritualized form of worship any longer, such as i had bestowed upon
 the picture of beatrice. it was both--both and yet much more, it was
 the image of an angel and of satan, man and woman in one, human being
 and animal, the highest good and lowest evil. it was my destiny, it
 seemed that i should experience this in my own life. i longed for it
 and was afraid of it, i followed it in my dreams and took to flight
 before it; but it was always there, was always standing over me.
 
the next spring i was to leave school and go to some university to
 study, where and what i knew not. small moustache grew on my lip,
 i was grown man, and yet completely hopeless and aimless. only one
 thing was firm: the voice in me, the dream picture. i felt it my duty
 to follow this guidance blindly. but it was difficult, and daily i was
 on the point of revolting. perhaps i was mad, i often used to think;
 perhaps i was not as other men? but i could do everything the others
 did; with little pains and industry i could read plato, i could solve
 trigonometrical problem or work out chemical analysis. only one
 thing i could not do: discover the dark, concealed aim within and
 make up my mind, as others did--others, who knew well enough whether
 they wanted to be professors or judges, doctors or artists. they knew
 what career to follow and what advantages they would gain by it. but i
 was not like that. perhaps i would be like them some day, but how was
 i to know? perhaps i should have to seek and seek for years, and would
 make nothing of myself, would attain end. perhaps i should attain an
 end, but it might be wicked, dangerous, terrible.
 
i wanted only to try to live in obedience to the promptings which came
 from my true self. why was that so very difficult?
 
i often made the attempt to paint the powerful love-figure of my dream.
 but i never succeeded. if i had been successful i would have sent the
 picture to demian. where was he? i knew not. i only knew there was a
 bond of union between us. when should i see him again?
 
the pleasant tranquillity of those weeks and months of the beatrice
 period was long since gone. i thought at that time i had reached a
 haven and had found peace. but it was ever so--scarcely did i begin to
 adapt myself to circumstances, scarcely had dream done good, when
 it faded again. in vain to complain! i now lived in fire of unstilled
 desires, of tense expectation, which often rendered completely wild
 and mad. i frequently saw before the picture of my dream-mistress
 with extraordinary clearness, much more clearly than i saw my own
 hand. i spoke to it, wept over it, cursed it. i called it mother and
 knelt before it in tears. i called it my beloved and felt its ripe kiss
 of fulfilled desire. i called it devil and whore, vampire and murderer.
 it invited to the tenderest dreams of love and to the most horrible
 abominations--nothing was too good and precious for it, nothing too bad
 and vile.
 
i passed the whole of that winter in state of inward tumult difficult
 to describe. i had long been accustomed to loneliness--that did not
 depress me. i lived with demian, with the hawk, with my picture of the
 big dream-figure, which was my fate and my mistress. it sufficed to
 live in close communion with those things, since they opened up large
 and broad perspective, leading to abraxas. but i was not able to summon
 up these dreams, these thoughts, at will. i could not invest them in
 colors, as i pleased. they came of themselves, taking possession of me,
 governing and shaping my life.
 
i was secure in so far as the outside world was concerned. i was afraid
 of one. my schoolfellows had learned to recognize that, and observed
 secret respect towards me, which often caused to smile. when i
 wished, i could penetrate most of them with look, thereby surprising
 them occasionally. only, i seldom or never wanted to do this. it was my
 own self which occupied my attention, always myself. and yet i longed
 ardently to live bit of real life, to give something of myself to
 the world, to enter into contact and battle with it. sometimes as i
 wandered through the streets in the evening and could not, through
 restlessness, return home before midnight, i thought to myself: now
 i cannot fail to meet my beloved, i shall overtake her at the next
 corner, she will call to from the next window. sometimes all this
 seemed to torture unbearably, and i was quite prepared to take my
 own life some day.
 
at that time i found peculiar refuge--by “chance,” as one says. but
 really such happenings cannot be attributed to chance. when person
 is in need of something, and the necessary happens, this is not due to
 chance but to himself; his own desire leads him compellingly to the
 object of which stands in need.
 
two or three times during my wanderings through the streets i had heard
 the strains of an organ coming from little church in the suburbs,
 without, however, stopping to listen. the next time i passed by the
 church i heard it again, and recognized that bach was being played.
 i went to the door, which i found to be locked. as the street was
 practically empty i sat down on curb-stone close to the church,
 turned up the collar of my coat and listened. it was not large organ,
 but good one nevertheless. whoever was playing played wonderfully
 well, almost like virtuoso, but with peculiar, highly personal
 expression of will and perseverance, which seemed to make the music
 ring out like prayer. i had the feeling that the man who was playing
 knew treasure was shut up in the music and struggled and tapped
 and knocked to get at the treasure, as if his life depended on his
 finding it. in the technical sense i do not understand very much
 about music, but this form of the soul’s expression i have from my
 childhood intuitively understood; i feel music is something which i can
 comprehend without initiation.
 
the organist next played something modern, it might have been reger.
 the church was almost completely dark, only very narrow beam of light
 shone through the window nearest to me. i waited until the end, and
 then walked up and down till the organist came out. was still a
 young man, though older than myself, robust and thick-set. walked
 quickly, taking powerful strides, but as if forcing the pace against
 his will.
 
many an evening thereafter i sat before the church, or walked up and
 down. once i found the door open, and for half an hour i sat shivering
 and happy inside, while the organist played in the organ loft by
 the dim gas light. of the music played i heard not only what he
 himself put into it. there seemed also to be secret coherence
 in his repertory, each piece seemed to be the continuation of the
 one preceding. everything played was pious, expressing faith
 and devotion. but not pious like church-goers and clergymen, but
 like pilgrims and beggars of the middle ages, pious with reckless
 surrender to world-feeling, which was superior to all confessions of
 faith. frequently played music by the pre-bach composers, and old
 italian music. and all the pieces said the same thing, all expressed
 what the musician had in his soul: longing, longing to identify
 oneself with the world and to tear oneself free again, listening to
 the workings of one’s own dark soul, an orgy of devotion and lively
 curiosity of the wonderful.
 
i once secretly followed the organist as left the church. he
 continued his way to the outskirts of the town and entered little
 tavern. i could not resist the temptation to go in after him. for
 the first time i had clear view of him. sat at the table in the
 corner of the little room, black felt hat on his head, measure of
 wine before him, and his face was just as i had expected it to be.
 it was ugly and somewhat uncouth, with the look of seeker and of
 an eccentric, obstinate and strong-willed, with soft and childish
 mouth. the expression of what was strong and manly lay in the eyes
 and forehead; on the lower half of the face sat look of gentleness
 and immaturity, rather effeminate and showing lack of self-mastery.
 the chin indicated boyish indecision, as if in contradiction with
 the eyes and forehead. i liked the dark brown eyes, full of pride and
 hostility.
 
silently i took my place opposite him. there was one else in the
 tavern. glared at me, as if wished to chase away. nevertheless
 i maintained my position, looking at him unflinchingly, until at last
 growled testily: “what the deuce are you staring at for? do you
 want anything of me?”
 
“i don’t want anything,” i said. “you have already given much.”
 
wrinkled his forehead.
 
“ah, you’re music enthusiast, are you? i think it’s disgusting to go
 mad over music.”
 
i did not let myself be intimidated.
 
“i have so often listened to your playing, there in the church,” i
 said. “but i don’t want to bother you. i thought perhaps i should
 discover something in you, something special, i don’t know exactly
 what. but please don’t mind me. i can listen to you in the church.”
 
“why, i always lock the door!”
 
“just lately you forgot, and i sat inside. otherwise i stand outside or
 sit on the curb-stone.”
 
“is that so? another time you can come inside, it’s warmer. you’ve
 simply got to knock on the door. but loudly, and not while i’m playing.
 now--what did you want to say? but you’re quite young, apparently a
 schoolboy or student. are you musician?”
 
“no. i like music, but only the kind you play, absolute music, where
 one feels that someone is trying to fathom heaven and hell. i like
 music so much, i think, because it is not concerned with morals.
 everything else is question of morals, and i am looking for something
 different. whatever has been concerned with morals has caused only
 suffering. i don’t express myself properly. do you know that there must
 be god who is at the same time god and devil? there must have been
 one, i have heard so.”
 
the organist pushed back his broad hat and shook the dark hair from
 his forehead. looked at penetratingly and bent forward his face
 towards over the table.
 
softly and tensely questioned:
 
“what’s the name of the god of whom you are talking?”
 
“unfortunately i know practically nothing about him really, only his
 name. his name’s abraxas.”
 
the musician looked distrustfully around, as if someone might be
 eavesdropping. then bent towards and said in whisper: “i
 thought so. who are you?”
 
“i’m student from the school.”
 
“how do you know about abraxas?”
 
“by chance.”
 
thumped on the table, so that his wine spilled over.
 
“chance! don’t talk nonsense, young man! one doesn’t know of abraxas
 by chance, mark you. i will tell you something more of him. i know a
 little about him!”
 
ceased talking and pushed back his chair. i looked at him
 expectantly, and made grimace.
 
“not here! another time. there, take these!”
 
dug his hand into the pocket of his overcoat, which had not taken
 off, and pulled out couple of roasted chestnuts, which threw to me.
 
i said nothing. i took and ate them, and was very contented.
 
“well,” whispered after while. “how do you know about--him?”
 
i did not hesitate to tell him.
 
“i was lonely and perplexed,” i related. “i called to mind friend of
 former years who, i think, knows great deal. i had painted something,
 bird coming out of terrestrial globe. i sent this to him. after a
 time, when i had begun to lose hope of reply, piece of paper fell
 into my hands. on it was written: ‘the bird fights its way out of the
 egg. the egg is the world. whoever will be born must destroy world.
 the bird flies to god. the name of the god is abraxas.’”
 
answered nothing. we peeled our chestnuts and ate them, and drank
 our wine.
 
“shall we have another drink?” asked.
 
“thanks, no. i don’t care much for drinking.”
 
laughed, somewhat disappointedly.
 
“as you wish! i am different. i am staying here. you can go now!”
 
the next time i saw him after the organ recital, was not very
 communicative. conducted through an old street to an old, stately
 house and upstairs into large, somewhat gloomy and untidy room where,
 besides piano, there was nothing to indicate that its occupant was a
 musician. instead, huge bookcase and writing table gave the room a
 somewhat scholarly air.
 
“what lot of books you have!” i said appreciatively.
 
“a part of them belongs to the library of my father, with whom i
 live. yes, young man, i live with my father and mother, but i cannot
 introduce you to them, as i and my acquaintances meet with but scant
 respect at home. i am prodigal son, you see. my father is very much
 looked up to, is well-known clergyman and preacher in this town.
 and i, to let you know at once, am his talented and promising son, who,
 however, is guilty of many back-slidings, and, to certain extent,
 mad. i was studying theology, and deserted this worthy faculty shortly
 before my final examination, although really i am still in the same
 line, as far as concerns my private studies. for it is still of the
 highest importance and interest what sort of gods people have invented
 for themselves at various times. i am musician into the bargain, and
 shall soon get post as organist, i think. then i shall be in the
 church again.”
 
i glanced over the backs of the books and found greek, latin, hebrew
 titles, as far as i could see by the feeble light of the lamp on the
 table. my acquaintance, meanwhile, had taken up position on the floor
 in the dark by the wall.
 
“come here,” called after while, “we will practice little
 philosophy. that means keeping one’s mouth shut, lying on one’s stomach
 and thinking.”
 
struck match and applied it to the paper and wood in the
 fireplace, in front of which was lying. the flame leapt up; poked
 and blew the fire with great skill. i lay down near him on the ragged
 carpet. stared into the flames, which drew my attention as well, and
 we lay silent for perhaps whole hour stretched out in front of the
 flaring wood fire. we watched it flame and roar, die down and flicker
 up again, until finally it settled down into subdued glow.
 
“fire worship was not by any means the silliest form of worship
 invented,” murmured without looking up. those were the only words
 spoken. with staring eyes i gazed into the fire. lulled by the
 tranquillity of the room, i sank in dreams, seeing shapes in the smoke
 and pictures in the ashes. once i started up. my companion had thrown
 little bit of resin into the glow. little slender flame shot up,
 i saw in it the bird with the gold hawk’s head. in the glow which
 died away in the fireplace, golden glittering threads wove themselves
 together into net, letters and pictures, memories of faces, of
 animals, of plants, of worms and serpents. when i woke from my reveries
 and looked across at my companion, was absorbed, staring at the
 ashes with the fixed gaze of fanatic, his chin in his hands.
 
“i must go now,” i said softly.
 
“well, go then, good-bye!”
 
did not get up, and as the lamp had gone out, i had to feel my way
 across the dark room, through dark corridors and down the stairs, and
 so out of the enchanted old dwelling. once in the street i stopped and
 looked up at the house. in not one of the windows was light burning.
 little brass-plate shone in the gleam of the gas-lamp before the door.
 
“pistorius, vicar,” i read thereon. as i sat in my little room after
 supper i remembered that i had learnt nothing about abraxas, or
 anything else from pistorius. we had scarcely exchanged ten words.
 but i was quite contented with the visit i had paid him. and had
 promised to play next time an exquisite piece of organ music, a
 passacaglia by buxtehude.
 
without my having realized it, the organist pistorius had given a
 first lesson, as we lay on the floor in front of the fireplace of his
 melancholy hermit’s room. staring into the fire had done good, it
 had confirmed and set in activity tendencies which i had always had,
 but had never really followed. gradually and in part i saw light on the
 subject.
 
when quite child i had from time to time the propensity to watch
 bizarre forms of nature, not observing them closely, but simply
 surrendering myself to their peculiar magic, absorbed by the
 contemplation of their curling shapes. long dignified tree-roots,
 colored veins in stone, flecks of oil floating on water, flaws in
 glass--all things of similar nature had had great charm for me
 at that time, above all, water and fire, smoke, clouds, dust, and
 especially the little circulating colored specks which i saw when i
 closed my eyes. in the days following my first visit to pistorius this
 began to come back to me. i noticed that i was indebted solely to
 staring into the open fire for certain strength and pleasure, for
 the increase in my depth of feeling which i had felt since. it was
 curiously beneficial and enriching--dreaming and staring into the fire!
 
to the few experiences i had gained on the road to the attainment of my
 proper ends in life was added this new one: the contemplation of such
 shapes, the surrendering of oneself to these irrational, twisting, odd
 forms of nature, engenders in us feeling of the harmony of our inner
 being with the will which brought forth these shapes; we soon feel the
 temptation to look upon them as our own creations, as if made by our
 own moods; we see the boundary between ourselves and nature waver and
 vanish; we learn to know the state of mind by outside impressions, or
 by inward. in way so simply and so easily as by this practice do we
 discover to what great extent we are creators, to what great extent
 our souls have part in the continual creation of the world. or rather,
 it is the same indivisible godhead, which is active in us and in
 nature. if the outside world fell in ruins, one of us would be capable
 of building it up again, for mountain and stream, tree and leaf, root
 and blossom, all that is shaped by nature lies modeled in us, comes
 from the soul, whose essence is eternity, of whose essence we are
 ignorant, but which is revealed to us for the most part as love-force
 and creative power.
 
many years later i found this observation confirmed in book, one of
 leonardo da vinci’s, who in one passage remarks how good and deeply
 moving it is to look at wall on which many people have spat. felt
 the same sensation before those spots on the wet wall as pistorius and
 i before the fire.
 
at our next meeting the organist enlightened still further on the
 subject.
 
“we confine our personality within much too narrow bounds. we count as
 composing our person only that which distinguishes us as individuals,
 only that which we recognize as irregular. but we are made up from
 the entire world stock, each one of us, and just as in our body is
 displayed the genealogical table of development back to the fish
 stage and still further, so we have accumulated in our souls all the
 experiences through which human soul has ever lived. all the gods and
 devils which have ever been, whether those of the greeks or chinese
 or zulus, all are in us, are there as potentialities, as desires,
 as starting points. if all mankind died out, with the exception of
 single moderately gifted child, who had not enjoyed the slightest
 instruction, so would this child rediscover the whole process of
 things; it would be able to produce gods, demons, paradises, the
 commandments and prohibitions, old and new testaments--everything.”
 
“well and good,” i objected; “but then what does the worth of the
 individual consist of? why do we continue to strive if everything has
 already been achieved in us?”
 
“stop!” exclaimed pistorius vehemently. “there is great difference
 between whether one merely carries the world in oneself, or whether one
 is conscious of that as well. madman can have ideas which remind one
 of plato, and pious little boy in moravian boarding school will
 recreate in his thought profound mythological ideas which occur in the
 gnostics or in zoroaster. but does not realize it! is tree or
 stone, at best an animal, as long as does not know it. but, when
 the first spark of this knowledge glimmers in him becomes man. you
 will not consider all the two-legged creatures who walk out there in
 the street as human beings, simply because they walk erect and carry
 their young nine months in the womb? look how many of them are fish or
 sheep, worms or leeches, how many are ants or bees. well, in reach of
 them are the possibilities of becoming human creatures, but only when
 they feel this, it is only when, if even in part, they learn to make
 them conscious, that these potentialities become theirs.”
 
our conversations were somewhat after this style. they seldom taught
 anything completely new, anything absolutely surprising. but all,
 even the most banal, hit like light persistent hammer-stroke on the
 same point in me, all helped in my development, all helped to peel
 off skins, to break up eggshells, and after each talk i held my head
 somewhat higher, i was more sure of myself until my yellow bird pushed
 his beautiful bird-of-prey crest through the ruins of the world-shell.
 
we frequently related our dreams to one another. pistorius knew how
 to interpret them. curious example comes to my mind. i dreamed i
 was able to fly. i was flung through the air, so to speak--impelled
 by great force over which i had not the mastery. the sensation of
 this flight was exhilarating, but soon changed to fear as i saw myself
 snatched up involuntarily to risky heights. there i made the saving
 discovery that i could control my rise and fall by arresting my breath
 and by breathing again.
 
pistorius interpreted it as follows: “the swing, which sent you
 up into the air, is the great property of mankind, which everyone
 possesses. it is the feeling of close relationship with the springs
 of every force, but it soon causes anxiety. it is cursedly dangerous!
 for that reason most people willingly renounce flying, preferring to
 walk according to prescribed laws along the footpath. but not you. you
 fly higher, as befits an intelligent fellow. and behold, you make a
 wonderful discovery there, namely, you gradually get the mastery over
 the impelling force. in other words, you acquire fine little force of
 your own, an instrument, rudder. that is splendid. without that one
 goes floating into the air without any will of one’s own; madmen, for
 instance, do that. they have deeper presentiments than the people on
 the footpath. but they have key and rudder, they fall whistling
 through the air, down into the fathomless depths. but you, sinclair,
 you manage all right! and how, pray? you probably don’t even know.
 you manage with new instrument, with breath regulator. and now
 you can see, that your soul isn’t really ‘personal’ at bottom. i mean
 that you didn’t invent this regulator. it isn’t new. it is loan, it
 has existed for thousands of years. it is the balancing organ fish
 have--the air-bladder. even to-day we actually still have few very
 rare kinds of fish whose air-bladder is at the same time sort of
 lung; and on occasion can use it to breathe with. in your dream you
 made use of your lungs in exactly the same way as these fish do their
 air-bladder.”
 
even brought volume on zoölogy, and showed the original
 drawings of these ancient fish. and with peculiar thrill i felt an
 organ of early evolutionary epochs functioning in me.
 



chapter six
 
jacob wrestles with god
 

i cannot relate in brief all that i learned from the singular musician
 pistorius about abraxas. the most important result of his teaching was
 that i made further step forward on the road to self-realization. i
 was then about eighteen years old. i was young man rather out of the
 ordinary, precocious in hundred things, in hundred other things
 backward and helpless. when from time to time i used to compare myself
 with others, i was often proud and conceited, but just as frequently
 i felt depressed and humiliated. i had often looked upon myself as a
 genius, often as half mad. i could not share the pleasures and life of
 the fellows of my age, and often i heaped reproaches on myself and was
 consumed with cares, thinking i was hopelessly cut off from them, and
 that life was closed to me.
 
pistorius, himself full-grown and an eccentric, taught to preserve
 my courage and my self-esteem. in constantly finding some value in my
 words, in my dreams, in the play of my imagination and in my ideas, in
 taking them seriously and discussing them, set an example.
 
“you have told me,” said, “that you like music because it is not
 moral. well, all right. but you should be moralist yourself! you
 should not compare yourself with others. if nature had created you to
 be bat, you ought not to want to make yourself into an ostrich. you
 often consider yourself as singular, you reproach yourself with going
 ways different from most people. you must get out of that habit. look
 in the fire, look at the clouds, and as soon as you have presentiments,
 and the voices of your soul begin to speak, yield to them and don’t
 first ask what the opinion of your master or your father would be, or
 whether they would be pleasing to some god or other. one spoils oneself
 that way. in doing that one treads the common road, becomes fossil.
 sinclair, my dear fellow, the name of our god is abraxas. is god
 and is satan; has the light and the dark world in him. abraxas
 has objection to urge against any of your ideas or against any of
 your dreams. never forget that. but deserts you if you ever become
 blameless and normal. deserts you and seeks out another pot in order
 to cook his ideas therein.”
 
of all my dreams, that dark love-dream recurred most frequently. often,
 often have i dreamed of it; often i stepped under the crest with the
 bird on it into our house, and wished to draw my mother to me, but
 instead of her i found i was embracing the tall, manly, half-motherly
 woman, of whom i was afraid, and yet to whom i was drawn by most
 ardent desire. and i could never relate this dream to my friend. i kept
 it back, although i had opened my heart to him on everything else. it
 was my secret, my retreat, my refuge.
 
when i was depressed, i used to beg pistorius to play the
 passacaglia of old buxtehude. i sat in the dark church in the evening,
 engrossed in this singularly intimate music, which seemed to be
 hearkening to itself, as if entirely self-absorbed. each time it did me
 good and made more ready to follow the promptings of my inward self.
 
sometimes we stayed awhile in the church after the strains of the organ
 had died away. we sat and watched the feeble light shine through the
 high lancet window; the light seemed to lose itself in the body of the
 church.
 
“it sounds funny,” said pistorius, “that i once did theology and almost
 became parson. but it was only an error in form that i committed.
 to be priest, that is my vocation and my aim. only i was too easily
 satisfied, and gave myself to the service of jehovah before ever i knew
 abraxas. ah, every religion is beautiful! religion is soul. it is all
 one whether you take communion as christian or whether you make a
 pilgrimage to mecca.”
 
“then really you might have been clergyman,” i suggested.
 
“no, sinclair, no. i should have had to have lied in that case. our
 religion is so practised, as if it were none. it is carried on as if it
 were work of the understanding. catholic i could well be, if need
 were, but protestant clergyman--no! there are two kinds of genuine
 believers--i know such--who hold gladly to the literal interpretation.
 i could not say to them that for christ was not mere person, but a
 hero, myth, wonderful shadow-picture, in which mankind sees itself
 painted on the wall of eternity. and what should i find to say to the
 other sort, those who go to church to hear wise words, to fulfill a
 duty, in order to leave nothing undone, etc.? convert them, you think,
 perhaps? but that is not at all my idea. the priest does not wish to
 convert. only wants to live among the believers, among those of his
 own kind, so that through him they may find expression for that feeling
 out of which we make our gods.”
 
broke off. then continued: “our new faith, for which we have now
 chosen the name of abraxas, is beautiful, my friend. it is the best we
 have. but it is still nestling. its wings have not yet grown. alas, a
 lonely religion, that is not yet the true one. it must become an affair
 of many, it must have cult and orgy, feasts and mysteries....”
 
was sunk in reflection.
 
“can one not celebrate mysteries alone, or in very small circle?” i
 asked hesitatingly.
 
“yes, one can,” nodded. “i have been celebrating them for long
 time past. i have celebrated cults for which i should have been
 imprisoned for years in convict station, if they had been found out.
 but i know it is not the right thing.”
 
suddenly clapped on the shoulder, making jump. “young friend,”
 said impressively, “you also have mysteries. i know that you must
 have dreams of which you make mention to me. i don’t wish to know
 them. but i tell you: live them, these dreams, play your destined
 part, build altars to them! it is not yet the perfect religion, but
 it is way. whether you and i and few other people will one day
 renew the world remains to be seen. but we must renew it daily within
 us, otherwise we are of account. think over it! you are eighteen,
 sinclair, you don’t go with loose women, you must have love-dreams,
 desires. perhaps they are such that you are frightened by them! they
 are the best you have! believe me! i have lost great deal by doing
 violence to these love-dreams when i was your age. one should not do
 that. when one knows of abraxas, one should do that more. we should
 fear nothing. we should hold nothing forbidden which the soul in us
 desires.”
 
frightened, i objected: “but you can’t do everything which comes into
 your mind! you can’t murder man because you can’t tolerate him.”
 
pressed closer to me.
 
“there are cases where you can. only, generally it’s mistake. i don’t
 mean that you can simply do everything which comes into your mind. no,
 but you shouldn’t do injury to those ideas in which there is sense, you
 shouldn’t banish them from your mind or moralize about them. instead of
 getting oneself crucified or crucifying others, one can solemnly drink
 wine out of cup, thinking the while on the mystery of sacrifice. one
 can, without such actions, treat one’s impulses and one’s so-called
 temptations with esteem and love. then you discover their meaning, and
 they all have meaning. next time the idea takes you to do something
 really mad and sinful, sinclair, if you would like to murder someone
 or to do something dreadfully obscene, then think moment, that it is
 abraxas who is indulging in play of fancy. the man you would like to
 kill is never really mr. so and so, that is really only disguise.
 when we hate man, we hate in him something which resides in us
 ourselves. what is not in us does not move us.”
 
never had pistorius said anything to which went home so deeply as
 this. i could not reply. but what moved most singularly and most
 powerfully was that pistorius in this conversation had struck the same
 note as demian, whose words i had carried in my mind for years and
 years past. they knew nothing of one another, and both said to the
 same thing.
 
“the things we see,” said pistorius softly, “are the same things which
 are in us. there is reality except that which we have in ourselves.
 for that reason most people live so unreally, because they hold the
 impressions of the outside world for real, and their own world in
 themselves never enters into their consideration. you can be happy like
 that. but if once you know of the other, then you longer have the
 choice to go the way most people go. sinclair, the road for most people
 is easy, ours is hard. let us go.”
 
few days later, after i had on two occasions waited for him in vain,
 i met him late one evening in the street. came stumbling round a
 corner, blown along by the cold night wind. was very drunk. i did
 not like to call him. passed by without noticing me, staring in
 front of him with strange, glowing eyes, as though were moving in
 obedience to dark call from the unknown. i followed him down one
 street. drifted along as if drawn by an invisible wire, with the
 swaying gait of fanatic, or like ghost. sadly i went home, to the
 unsolved problems of my dreams.
 
“thus renews the world in himself!” i thought, and felt instantly
 that my thought was base and moral. what did i know of his dreams?
 perhaps in his intoxication was going surer way than in my anxiety.
 
* * * * *
 
in the intervals between lessons it struck once or twice that a
 boy who had never before attracted my notice was hovering about in
 my proximity. it was little, weak-looking, slim youngster with
 reddish-blond thin hair, who had something peculiar in his look and
 behavior. one evening as i came home was on the watch for in the
 street. let pass by, then walked behind me; and remained standing
 in front of the door of the house.
 
“can i do anything for you?” i asked.
 
“i only want to speak to you,” said timidly. “be good enough to come
 few steps with me.”
 
i followed him, observing that was deeply excited and full of
 expectation. his hands trembled.
 
“are you spiritualist?” asked quite suddenly.
 
“no, knauer,” i said, laughing. “not bit. how did you get hold of
 that idea?”
 
“but you are theosophist?”
 
“no again.”
 
“oh, please don’t be so reserved. i feel with absolute certitude there
 is something singular about you. it is in your eyes. i thought it
 certain you communed with spirits. i am not asking out of curiosity,
 sinclair, no! i am myself seeker, you know, and i am so lonely.”
 
“tell me, then!” i encouraged him. “i know absolutely nothing of
 ghosts. i live in my dreams: that is what you have felt about me.
 other people live in dreams as well, but not in their own, that is the
 difference.”
 
“yes, perhaps so,” whispered. “only it depends on the sort of dreams
 you live in. have you ever heard of white magic?”
 
i had to admit my ignorance.
 
“it’s when you learn to get the mastery over yourself. you can be
 immortal, and have magical powers as well. have you never practised
 such experiments?”
 
on my evincing curiosity with regard to those practices, was
 mysteriously silent, but when i turned to go burst out in
 explanation.
 
“for example, when i go to sleep or when i wish to concentrate my
 thoughts i do such exercises. i think of something or other, word
 for instance, or name, or geometrical figure. then i think it into
 myself, as strongly as i can. i try to get it into my head, until i
 feel it is there. then i think it in my neck, and so on, until i am
 quite full of it. then my thoughts are concentrated and nothing more
 can disturb my repose.”
 
i understood to certain degree what meant. yet i felt had
 something else in his mind, was oddly excited and hasty. i tried to
 make the questions easy for him, and soon gave an indication of
 what immediately concerned him.
 
“you are also continent?” asked anxiously.
 
“what do you mean by that? do you mean it from the sex point of view?”
 
“yes, yes. i have been continent for two years, since i knew of what i
 have told you. before that i practised vice, you know what. you have
 never been with woman, then?”
 
“no,” i said. “i haven’t found the right one.”
 
“but if you should find her, the one you consider the right one, then
 would you sleep with her?”
 
“yes, naturally. if she had nothing against it,” i said with some scorn.
 
“oh, then you are on false track! one can only perfect one’s inner
 forces if one remains entirely continent. i have done it, for two whole
 years. two years and little more than month! it’s so hard. often i
 can scarcely hold out any longer.”
 
“listen, knauer, i don’t believe that continency is so terribly
 important.”
 
“i know,” parried, “they all say that. but i did not expect to hear
 it from you. whoever will go the higher spiritual way must remain pure,
 unconditionally!”
 
“well, then, do so! but i don’t understand why one man should be purer
 than another, because represses his sex instincts. or can you switch
 off all sexual matters from your thoughts and dreams?”
 
looked despairingly at me.
 
“no, that’s just it. god! and yet it must be. at night i have dreams
 which i couldn’t relate even to myself. terrible dreams, terrible!”
 
i recollected what pistorius had said to me. but however much i felt
 his words to be right i could not pass them on. i could not give advice
 which did not result from my own experience, advice the observance
 of which i did not yet feel myself equal to. i was silent and felt
 humiliated that someone should come to for counsel when i had none
 to give.
 
“i have tried everything!” wailed knauer beside me. “i have done all
 that man can do, with cold water, with snow, with gymnastic exercises
 and running, but all that doesn’t help bit. each night i wake up out
 of dreams on which i dare not think. and most dreadful of all, i am by
 degrees losing everything that i had gained spiritually. it is almost
 impossible for any longer to concentrate my thoughts or to lull
 myself to sleep. often i lie awake the whole night through. i shall
 not be able to bear that much longer. finally, when i can carry on the
 struggle further, when i give in and make myself impure again, then
 i shall be worse than all the others who have never struggled against
 it. you understand that, don’t you?”
 
i nodded, but could say nothing to the point. began to bore me, and
 i was horrified at myself, because his obvious need and despair made
 deep impression on me. my only sentiment was: i can’t help you.
 
“then you know nothing that would help me?” asked at last, exhausted
 and sad. “nothing at all? there must be some way! how do you manage?”
 
“i cannot tell you anything, knauer. people can’t help one another in
 this case. one has helped me, either. you must think of something
 yourself, and you must obey the prompting which really comes from your
 own nature. there is nothing else. if you cannot find yourself, you
 won’t find any spirits, either.”
 
disappointed, and suddenly become dumb, the little fellow looked at me.
 then his look suddenly glowed with hate, made grimace at and
 cried with rage: “ah, you’re nice sort of saint! you have your vice
 as well, i know! you pretend to wisdom, and secretly you stick in the
 same filth as i and all of us! you’re swine, swine, like myself. we are
 all swine!”
 
i went away and left him standing there. made two, three steps in my
 direction, then stopped, turned round and ran away. i felt sick from
 feeling of pity and horror. i could not get rid of the feeling until
 i got home to my little room, and placing my few pictures before me, i
 surrendered myself up with passionate fervor to my dreams. my dreams
 came back at once, the dream of front door and crest, of mother and the
 strange woman, and i saw the features of the woman so very clearly
 that i began to draw her picture the same evening.
 
in few days this drawing was finished, painted in as if unconsciously
 in dreamy quarter-of-an-hour periods. in the evening i hung it on
 the wall, put the reading lamp in front of it, and stood before it
 as before spirit with whom i had to fight until victory should be
 decided one way or the other. it was face similar to the former,
 resembling my friend demian, in certain traits even resembling myself.
 one eye stood perceptibly higher than the other, the look passed over
 me, sunk in staring gaze, full of destiny.
 
i stood before it. such was my inward exertion that i became cold to
 the marrow. i questioned the picture, i abused it, i caressed it,
 i prayed to it. i called it mother, i called it beloved, called it
 strumpet and whore, called it abraxas. meanwhile words of pistorius
 crossed my mind, or of demian? i could not recollect on what occasion
 they had been spoken, but i thought i heard them again. they were the
 words of jacob wrestling with the angel of god. “i will not let thee
 go, except thou bless me.”
 
the painted face in the lamplight changed at each appeal. it was bright
 and shining, was black and gloomy; it closed pale lids over dead eyes,
 opened them again and flashed burning look. it was woman, man, girl,
 was little child, an animal, vanished to speck, was again tall and
 clear. at last, in response to strong inward prompting, i closed my
 eyes, and saw the picture inwardly in me, stronger and more powerful.
 i wished to kneel down before it, but it was so much within me, that i
 could separate it from myself more; it seemed as if it had entirely
 identified itself with me.
 
then i heard loud confused roar as of spring storm. i trembled
 in an indescribably new feeling of fear and excitement. stars darted
 before and died out, recollections even of the first forgotten years
 of my childhood, of time further back still, of pre-existence
 and the early stages of existence, pressed through me. but the
 recollections which seemed to piece together my life’s whole history
 even to its most secret details did not cease with yesterday and
 to-day, they went farther, mirrored the future, tearing away from
 to-day, changing into new forms of life, of which the pictures were
 very bright and blinding. but of none of them could i call up just
 image later.
 
in the night i woke up out of deep sleep. i was dressed and lying
 transversely across the bed. i struck light, feeling that i must try
 to remember something important that had happened. i knew nothing of
 the hours just passed. i turned on the light, and recollection came
 back gradually. i looked for the picture. it was not hanging on the
 wall, neither was it lying on the table. i thought confusedly that i
 must have burned it. or was it dream, that i had burned it in my
 hands and had eaten the ashes?
 
great inquietude convulsed and drove forth. i put on my hat,
 went out of the house and down the street, as if under coercion.
 i walked and walked through streets and squares as if blown along
 by storm, i listened in front of the gloomy church of my friend,
 searched in obedience to blind impulse, without knowing what i was
 looking for. i went through suburb, where brothels stood. here and
 there light was still shining. further on stood new buildings and
 brick heaps, covered in part with grey snow. i went on through this
 wilderness, driven forward by strange impulse, like man walking in
 dream. the thought of the new building in my native town crossed my
 mind, that building to which my tormentor kromer had drawn to settle
 accounts with him. in the grey night similar building stood there in
 front of me, its black doorway yawning wide. i was drawn towards it,
 but wanted to shun it and stumbled over sand and rubbish. the impulse
 was stronger than i, i had to go in.
 
i staggered over planks and broken bricks into the deserted room. there
 was mouldy smell of damp, cold stones. heap of sand lay there, a
 grey bright speck, otherwise all else was dark.
 
suddenly terrified voice called to me: “in god’s name, sinclair,
 where have you come from?”
 
and human figure rose out of the darkness close to me, little thin
 shape like ghost. i recognized, while yet my hair was standing on
 end, my school companion knauer.
 
“how did you get here?” asked, as if mad with excitement. “how have
 you been able to find me?”
 
i did not understand.
 
“i wasn’t looking for you,” i said, dazed. i spoke with difficulty, the
 words came from painfully, as if from dead, heavy, frozen lips.
 
“you weren’t looking for me?”
 
“no. i was drawn here. did you call me? you must have called. but what
 are you doing here? it’s still night.”
 
put his thin arms convulsively round me.
 
“yes, night. but it must soon be morning. oh, sinclair, to think that
 you didn’t forget me! can you ever forgive me?”
 
“what then?”
 
“ah, i was so hateful!”
 
then i recollected our conversation. had that taken place four, five
 days ago? it seemed to like lifetime. but suddenly i knew all. not
 only what had occurred between us, but also why i had come and what
 knauer wanted to do there.
 
“you wanted, then, to take your life, knauer?”
 
shuddered through cold and fear.
 
“yes, i wanted to. i don’t know whether i could have. i wished to wait
 until the morning came.”
 
i drew him into the open. the first oblique rays of day glimmered
 indescribably cold through the grey atmosphere.
 
i led the boy on my arm little way. i heard my own voice saying: “now
 go home, and don’t say anything to anybody. you were on false track,
 false track! and we are not swine, as you think. we are men. we make
 gods, and we wrestle with them, and they bless us.”
 
silently we went on, and separated. when i came home it was day.
 
the best that mystery in st. ---- had yet to give was the hours with
 pistorius at the organ or by the chimney fire. we read greek text
 about abraxas together. read to portions of translation of the
 veda and taught to say the sacred “om.” however, it was not this
 learned instruction which was of service to my inner self, but rather
 the contrary. what did good was the self-progression i made, the
 increasing confidence in my own dreams, thoughts and presentiments, and
 the consciousness of the power that i carried in me.
 
i had an excellent understanding with pistorius in every way. i needed
 only to think intently of him, and i could be sure that he, or a
 greeting from him, would come to me. i could ask him, just as i could
 demian, something or other, without his being there in person. i
 needed only to imagine his presence and to put my questions to him as
 intensive thoughts. then all the soul-force i had put into the question
 came back to as answer. only it was not the person of pistorius
 which i called up in my imagination; nor that of max demian, but it
 was the picture i had painted and of which i had dreamed. it was the
 half-man, half-woman, dream picture of my dæmon, to which i called. it
 lived now not only in my dreams, it was longer painted on paper, but
 it was in me, as desire-picture and an enhancement of my spiritual
 self.
 
the relation into which the unsuccessful suicide knauer entered with
 was peculiar and sometimes amusing. since the night i had been sent
 to him, dogged my steps like faithful servant or hound, sought
 to attach himself to and followed blindly. came to with
 curious questions and wishes. wanted to see spirits, to learn the
 cabbala, and did not believe when i assured him i understood
 nothing of all these things. credited with being able to do
 anything. but it was singular that often came to with his queer
 and silly questions just at the moment when i myself had mental knot
 to be disentangled. his moody ideas and concerns often gave the cue,
 the impulse which helped in the solution of my own problems. was
 often tiresome and i imperiously drove him away. i felt, however,
 that had been sent to me, and what i gave to him, i received
 twofold in return. also was guide, or rather way. the mad books
 and publications brought me, and in which sought the key to
 happiness, taught more than i realized at the time.
 
this knauer vanished later from my path, neither did i miss him. no
 arrangement, understanding was necessary with him. but it was with
 pistorius. towards the close of my school career in st. ---- i lived
 through another peculiar experience with my friend.
 
even innocuous, innocent people are not altogether spared the shock
 of conflict. even they come once in their lives in conflict with
 the beautiful virtues of piety and gratitude. each must make the step
 which parts him from his father, from his teachers. each must once feel
 something of the bitterness of loneliness, though most people cannot
 support it for long and soon creep back to their homes again. it was
 not great struggle for to part from my parents and their world,
 the “bright” world of my beautiful childhood. but slowly and almost
 imperceptibly i had got further from them and become more of stranger
 to them. i regretted it; it often caused bitter hours during my
 visits home; but it was not deep. i could bear it.
 
but when we have offered love and reverence of our own accord, and
 not out of habit, when we have been disciples and friends with our
 innermost feelings--then it is bitter and terrible moment when the
 realization is suddenly brought home to us that the guiding current of
 our life is bearing us away from those we love. then every thought of
 ours which rejects our friend and teacher enters our own heart like a
 poisoned sting, every blow of self-defense strikes back into our own
 face. then who felt that the dictates of his own conscience were an
 authentic guide reproaches himself with the terms “faithlessness” and
 “ingratitude.” then the terrified heart flees anxiously back to the
 valleys of childhood virtues, and cannot believe that the rupture must
 take place, that another bond must be severed.
 
in the course of time feeling had slowly developed in which
 refused to recognize my friend pistorius unconditionally as my guide.
 what i experienced in the most important moments of my youth was my
 friendship with him, his counsel, his consolation, his proximity.
 god had spoken to through him. through him my dreams returned to
 me, from his mouth came their explanation, from him i learned their
 significance. had given the courage to realize myself. and now,
 alas, i felt growing opposition against him. in his conversation he
 evinced too clearly desire to instruct me. i felt it was only one
 side of my nature that thoroughly understood.
 
there was quarrel, scene between us, rupture. i said to him
 only single, really harmless word, but nevertheless it was the
 moment when an illusion between us fell in colored pieces.
 
the presentiment had for some time already oppressed me, but one sunday
 in his scholarly old room this presentiment changed to definite
 feeling. we were lying on the floor before the fire. was speaking
 of mysteries and religious forms which was studying, and on which
 was meditating. occupied himself with trying to picture their
 possible future. to all this seemed curious and interesting, but
 scarcely of vital importance. it smacked of erudition. it was like a
 fatiguing search among the ruins of former worlds. and all at once i
 felt an aversion from the whole business, from this cult of mythology,
 from this sort of piecing together, this mosaic work of religious forms
 which had been handed down to posterity.
 
“pistorius,” i said suddenly, in malicious outburst which surprised
 and frightened even myself, “relate dream, real dream, one that you
 have had in the night. what you have just been talking about is so--so
 cursedly antiquarian!”
 
had never heard speak thus. with shame and terror i realized
 the very same moment that the arrow i had shot at him, and which had
 entered his heart, was taken from his own quiver--i realized that i had
 heard him reproach himself in an ironical tone on this very account,
 and that now i had maliciously turned one of his own reproaches
 against him like resharpened arrow.
 
felt it instantly, and was silent. i looked at him with terror in my
 heart and saw that had become very pale.
 
after long, heavy pause put some wood on the fire and said
 quietly: “you are quite right, sinclair. you’re wise fellow. i will
 spare you all this antiquarian business.”
 
spoke very quietly, but his tone told how deeply had been
 wounded. what had i done!
 
i was on the point of tears. i wanted to beg his pardon with all my
 heart, to assure him of my affection and gratitude. moving words came
 into my mind--but i could not utter them. was silent as well, and so
 we lay there, while the flames leaped up and then sank, and with each
 flame that paled fell something beautiful and fervid that ceased to
 glow and had vanished--never again to come back.
 
“i fear you have misunderstood me,” i said at last, much crushed,
 and with dry, hoarse voice. the silly, senseless words came as if
 mechanically from my lips, as if i had been reading them out of news
 sheet.
 
“i understood you perfectly,” said pistorius softly. “you are quite
 right.” we waited. then continued slowly: “so far as one man can be
 right in his judgment of another.”
 
no, no, voice inside said, i am wrong; but i could not say
 anything. i knew that i had aimed my single little word at his one
 essential weakness. i had touched the point of which himself
 was distrustful. his idea was “antiquarian.” was seeker, but
 retrogressive, was romantic. and suddenly i realized that it was
 just what had been to and had given that could not be and
 give to himself. had guided to point on the road, beyond which
 he, the guide, could not go.
 
god knows how i could have uttered such word! i had not meant it
 badly. i had had idea it would lead to catastrophe. i had uttered
 something, the import of which i did not myself realize at the moment
 of utterance. i had surrendered myself to somewhat witty, somewhat
 malicious inspiration, and fate used it as her instrument. i had been
 guilty of little thoughtlessness, crudeness, and had accepted it
 as judgment.
 
oh, how much i wished then that would have got angry, have defended
 himself, have shouted at me! but did nothing. i had all that to do
 within myself. would have smiled, had been able. the fact that he
 could not, showed more than anything else how hard i had hit him.
 
and because pistorius took the blow from me, his presumptuous and
 ungrateful pupil, so quietly, because silently agreed with me,
 because recognized my word as judgment of fate, caused to
 hate myself, made my thoughtlessness seem thousand times greater
 than it was. as i struck, i had thought to hit strong man, capable of
 defending himself--now was meek, suffering creature, defenseless,
 who surrendered in silence.
 
we remained long time lying before the dying fire, in which each
 glowing figure, each crumbling ash heap called to my memory happy,
 beautiful, rich hours, making my guilt and my obligation to pistorius
 greater and greater. finally i could bear it longer. i got up and
 went. long time i stood before his door, long time i listened on
 the dark staircase, long time i stood outside in front of the house,
 waiting to see whether perhaps would come out to me. then i went on,
 walking for hours and hours through town and suburbs, park and wood,
 until evening fell. at that moment i felt for the first time the mark
 of cain on my forehead.
 
i fell to pondering and rumination. i had every intention, in thinking
 matters over, to accuse myself and to defend pistorius. but all ended
 to the contrary. thousand times i was ready to repent of my rash word
 and to withdraw it--but it had been true, nevertheless. now i succeeded
 in understanding pistorius, in building up his whole dream. this dream
 had been to be priest, to proclaim new religion, to invent new
 forms of exultation, of love, of worship, to set up new symbols. but
 this was not within his province. lingered too long in the past, he
 knew too much of what had been, knew too much of egypt, of india,
 of mithras, of abraxas. his love was attached to ideas with which
 the world was already familiar. and in his inmost self probably
 recognized that the new religion had to be different, that it had to
 spring from fresh sources and not be drawn out of collections and
 libraries. his office was, perhaps, to help men to find themselves, as
 had done with me. but to found new doctrine, to give new gods to
 the world, was not his function in life.
 
and at this point the realization came upon that everyone has an
 “office,” charge. but to one is it permitted to choose his office
 for himself, and to discharge it as likes. it was wrong to want new
 gods, it was entirely wrong to wish to give the world anything. man
 has absolutely other duty than this: to seek himself, to grope his
 own way forward, matter whither it leads. that thought impressed
 itself deeply on me; that was the fruit of this new event for me.
 often had i pictured the future. i had dreamed of filling rôles which
 might be destined for me, as poet perhaps or as prophet, as painter,
 or some such rôle. all that was of account. i was not here to
 write, to preach, to paint, neither i nor anyone else was here for
 that purpose. all that was secondary. the true vocation for everyone
 was only to attain to self-realization. might end as poet or as
 madman, as prophet or as criminal--that was not his affair, that was
 of consequence in the long run. his business was to work out his
 own destiny, not any destiny, but his own, to live for that, entirely
 and uninterruptedly. everything else was merely an attempt to shun his
 fate, to fly back to the ideals of the masses, to adapt himself to
 circumstances. it was fear of his own inner being. there rose before
 this new picture, terrible and sacred, suggested to hundred
 times ere this, perhaps often already expressed, but now for the first
 time lived. i was throw from nature’s dice box, projection into the
 unknown, perhaps into something new, perhaps into the void, and my sole
 vocation was to let this throw-up from primeval depths work itself out
 in me, to feel its will in and to make it mine. that solely!
 
i had already known what it was to be very lonely. now i felt i could
 be lonelier still, and that i could not escape from it.
 
i made attempt to reconcile myself with pistorius. we remained
 friends, but our relation towards one another had changed. only one
 single time did we mention it, or rather, it was only who spoke of
 the matter. said: “i want to be priest, you know that. i would
 best of all like to be the priest of the religion of which we have
 so many presentiments. i can never be that, i know. i have known it
 already for some time, without fully admitting it. i will do some
 other priestly service, perhaps at the organ, perhaps in another way.
 but i must always be surrounded by something which i find beautiful
 and sacred, organ music and mysteries, symbol and myth, i need that
 and cannot persuade myself to leave it--that is my weakness. i often
 realize, sinclair, that i should not have such desires, that they are
 luxury and weakness. it would be greater, it would be more right,
 if i placed myself quite simply at the disposition of fate, without
 pretensions. that is the sole thing i cannot do. perhaps you will some
 time be able to do it. it is hard, it is the only thing really hard
 there is, my friend. i have often dreamed of it, but i cannot do it,
 i tremble at the thought of it. i cannot stand so completely naked
 and alone. i am poor, weak hound, who needs little warmth and
 food, who occasionally likes to feel the proximity of his own kind.
 whose only desire it is to work out his own destiny has kith or
 kin, but stands alone and has only the cold world space around him.
 do you know, that is jesus in the garden of gethsemane? there have
 been martyrs who willingly let themselves be nailed to the cross, but
 even they were not heroes, they were not free, they also wished for
 something to which they had been accustomed, which they had loved; with
 which they had felt at home. they had examples or ideals. who will
 fulfill his destiny has neither examples nor ideals, has nothing
 dear to him, nothing to comfort him. and one really ought to go this
 way. people like you and i are certainly very lonely, but we still
 have each other, we have the secret satisfaction of being different,
 of revolting, of wanting the unusual. but we must drop that, too, if
 we would go the whole way. we must not wish to be revolutionaries, or
 examples, or martyrs. to think the thought to its logical end----”
 
no, one could not think beyond that. but one could dream of it, could
 sense it, could anticipate it. few times i realized something of
 this, in very quiet hour. then i looked straight into the open,
 staring eyes of my fate. they could have been full of wisdom, or full
 of madness, they could be full of love or full of wickedness, it
 was all one. one was to choose nothing of all that; one was to want
 nothing, one was only to want oneself, one’s destiny. in that way had
 pistorius served me, for time, as guide.
 
in those days i walked about as if i were blind, storms roared within
 me, every step meant danger. i was conscious of nothing but the
 precipitous darkness in front of me, down to which all the roads i
 had trodden hitherto seemed to lead. and in my inward self i saw the
 picture of the guide, who resembled demian, and in whose eyes stood my
 fate.
 
i wrote on sheet of paper: “a guide has left me. i stand in complete
 darkness. i cannot take step alone. help me!”
 
i wished to send that to demian. yet i omitted to do this, for each
 time i wished to do it, it seemed foolish and meaningless. but i
 knew that little prayer by heart, and often said it to myself. it
 accompanied hourly. i began to realize what prayer is.
 
* * * * *
 
my school career was over. my father had arranged that during the
 holidays i was to travel and then i was to go to the university. in
 which faculty, i knew not. i was to be allowed to take philosophy for
 one semester. i should have been equally content with anything else.
 



chapter seven
 
mother eve
 

in the holidays i went once to the house in which, years before, max
 demian and his mother had lived. an old lady was walking in the garden.
 i entered into conversation and learned that the house belonged to
 her. i enquired after the demians. she remembered them very well. but
 she did not know where they were living at that moment. as she felt
 my interest, she took into the house, searched through leather
 album and showed photograph of demian’s mother. i scarcely had any
 recollections of what she was like. but when i saw the little picture
 my heart stood still. it was my dream picture! there it was, the tall,
 almost masculine woman’s figure, resembling her son, with traits
 of motherliness, traits which denoted severity, and deep passion,
 beautiful and alluring, beautiful and unapproachable, demon and mother,
 destiny and mistress. that was she!
 
i was filled with wild wonder, when i learned that my dream picture
 lived on earth! there was woman, then, who looked like that, who
 bore my fate in her features! where was she? where? and she was
 demian’s mother!
 
i started on my travels soon after. strange journey! i went
 restlessly from place to place as impulse directed, always in search of
 this woman. there were days when i met shapes which reminded of her,
 and which resembled her. these shapes led on through the streets
 of strange towns, into railway stations, into trains, as in tangled
 dream. there were other days when i saw how useless my search was. then
 i sat inactive, anywhere, in park or the garden of hotel, in a
 waiting room; i looked into myself and tried to make the picture live
 in me. but it was now shy and elusive. i could not sleep, i only nodded
 for quarter of an hour or so on railway journeys through country
 unknown to me. once in zürich, woman followed me, pretty, rather
 forward woman. i scarcely noticed her and went on, as if she were air.
 i would rather have died at once, than have shown sympathy for another
 woman, even if only for an hour.
 
i felt that my destiny was leading on. i felt that fulfillment was
 nigh. i was mad with impatience, to think that i could do nothing to
 help myself. once at station, i think it was at innsbruck, i saw, at
 the window of train which was just moving out, form which reminded
 of her, and i was miserable for days. and suddenly the form appeared
 again to at night in dream. i woke up with feeling as of shame,
 realizing the fruitlessness and senselessness of my chase, and i went
 home by the most direct route.
 
couple of weeks later i matriculated in the university of h----.
 everything disappointed me. the course of lectures i followed, on the
 history of philosophy, was just as vain and mechanical as the common
 ground of student life. everything was so much according to pattern,
 one person did as the other, and the boyish faces, although inflamed
 with forced gaiety, looked so distressingly vacant. it was like the
 gloss of ready-made article! but i was free, i had the whole day to
 myself, and lived quietly in beautiful old building outside the town.
 i had couple of volumes of nietzsche on my table. i lived with him,
 feeling the loneliness of his soul, sensing his destiny, which impelled
 him onwards unceasingly. i suffered with him, and was happy that there
 had been one who had gone his way so inflexibly.
 
late one evening i wandered through the town; an autumn wind was
 blowing and i heard the student societies singing in their taverns.
 tobacco smoke rose in clouds through the open windows; songs were being
 roared out, loudly and tensely; but the noise did not soar up, it fell
 dully on the ear, and was lifelessly uniform.
 
i stood at street corner and listened. from two cafés the flood of
 song rolled forth into the night. everywhere community, everywhere
 this huddling together, everywhere this unloading of the burden of
 destiny, this flight into the warm proximity of the herd!
 
two men passed by slowly. i caught phrase of their conversation.
 
“isn’t it just like an assembly of youths in nigger village?” said
 one. “they all do the same things. even tattooing is in fashion. look,
 that’s the young europe.”
 
the voice rang suggestively in my ear. i followed behind the two in the
 dark street. one of them was japanese, small and elegant. i saw his
 yellow smiling face shine under the lamp.
 
the other spoke again.
 
“well, i don’t suppose it’s any better with you in japan. people who do
 not follow the herd are everywhere rare. there are few here, too.”
 
every word went through me. i felt pleasure and dread. i recognized the
 speaker. it was demian.
 
in the windy night i followed him and the japanese through the dark
 streets, listening to their conversation and enjoying the ring of
 demian’s voice. it had the old tone, the old, beautiful sureness and
 tranquillity, and it had the same power over me. now everything was
 right. i had found him.
 
at the end of street in the suburbs the japanese took leave and
 closed house door behind him. demian took the way back. i had
 remained standing, and awaited him in the middle of the street. with
 beating heart i saw him approaching erect and walking with an elastic
 step. wore brown raincoat and carried thin stick, hanging from
 his arm. advanced without altering his regular stride until got
 right up to me. took off his hat, displaying his old, bright face
 with the determined mouth and the peculiar brightness on the broad
 forehead.
 
“demian!” i called.
 
stretched out his hand to me.
 
“so it’s you, then, sinclair? i expected you.”
 
“did you know i was here?”
 
“i did not know for certain, but i hoped it might be true. i saw you
 first this evening. you have been behind us the whole time.”
 
“you recognized then at once?”
 
“of course. you’re very much changed to be sure; but you have the sign.
 we used to call it the mark of cain, if you recollect. it is our sign.
 you have always had it; for that reason i became your friend. but now
 it is clearer.”
 
“i did not know. or rather i did. i once painted picture of you,
 demian, and was astonished that it was also like me. was that the sign?”
 
“that was it. it’s fine that you are here now! my mother will be glad
 as well.”
 
i started.
 
“your mother? is she here? she doesn’t know bit.”
 
“oh, she knows of you. she will know, without even my asking her, who
 you are. you haven’t let hear from you for long time.”
 
“oh, i often wanted to write, but nothing came of it. for some time
 past i have felt i should find you. i was waiting for it every day.”
 
pushed his arm through mine and we went on. tranquillity seemed to
 emanate from him and pass on to me. we were soon chatting together as
 formerly. we mentioned our schooldays, the confirmation class and that
 unlucky meeting of ours in the holidays--only mention was made of
 the earliest and closest bond between us, of the affair with frank
 kromer.
 
unexpectedly we found ourselves in the middle of singular and ominous
 conversation. having recalled demian’s discourse with the japanese,
 we spoke of student life in general and from that we had branched
 off to something else, which seemed to be rather out of the way of
 the former trend of our talk. nevertheless, from demian’s manner of
 introducing the subject, there seemed to be lack of coherence in our
 conversation.
 
spoke of the spirit of europe, and of modern tendencies. everywhere,
 said, reigned desire to come together, to form herds, but nowhere
 was freedom or love. all this life in common, from the student clubs
 and choral societies to the state, was an unnatural, forced phenomenon.
 the community owed its origin to sense of fear, of embarrassment, to
 desire for flight; inwardly it was rotten and old, and approaching a
 general break-up.
 
“community,” demian said, “is beautiful thing. but what we see
 blossoming everywhere is by means that. it will arise anew from the
 mutual understanding of individuals, and after time the world will be
 remodeled. what is now called community is merely formation of herds.
 mankind seeks refuge together because men have fear of one another--the
 masters combine for their own ends, the workmen for theirs, and the
 intellectuals for theirs! and why are they afraid? one is only afraid
 when one is not at one with oneself. they are afraid because they
 have never had the courage to be themselves. community of men who
 are afraid of the unknown in themselves! they all feel that the laws
 of their life longer hold good, that they are living according to
 outworn commandments. neither their religion nor their morals conform
 to our needs. for hundred years and more europe has simply studied
 and built factories. they know exactly how many grams of powder it
 takes to kill man, but they do not know how to pray to god. they
 have idea how to amuse themselves, even for an hour. look at these
 students drinking in their tavern! or take any place of amusement
 where rich people go! hopeless! my dear sinclair, cheerfulness,
 serenity can come of all that. these creatures, who move about so
 uneasily in crowds, are full of fear and full of wickedness, one
 trusts the other. they adhere to ideals which have ceased to exist,
 and they stone everyone who proposes new one. i feel that there
 are troubles ahead of us. they will come, believe me, they will come
 soon! of course the world won’t be bettered! whether the workmen kill
 the manufacturers, or whether the russians and germans shoot at one
 another, it will only be change of proprietors. but it will not be
 in vain. it will free the world from the chains of present-day ideals,
 there will be clearing away of stone-age gods. the world, as it is
 now, wants to die, it wants to perish, and it will.”
 
“and what will happen to us then?” i asked.
 
“to us? oh, perhaps we shall perish as well. they can also murder
 people in our position. only we shall not be entirely wiped out.
 the will of the future will realize itself from what remains of our
 influence, or with the aid of those of us who survive. the will of
 humanity will make itself felt, which our europe has for long time
 past tried to drown in its sale yard of scientifically manufactured
 articles. and then it will be seen that there is nothing in common
 between the will of humanity and that of our present-day communities,
 of the states and peoples, of the societies and churches. but what
 nature wills with man, is written in the individual few, in you and in
 me. it is found in jesus, in nietzsche. for these (the only important
 currents of thought which naturally can alter their course each day)
 there will be place when the present-day communities break up together.”
 
it was late when we made halt before garden by the river.
 
“we live here,” said demian. “come and see us soon! we shall expect
 you.”
 
i cheerfully wended my long way home through the night, which had
 become cold. here and there brawling students were lurching through
 the town. i had often felt, sometimes with feeling of privation,
 sometimes with scorn, the contrast between their curious sort of
 gaiety and my lonely life. but now, tranquil and strong in sense of
 secret power i felt as never before how little that affected me, how
 far removed was their world from mine. i reminded myself of officials
 of my native town, worthy old gentlemen, who clung to memories of the
 semesters they had passed in drinking, as they would to memories of a
 blissful paradise, and who practised cult, calling up reminiscences
 of the vanished “freedom” of their university life with all the
 seriousness which some poet or other romantic would devote to an
 account of his childhood. everywhere the same! everywhere they sought
 “liberty” and “happiness” behind them, in the past, for fear of being
 reminded of their own responsibility, of being warned they were not
 striking out for themselves, but merely going the way of all the world.
 two or three years passed in drinking and jollification, and then they
 crept under the common shelter and became serious gentlemen in the
 service of the state. yes, it was rotten, our whole system was rotten
 and these student sillinesses were less stupid and not so bad as a
 hundred others.
 
however, when i reached my distant dwelling and went to bed, all these
 thoughts had flown. everything else was in suspense as i looked forward
 to the fulfillment of the promise made to that day. as soon as i
 wished, in the morning if i liked, i could see demian’s mother. let
 the students hold their drinking bouts and tattoo their faces, let the
 world be rotten and on the brink of ruin--what had that to do with me?
 i was waiting for one single thing, that my fate might meet in new
 picture.
 
i woke up late in the morning from deep sleep. the day broke for
 as solemn festal day, such as i had not experienced since the
 christmas celebrations of my boyhood. i was full of deep unrest, yet
 entirely without fear. i felt that an important day had broken for
 me. i saw and felt the world around changed: it was full of secret
 portent, expectant and solemn. even the gently falling autumn rain was
 beautiful, full of the quiet, glad, serious music of festal day. for
 the first time the outer world was in tune with my inner world--then it
 is feast-day for the soul, then living is worth while! house, no
 shop window, face in the street disturbed me. everything was as it
 had to be, but did not wear the empty features of every day and of the
 habitual. it was like expectant nature, standing full of awe to meet
 its fate. thus, as little boy, i used to see the world on the morning
 of great feast-day, at christmas or at easter. i had not known that
 this world could still be so beautiful. i had been accustomed to
 living shut up in myself, and to content myself with the idea that my
 understanding for the outside world had been lost, that the loss of
 glistening colors was inevitably connected with the loss of childish
 vision.
 
so the hour came when i found again that garden in the suburbs, at
 the gate of which i had taken leave of max demian the night before.
 concealed behind trees in grey mist of rain stood little house,
 bright and homely, tall flowers stood behind big glass partition,
 and behind shining windows were dark room walls with pictures and
 bookcases. the front door led immediately into little hall, and a
 silent old servant, black, with white apron, showed in and took my
 raincoat from me.
 
she left alone in the hall. i looked about me. i looked round; and
 immediately i was in the middle of my dream. on the dark wood wall
 above door, under glass and in black frame, hung picture i knew
 well, my bird with the golden yellow hawk’s crest, forcing its way out
 of the sphere. much moved, i remained standing. my heart felt glad and
 sorry, as if in that moment everything i had done and had experienced
 came back to as answer and fulfillment. like lightning flash a
 crowd of pictures passed through my soul: my home, the house of my
 father, with the old stone crest over the arch of the door, the boy
 demian drawing the crest, myself as boy, fearsome under the evil
 spell of my enemy kromer, myself, as youth, at the table in my little
 room at school painting the bird of my dream, the soul caught in web
 of its own weaving, and everything, everything up to this moment found
 echo in again, and was confined, answered, approved.
 
with misty eyes i stared at my picture and read in the book of my soul.
 my glance dropped. in the open door under the picture of the bird stood
 tall lady in dark dress. it was she.
 
i could not utter word. the beautiful woman smiled at in a
 friendly way beneath features like her son’s, timeless and without
 age, full of an animated will. her look was fulfillment, her greeting
 meant home-coming. in silence i stretched out my hands to her. she
 seized both mine with her strong, warm ones.
 
“you are sinclair. i knew you at once. i am very glad to see you!”
 
her voice was deep and warm, i drank it in like sweet wine. and now i
 looked up in her tranquil face, into the black eyes of unfathomable
 depth. i looked at her fresh, ripe mouth, queenly forehead, which bore
 the sign.
 
“how glad i am!” i said to her and kissed her hands. “i believe i have
 been on my way all my life long--but now i have come home.”
 
she smiled in motherly way.
 
“one never comes home,” she said gently. “but where friendly roads
 converge, the whole world looks for an hour like home.”
 
she gave expression to what i myself had felt on my way to her.
 her voice and her words were like those of her son, and yet quite
 different. everything was more mature, warmer, more assured. but just
 as max in years past had made on one the impression of being mere
 boy, so his mother did not look like the mother of grown-up son, so
 young and sweet was the breath of her face and hair, so smooth her
 golden skin, so blossoming her mouth. more queenly still than in my
 dream she stood before me. her presence was love’s happiness, her look
 was fulfillment.
 
this, then, was the new picture, in which my fate displayed itself, no
 longer severe, longer isolating, but mature and full of promise.
 i took resolutions, i made vows. i had attained an end, i had
 reached point of vantage on the way, from which the further road
 displayed itself, broad and lovely, leading on to lands of promise,
 shaded by treetops of happiness near at hand, cooled by gardens of
 delight. come what might, i was happy to know of this woman’s existence
 in the world, to drink in her voice, to sense her presence. whether she
 would be to mother, mistress, goddess--what mattered it as long as
 she was present! as long as my way lay near to hers!
 
she indicated my picture of the hawk.
 
“you have never given max more pleasure than by sending this bird,”
 she said musingly. “and i was pleased as well. we expected you, and
 when the picture arrived we knew that you were on the way to us. when
 you were little boy, sinclair, my came one day from school and
 said: ‘there’s boy who has the sign on his forehead, must be my
 friend.’ that was you. you have not had an easy time of it, but we had
 confidence in you. once in the holidays when you were at home, max met
 you again. you were at that time about sixteen years old. max told
 me----”
 
i interrupted: “oh, that should have told you that. it was the most
 miserable time i have had!”
 
“yes, max said to me: ‘now sinclair has the hardest time before him. he
 is making an attempt to escape to the community, has even taken to
 drinking with the others; but won’t succeed in that. his sign has
 become dulled, but it shines secretly.’ was not that the case?”
 
“oh yes, it was, exactly. then i found beatrice, and finally guide
 came to me. his name was pistorius. for the first time it was clear to
 why my boyhood was so bound up with max’s, why i could not break
 away from him. dear lady--dear mother, at that time i often thought i
 should have to take my life. is the way so hard for everyone?”
 
she let her fingers stray through my hair, as gently as if light
 breeze were blowing.
 
“it is always hard, to be born. you know, it is not without effort that
 the bird comes out of the egg. look back and ask yourself: was the way
 then so hard?--only hard? was it not beautiful as well? could you have
 had one more beautiful, more easy?”
 
i shook my head.
 
“it was hard,” i said, as if in sleep, “it was hard, until the dream
 came.”
 
she nodded and looked at penetratingly.
 
“yes, one must find one’s dream, then the way is easy. but there is
 dream which endures for always. each sets new one free, to none
 should one wish to cleave.”
 
i started. was that already warning? was that already warding-off?
 but matter, i was ready to let myself be led by her, and not enquire
 after the end.
 
“i do not know,” i said, “how long my dream is to last. i wish it would
 be forever. my fate received under the picture of the bird, like a
 mother, and like mistress. to it i belong and to one else.”
 
“as long as the dream is your fate, so long must you remain true to
 it,” she said, in earnest confirmation of my remark.
 
i was very sad, and i wished ardently to die in this hour of
 enchantment; i felt the tears--for what an interminably long time had i
 not wept--rise irresistibly and overmaster me. i turned violently away
 from her. i stepped to the window, and looked out, my eyes blinded with
 tears, away over the flower-pots.
 
i heard her voice behind me; it rang out calmly and yet was so full of
 tenderness, like cup filled to the brim with wine.
 
“sinclair, what child you are! of course your fate loves you. one day
 it will belong to you entirely, just as you dreamt it, if you remain
 true to it.”
 
i had composed myself and turned my face to her again. she gave her
 hand.
 
“i have few friends,” she said, smiling, “very few, very close
 friends, who call mother eve. you may call so as well, if you
 like.”
 
she led to the door, opened it and indicated the garden. “you will
 find max out there, i think.”
 
i stood under the tall trees, stunned and stupefied. i knew not whether
 i was more awake or more dreaming than ever. softly the rain dripped
 from the branches. i went slowly through the garden, which stretched
 far along the river bank. at last i found demian. stood in an open
 summer house. naked to the waist, was doing boxing exercises with a
 little sack of sand hung from beam.
 
astonished, i remained standing there. demian looked magnificent; his
 broad chest, the firm manly head, the uplifted arms were strong and
 sturdy. the movements came from the hips, the shoulders, the joints of
 the arm, as easily as if they bubbled out of spring of strength.
 
“demian!” i called. “what are you doing there?”
 
laughed gaily.
 
“i am exercising. i have promised to box with the little jap; the
 fellow is as agile as cat, and naturally just as sly. but won’t be
 able to manage me. i owe him just one little beating.”
 
drew on shirt and coat.
 
“you have already seen mother?” asked.
 
“yes, demian, what marvellous mother you have! mother eve! the name
 suits her perfectly; she is like the mother of all being.”
 
gazed for an instant musingly in my face.
 
“you know her name already? you ought to be proud, young friend.
 you are the only one to whom she has said it in the first hour’s
 acquaintance.”
 
from this day on i went in and out of the house like and a
 brother, but also like lover. when i closed the gate behind me, even
 when i saw the tall trees of the garden emerge in the distance, i was
 happy. outside was “reality,” outside were streets and houses, human
 beings and institutions, libraries and lecture rooms--here inside were
 love and the life of the soul, here was the kingdom of fairy stories
 and dreams. and yet we lived by means shut off from the world. in
 thought and word we often lived in its midst, only on another plane. we
 were not separated from the majority of creatures by boundaries, but
 rather by different sort of vision. our task was to be, as it were,
 an island in the world, perhaps an example, in any case to proclaim
 that it was possible to live different sort of life. i, who had been
 isolated for so long, learned to what extent community of feeling is
 possible between people who have experienced complete loneliness. i no
 longer desired to be back at the tables of the happy, at the feasts
 of the merry. i longer felt envious or homesick when i saw others
 living in community. and slowly i was initiated into the mystery of
 those who bore “the sign.”
 
we, who bore the sign, were probably justly considered by the world
 as peculiar--yes, mad even, and dangerous. for we were awake, or were
 waking, and our endeavor was to be more and more completely awake,
 whereas the others strove to be happy, attaching themselves to the
 herd, the opinions and ideals of which they made their own, taking
 up the same duties, making their life and happiness depend on common
 interests. true, there was certain greatness, vigorousness, in
 their endeavor. but whereas, from our point of view, we who bore the
 sign carried out the will of nature as individuals and as men of the
 future, the others persisted in stubbornness which hindered all
 progress. for them mankind, which they loved just as we did--was
 something already complete, which must be maintained and protected. for
 us mankind was distant future, to which we were all on the way. no
 one could image this future, neither did its laws stand written in any
 book.
 
besides mother eve, max and myself, there belonged to our circle in
 greater or lesser degree of intimacy many seekers of very various
 sorts. many of them were going along their own special paths, had set
 up special aims and adhered to special opinions and duties. amongst
 these were astrologers and cabbalists, also an adherent of count
 tolstoy, and all kinds of tender, timid, sensitive people, followers of
 new sects, men who practised indian cults, vegetarians and others. with
 all these we had really nothing of spiritual nature in common, except
 the esteem which each accorded the secret life-dream of the other.
 some were in closer contact with us, such as those who traced the
 searchings of mankind after gods and new ideals in the past, and whose
 studies often reminded of my friend pistorius. they brought books
 with them, translated for us texts from ancient tongues and showed us
 illustrations of ancient symbols and rites. they taught us to see how
 all the ideals of mankind up to the present have their origin in dreams
 of the subconscious soul, dreams in which humanity is, as it were,
 feeling its way forward into the future, guided by premonitions of the
 future’s potentialities. so we went through the religious history of
 the ancient world with its thousand gods, to the dawn of christianity.
 the confessions of the isolated saints were known to us, and the
 changes of religion from race to race. and from all the knowledge
 we thus acquired resulted criticism of our and of present-day
 europe, of this continent which through enormous exertions had created
 powerful new weapons for humanity, only to fall finally into deep
 spiritual devastation, the effects of which were at last being felt.
 for it had gained the whole world, only to lose its own soul.
 
there were with us believers as well, advocates of doctrines of
 salvation, in the efficacy of which they were very hopeful. there were
 buddhists who wished to convert europe, and disciples of tolstoy, and
 of other confessions. we in our narrow circle listened, but accepted
 none of these doctrines except as symbols. we who bore the sign had no
 cares as regarded the formation of the future. to us every confession,
 every doctrine of salvation appeared in advance dead and useless. our
 whole duty, our destiny, was, we felt, to attain to self-realization,
 in order that in us nature might find scope for its full activities,
 and that the unknown future might find us ready to fill any rôle which
 should be allotted us.
 
whether we expressed our opinion in so many words or not, it was clear
 to all of us that break-up of the present-day world was approaching,
 to be followed by new birth. demian said to on more than one
 occasion: “what will come is beyond conception. the soul of europe
 is an animal which has been chained up for an immeasurably long
 period. when it is set free, its first movements will not display much
 amiability. but the way it will take, whether direct or indirect, is
 not of importance, provided that the soul’s true need is realized,
 this soul which has been deluded and dulled for so long. then our day
 will come, then we shall be needed, not as guides or new law-givers--we
 shall not live to see the new laws--but rather as volunteers, as those
 who are ready to follow and to stand wherever fate shall call us. look,
 all men are ready to perform the incredible, when their ideals are
 threatened. but one comes forward when new ideal, new, perhaps
 dangerous and uncanny impulse of spiritual growth declares itself. we
 shall be of those few who are there, ready to go forward. for that
 purpose have we been singled out just as cain was marked with the sign
 to inspire fear and hate, to drive the men of his time out of narrow
 idyllic existence into the broad pastures of greater destiny. all men
 whose influence has affected the march of humanity, all such, without
 differentiation, owe their capabilities and their efficacy to the fact
 that they were ready to do the bidding of destiny. that applies to
 napoleon and bismarck. the immediate purpose to which they direct their
 energies does not lie within their choice. if bismarck had understood
 the social democrats and had thrown in his lot with them, would have
 been prudent fellow, but would never have been the instrument of
 fate. the same applies to napoleon, to caesar, to loyola, to all of
 them! one must always look at such things from the point of view of
 biology and evolution! when the changes which took place in the earth’s
 surface transferred to the land animals which lived in water, and vice
 versa, then those specimens which were ready to fulfill their functions
 as instruments of fate, brought new and unheard-of things to pass and
 were able, through new adaptations, to save their kind. whether these
 specimens were the same that had previously been conservatives and
 preservers of the status quo or the eccentrics and revolutionaries, is
 not known. they were ready to be used by fate, and for that reason were
 able to help their race through new stage of evolution. that we do
 know. for that reason we want to be ready.”
 
mother eve was often present when such conversations took place, but
 she did not join in. for each of us who chose to express his thoughts
 she was as it were listener and an echo, full of confidence, full
 of understanding. it appeared as if our ideas all emanated from her
 and returned to her again. my happiness consisted in sitting near her,
 in hearing her voice from time to time, and in participating in that
 atmosphere of maturity and of the soul, which surrounded her.
 
she felt immediately when change was taking place in me, when my soul
 was troubled, or when renewal was in progress. it seemed to as if
 the dreams i had in my sleep were inspired by her. i often related
 them to her. she found them quite comprehensible and natural, there
 were peculiarities which she could not follow clearly. for time
 i had dreams which were like reproductions of the day’s conversation.
 i dreamed that the whole world was in revolt, and that i, alone or
 with demian, tensely waited the signal of fate. fate remained half
 concealed, but bore somehow or other the traits of mother eve--to be
 chosen or rejected by her, that was fate.
 
sometimes she said with smile: “your dream is not complete, sinclair,
 you have forgotten the best part”--and it sometimes happened that i
 recalled it then, and i could not understand how i had come to forget
 any of it.
 
at times i was discontented and was tormented by desire, i thought i
 could not bear to see her near any longer without taking her in my
 arms. she noticed that immediately. once, when i had stayed away for
 several days and had returned distraught, she took aside and said:
 “you should not give yourself up to wishes in which you do not believe,
 i know what you wish. you must give up these desires, or else surrender
 yourself to them completely. if one day you are able to ask, convinced
 that your wishes will be fulfilled, then you will find satisfaction.
 but you wish, and repent again, and are afraid. you must overcome all
 that. i will tell you fairy-tale.”
 
and she told of youth who was in love with star. stood on the
 sea-shore, stretched out his hands, and prayed to the star. dreamed
 of it and all his thoughts were of it. but knew, or thought he
 knew, that star could not be embraced by man. held it to be his
 fate to love star without hope of fulfillment, and created from
 this thought whole life-poem about renunciation, and mute, faithful
 suffering which should better him and purify him. but his dreams all
 went up to the star. once again stood at night by the sea-shore,
 on high cliff. gazed at the star, and his love for it flamed up
 within him. and in moment of great longing made spring, throwing
 himself into space to meet the star. but at the moment of leaping,
 the thought flashed through his mind: it is impossible! and so was
 dashed to pieces on the rocks below. did not know how to love. had
 had the strength of soul, at the moment of leaping, to believe in
 the fulfillment of his wish, would have flown up and have been
 united with the star.
 
“love must not beg,” she said, “nor demand either. love must have the
 force to be absolutely certain of itself. then it is attracted no
 longer, but attracts. sinclair, i am attracting your love. as soon as
 you attract my love, i shall come. i do not want to make present of
 myself. i want to be won.”
 
on later occasion she told another fairy-story. there was lover,
 who loved without hope of success. withdrew entirely into himself
 and thought his love would consume him. the world was lost to him, he
 saw the blue sky and the green wood longer, did not hear the
 murmuring of the stream, or the notes of the harp; all that meant
 nothing to him, and became poor and miserable. but his love grew,
 and would much rather have died and have made an end of it all than
 renounce the chance of possessing the beautiful woman whom loved.
 then suddenly felt that his love had consumed everything else in
 him, it became powerful and exercised an irresistible attraction, the
 beautiful woman had to follow, she came and stood with outstretched
 arms to draw her to him. but as she stood before him, she was
 completely transformed, and with thrill felt and saw that had
 drawn into his embrace the whole world, which had lost. she stood
 before him and surrendered herself to him, sky and wood and brook, all
 was decked out in lovely new colors, all belonged to him, and spoke
 his tongue. and instead of merely winning woman, had taken the
 whole world to his heart, and each star in the heaven glowed in him,
 and twinkling, communicated desire to his soul. had loved, and
 thereby had found himself. but most people love only to lose themselves
 thereby.
 
my whole life seemed to be contained in my love for mother eve. but
 every day she looked different. many times i felt decidedly that it was
 not her person for which my whole being was striving, but that she was
 symbol of my inward self, and that she wished only to lead to see
 more deeply into myself. i often heard words fall from her lips, which
 sounded like answers to the burning questions asked by my subconscious
 self. then again there were moments when in her presence i burnt with
 desire, and afterwards kissed objects she had touched. and by degrees
 sensual and unsensual love, reality and symbol merged into one another.
 then it happened that i could think of her at home in my room with
 quiet fervor. i thought i felt her hand in mine and my lips pressed
 to hers. or i was at her house, gazing up into her face, talking with
 her and listening to her voice; and i did not know whether it was
 really she, or whether it was dream. i began to foresee how one can
 have lasting and immortal love. in reading book i had acquired new
 knowledge, and it was the same feeling as kiss from mother eve. she
 stroked my hair and smiled at me, i sensed the perfume of her warm ripe
 mouth, and i had the same feeling as if i had been making progress
 within myself. all that was important and fateful for seemed to be
 contained in her. she could transform herself into each of my thoughts,
 and every one of my thoughts was transformed into her.
 
i feared that it would be torture to spend the two weeks of the
 christmas holidays, separated from mother eve, with my parents at home.
 but it was torture, it was lovely to be at home and to think of her.
 when i returned to h---- i remained away from her house another two
 days, in order to enjoy the security and independence of her actual
 presence. i also had dreams in which my union with her was accomplished
 by way of allegory. she was sea, into which i, river, flowed. she
 was star, and i myself was star on my way to her. we felt drawn to
 one another. we met, and remained together always, turning blissfully
 round one another in close-lying orbits, to the music of the spheres.
 
i related this dream to her, when i visited her again after the
 holidays.
 
“it is beautiful dream,” she said softly. “see that it comes true!”
 
there came day in early spring that i shall never forget. i entered
 the hall. window stood open and the heavy scent of hyacinths, wafted
 by warm breath of air, permeated the room. as one was to be seen,
 i went upstairs to max demian’s study. i knocked softly on the door and
 entered without waiting for permission, as i was in the habit of doing
 with him.
 
the room was dark. the curtains were all drawn. the door to little
 room adjoining stood open, where max had set up chemical laboratory.
 from there came the bright, white light of the spring sun, shining
 through rain clouds. i thought one was there and pulled back one of
 the curtains.
 
there i saw max demian, sitting on stool by curtained window. his
 attitude was cramped and was oddly changed. the thought flashed
 through me: you have seen him like this once before! his arms were
 motionless at his side, his hands in his lap; his face inclined
 slightly forward, with open eyes, was without sight, as if dead. in the
 eyes there glimmered dully little reflex of light, as in piece of
 glass. the pale face was self-absorbed and without any expression, save
 that of great rigidity. looked like very ancient mask of an animal
 at the door of temple. appeared not to be breathing.
 
the recollection came to me--thus, exactly thus, had i once seen
 him, many years ago, when i was still quite boy. thus had his eyes
 stared inwards, thus his hands had been lying motionless, close to one
 another, fly had been crawling over his face. and had then, six
 years ago perhaps, looked just as old and as ageless, not wrinkle in
 his face had changed.
 
i was frightened, and went softly out of the room and down the stairs.
 in the hall i met mother eve. she was pale and seemed tired: i had not
 seen her like that before. shadow came through the window, the bright
 white sun had suddenly disappeared.
 
“i went into max’s room,” i whispered hastily. “has anything happened?
 is asleep, or absorbed, i don’t know what; i once saw him like that
 before.”
 
“but you didn’t wake him?” she asked quickly.
 
“no. did not hear me. i came out immediately. mother eve, tell me,
 what is the matter with him?”
 
she passed her hand over her forehead.
 
“don’t worry, sinclair, nothing has happened to him. has retired
 into himself. it will not last long.”
 
she got up and went out into the garden, although it had begun to rain.
 i felt that i must not follow her. so i walked up and down in the hall,
 inhaling the scent of the hyacinths which dulled my senses, and gazing
 at my picture of the bird over the door. i felt oppressively the odd
 shadow which seemed to fill the house that morning. what was it? what
 had happened?
 
mother eve came back soon. rain drops hung in her dark hair. she sat
 down in her easy chair. she was very tired. i went to her, bent down
 and kissed the raindrops in her hair. her eyes were bright and soft,
 but the raindrops tasted like tears.
 
“shall i go and see how is?” i asked in whisper.
 
she smiled weakly.
 
“don’t be child, sinclair!” she admonished loudly, as if to relieve
 her own feelings. “go now and come back later, i cannot talk to you
 now.”
 
i went. i walked out of the house and out of the town, towards the
 mountains. the thin rain was falling obliquely, and clouds were driving
 at low altitude under heavy pressure, as if in fear. down below there
 was hardly any breeze, but on the heights above storm seemed to be
 raging. several times the sun, pale and bright, broke for an instant
 through the steely grey of the clouds.
 
there came fleecy, yellow cloud driving across the sky. it collided
 with the grey cloud wall, and in few seconds the wind formed a
 picture of the yellow and blue, of bird of giant size, which tore
 itself free from the blue mêlée and with wide fluttering wings
 disappeared in the sky. then the storm became audible and rain mixed
 with hail rattled down. short burst of thunder with an unnatural and
 terrific sound cracked over the whipped landscape. immediately after
 the sun broke through and on the mountains close at hand above brown
 woods glistened, pale and unreal, the fresh snow.
 
when i returned after several hours, wet from the rain and wind, demian
 himself opened the front door to me.
 
took with him up to his room. gas flame burned in the
 laboratory, paper lay about, appeared to have been working.
 
“sit down,” invited, “you must be tired, it was terrible storm;
 it’s evident, you were overtaken by it. tea is coming at once.”
 
“something is the matter to-day,” i began hesitatingly, “it can’t only
 be that bit of storm.”
 
looked at penetratingly.
 
“have you seen anything?”
 
“yes. i saw picture clearly in the clouds, for an instant.”
 
“what sort of picture?”
 
“it was bird.”
 
“the hawk? was it that? the bird of your dream?”
 
“yes, it was my hawk. it was yellow and of giant size, it flew up into
 the blue-black heaven.”
 
demian took deep breath. someone knocked at the door. the aged
 servant brought in tea.
 
“take cup, sinclair, do. i don’t think it was by chance you saw the
 bird.”
 
“chance? does one see such things by chance?”
 
“well, no. it means something. do you know what?”
 
“no. i only feel, it means violent shock, the approach of fate. i
 think it will affect all of us.”
 
walked violently up and down.
 
“the approach of fate!” exclaimed loudly. “i dreamed the same
 thing myself last night, and my mother yesterday had premonition,
 portending the same thing. i dreamed i was going up ladder, placed
 against tree trunk or tower. when i reached the top i saw the whole
 country. it was wide plain, with towns and villages burning. i cannot
 yet relate everything, because it isn’t all quite clear to me.”
 
“do you interpret the dream as affecting you?” i asked.
 
“me? naturally. one dreams of what does not concern him. but it
 does not concern alone, you are right. i distinguish tolerably
 well between the dreams which indicate agitation of my own soul, and
 the others, the rare ones, which bear on the fate of all humanity. i
 have seldom had such dreams, and never one of which i can say that it
 was prophecy, and that it has been fulfilled. the interpretations
 are too uncertain. but this i know for certainty, i have dreamed of
 something which does not concern alone. for the dream belongs to
 others, former ones i have had; this is the continuation. these are the
 dreams, sinclair, in which i had the premonitions which i have already
 mentioned to you. we know that the world is absolutely rotten, but
 that is reason to prophesy its ruin, or to make prophecy of like
 nature. but for several years past i have had dreams, from which i
 conclude, or feel, or what you will, which, then, give the feeling
 that the break-up of an old world is drawing near. at first they were
 simply faint presentiments, but since they have become more and more
 significant. even now i know nothing more than that something big and
 terrible is approaching, which will concern me. sinclair, we shall go
 through the experiences of which we have so often talked. the world is
 about to renew itself. it smacks of death. nothing new comes without
 death. it is more terrible than i had thought.”
 
frightened, i looked at him fixedly.
 
“can’t you tell the rest of your dream?” i begged timidly.
 
shook his head.
 
“no.”
 
the door opened and mother eve entered.
 
“there you are, sitting together! children, i hope you aren’t sad?”
 
she looked fresh, her fatigue had quite vanished. demian smiled at her,
 she came to us as mother comes to frightened children.
 
“we aren’t sad, mother. we were simply trying to solve the riddle of
 these new signs. but that is of importance; what is to come, will
 be here all of sudden, and then we shall learn what we need to know.”
 
but i did not feel happy. when i said good-bye and went down alone
 through the hall, i felt that the hyacinths were faded and withered,
 reminding of corpses. shadow had fallen over us.
 



chapter eight
 
beginning of the end
 

it had been decided that i should remain in h---- for the summer
 semester. instead of staying in the house, we were almost always in the
 garden by the river. the japanese, who by the way had been thoroughly
 beaten in the boxing match, was away, and the disciple of tolstoy was
 also missing. demian had procured horse, and went for long rides
 every day. i was often alone with his mother.
 
sometimes i wondered greatly at the peaceableness of my life. i had
 been so long accustomed to being alone, to practise renunciation, to
 fight toilfully my own battles, that these months in h---- seemed to me
 like time passed on dream island, where i might live tranquilly in
 beautiful, enchanted surroundings. i felt that this was foretaste of
 that new, higher community, on which we meditated. and now and then i
 was seized by deep feeling of sadness, for i knew that this happiness
 could not last. i was not destined to breathe in the fulness of peace
 and comfort, i needed torment to spur on. i felt that one day i
 should wake up from these dreams of beautiful love-pictures to find
 myself standing once more alone, in the cold world of others, where for
 there would be only loneliness and fighting, peace, community
 of spirit.
 
then i yielded myself to the charms of mother eve’s presence. my
 feeling for her was now doubly tender. i was glad that my fate bore
 still these beautiful, tranquil features.
 
the summer weeks passed quickly and easily. already the semester was
 drawing to close. leave-taking was near, i dared not think of it, and
 did not, but clung to the beautiful days like butterfly to honeyed
 flower. that was my period of happiness, the first fulfillment of my
 life’s wishes, and my reception into the league--what was to come next?
 i would again have to fight my battles, be consumed by longing, have
 dreams, be alone.
 
at this time the feeling, the foretaste of separation, came over me
 so strongly that my love for mother eve blazed up suddenly, causing
 pain. my god! how soon would the time come to say good-bye, and
 i should see her more, more hear her firm step in the house,
 should find more her flowers on my table! and what had i attained?
 i had dreamed and had lulled myself in comfort, instead of winning
 her, instead of fighting for her and drawing her to for always! all
 that she had said to about genuine love crossed my mind, hundreds
 of fine, suggestive words, hundred tender invitations, promises
 perhaps--and what had i made of them? nothing! nothing!
 
i took up position in the middle of my room, collected my whole
 conscious self together and thought of eve. i wished to concentrate the
 forces of my soul, in order to let her feel my love, in order to draw
 her to me. she was to come, longing for my embrace. my kisses were to
 suck insatiably the ripe fruit of her lips.
 
i stood tense, until fingers and feet became stiff with cold. i felt
 force was going out of me. for few seconds something seemed to take
 shape with me, something bright and cool; i had for moment the
 sensation as if i carried crystal in my heart, and i knew that was
 myself. cold chill pierced to my heart.
 
as i woke out of my fearful state of tension i felt something was
 approaching. i was exhausted to the point of death, but i was prepared
 to see eve step into the room, burning with passion, ravished.
 
the sound of horse’s hoofs clattering down the long street rang nearer
 and nearer, then suddenly ceased. i sprang to the window. below demian
 was dismounting.
 
“what is the matter, demian? nothing can have happened to your mother?”
 
did not listen to my words. was very pale, and perspiration ran
 down both sides of his forehead over his cheeks. his horse was flecked
 with foam. tied the reins to the garden fence, then took my arm
 and walked with down the street.
 
“have you already heard the news?” i had heard nothing.
 
demian pressed my arm and turned his face to me, with dark,
 compassionate, singular look.
 
“yes, old man, now we’re in for it. you know of the strained relations
 with russia----”
 
“what? is it war? i had never believed it.”
 
spoke in an undertone, although one was near.
 
“it is not yet declared. but it’s war. rely on it. i haven’t worried
 you lately, but i have seen three new omens since. it will be no
 foundering of the world, earthquake, revolution. it’s war. you
 will see how that strikes everybody. it will be joy to people;
 everyone already rejoices that hostilities are about to commence. so
 insipid has life become for them. but you will see now, sinclair, that
 is only the beginning. this will perhaps be great war, very great
 war. the new dispensation commences and for those who adhere to the
 old, the new will be terrible. what will you do?”
 
i was perplexed, everything sounded so strange and improbable.
 
“i don’t know--and you?”
 
shrugged his shoulders.
 
“as soon as mobilization orders are out, i join up. i am lieutenant.”
 
“you? i had idea of that.”
 
“yes. it was one of my adaptations. you know, i have never wanted to
 appear out of the ordinary, and have rather done too much, in order to
 be correct, to do the right thing. in eight days, i think, i shall be
 already in the field.”
 
“for god’s sake!”
 
“look here, old fellow, you mustn’t take things so sentimentally. at
 bottom it certainly won’t give pleasure to order machine gunfire to
 be turned on living creatures, but that is secondary matter. now each
 one of us will be seized by the great wheel of fate. you as well. you
 will certainly be called up.”
 
“and your mother, demian?”
 
then for the first time i recollected what i was doing quarter of an
 hour before. how the world had changed! i had summoned together all my
 force in order to conjure up the sweetest picture, and now fate had
 suddenly put on new, horrible mask.
 
“my mother? we need have cares for her safety. she is safe, safer
 than anyone else in the world to-day. you love her so very much?”
 
“you knew it, demian?” laughed brightly and without any
 embarrassment.
 
“you child! naturally i knew it. one has yet called my mother mother
 eve without loving her. by the way, how was that? you have called to
 either her or myself to-day, haven’t you?”
 
“yes, i called--i called to mother eve.”
 
“she felt it. she suddenly sent away, i was to come to you. i had
 just told her the news about russia.”
 
we turned back, scarcely speaking, untied his horse and mounted.
 
i first realized in my room how exhausted i was by demian’s message,
 and even more so by my previous spiritual exertions. but mother eve had
 heard me! my thoughts had reached her. she would have come herself,
 if--how wonderful all this was, and how beautiful! now it was to be
 war. now what we had so often spoken of was about to happen. and demian
 had known so much in advance. how strange that the world’s stream would
 longer flow somewhere or other by us--that now it was suddenly
 flowing through us, that fate and adventure called us, and that now, or
 soon, the moment would come when the world would need us, when it would
 be transformed. demian was right, one should not be sentimental over
 it. only it was strange that i was now to experience that lonely thing,
 “fate,” with so many, with the whole world. good then!
 
i was ready. in the evening, when i went through the town, every corner
 was alive with bustle and excitement. everywhere the word “war”!
 
i went to mother eve’s house. we had supper in the summer house. i was
 the only guest. one spoke word about the war. but later, shortly
 before i left, mother eve said: “dear sinclair, you called to-day.
 you know why i did not come myself. but don’t forget, you know the call
 now and if ever you need someone who bears the sign, call again.”
 
she rose and went out through the gloaming into the garden. tall and
 queenly, invested with mystery, she stepped between the trees, the
 foliage ceased its whispering at her approach, and over her head
 glimmered tenderly the many stars.
 
* * * * *
 
i am coming to the end. events marched quickly. war was declared.
 demian, who looked strange in uniform, with silver-grey cloak, went
 away. i brought his mother home. soon after i also said good-bye to
 her. she kissed on the lips and held moment on her breast, and
 her large eyes burned steadily close to mine.
 
and all men were like brothers. they had in mind their country and
 their honor. but it was fate, they peeped for moment into the
 unveiled face. young men came out of barracks, stepped into trains, and
 on many face i saw sign--not ours--a beautiful and dignified sign,
 signifying love and death. i as well was embraced by people i had never
 seen before. i understood and responded gladly. it was an atmosphere
 of intoxication in which they moved, not that of fated will. but the
 intoxication was sacred, it was due to the fact that they had all
 looked into the rousing eyes of destiny.
 
it was already nearly winter when i went to the front.
 
at first, in spite of the sensation of the bombardment, i was
 disappointed with everything. formerly i had often wondered why people
 so seldom were able to live for an ideal. now i saw that many, yes, all
 men, are capable of dying for an ideal, provided that such an ideal is
 not personal, not chosen of their own free will. for them it had to be
 an ideal accepted by and common to great number.
 
but with time i saw that i had underestimated men. although service and
 common danger renders them uniform, i saw many, living and dying,
 approach fate magnificently. not only in an attack, but the whole time,
 many, very many of them had fixed, far-away look, rather like that
 of person possessed, look which indicates entire ignorance of the
 end pursued, and complete surrender of self to the unknown. matter
 what they might believe and think they were ready, they were there in
 case of need, out of them would the future be formed. and, however
 strongly the world’s attention appeared to be focused on war and heroic
 deeds, on honor and other old ideals, however distantly and unnaturally
 sang the voices of humanity--all this was merely the surface, just
 as the question with regard to the foreign and political aims of the
 war was superficial. deep down, below the surface of human affairs,
 something was in process of forming. something which might be new
 order of humanity. for i could see many--many such died at my side--to
 whom the understanding was brought home that hate and rage, murder and
 destruction had connection with the real object of the war. no, the
 object, just as the aims in view, was purely matter of chance. their
 deepest and most primitive feelings, even their wildest instincts were
 not actually directed against the enemy, their murderous and bloody
 work was an expression of their own inner being, of their cleft soul,
 which wished to rave and kill, to destroy and die, in order to be able
 to be born anew. giant bird was fighting its way out of the egg, and
 the egg was the world, and the world had to go to ruin.
 
one night in early spring i was doing sentry duty in front of farm
 we had occupied. the wind was blowing in fitful gusts, shrieking and
 moaning according to the vagaries of its mood; over the high flanders
 sky rode an army of clouds, somewhere or other behind was suspicion
 of moon. i had been restless throughout the whole of that day, troubled
 by cares which i could not precisely define. now, at my dark post,
 i thought with fervor of the picture of my life up to that time, of
 mother eve, of demian. i stood leaning against poplar, staring into
 the agitated sky, the mysterious quivering brightness of which soon
 resolved itself into series of pictures. i felt by the odd slowness
 of my pulse, by the insensibility of my skin to wind and rain, by the
 lively wakefulness of my inner being, that guide was near me.
 
in the clouds large city could be seen, out of which millions of men
 were streaming, spreading in swarms over the broad countryside. in
 their very midst there appeared the mighty figure of god, as big as
 mountain, with glittering stars in its hair, and with the features
 of mother eve. into it disappeared the processions of men, as into a
 gigantic cave, and were lost to view. the goddess shrank down on the
 ground, the sign on her forehead glittered brightly. she seemed to
 be under the influence of dream. she closed her eyes and her large
 features were twisted in pain. suddenly she cried out, and out of her
 forehead sprang stars, which hurried in lovely arcs and half-circles
 over the black sky.
 
one of the stars rushed noisily through the air to meet me, as if
 seeking out. with crash it burst into thousand sparks, lifting
 off my feet and hurling on to the ground. the world broke up
 thunderously about me.
 
they found close to the poplar, covered with earth and wounded in
 several places.
 
i lay in cellar, guns growled and rumbled overhead, i lay in cart,
 and was jolted over empty fields. for the most part i was either asleep
 or unconscious. but the more deeply i slept, the more strongly i felt
 that i was being drawn, that i followed at the will of force over
 which i was not master.
 
i lay on straw in stable, it was dark, someone trod on my hand. but
 my inner self willed to go further, the mysterious force drew on.
 again i lay in cart, and later on stretcher. even more strongly
 i felt in the command to go forward, i was conscious only of the
 pressure, the force which seemed to be controlling my journeying thus
 from place to place.
 
at last i was there. it was night. i was fully conscious and i felt
 strongly the secret attraction and power which had brought to that
 place. now i was lying in room, on bed made up on the floor. i
 felt i had arrived at the place to which i had been called. i glanced
 around, close to my mattress was another, on which someone was lying,
 someone who bent over and looked at me. it was max demian.
 
i could not speak, and either could not or would not. only looked
 at me. lamp which hung over him on the wall cast light on his face.
 smiled at me.
 
for what seemed an immeasurably long time gazed unwaveringly into my
 eyes. slowly inclined his face towards me, until we almost touched.
 
“sinclair!” said in whisper.
 
i signaled to him with my eyes that i understood him.
 
smiled again, almost as if in compassion.
 
“little one!” said, smiling.
 
his mouth lay now quite close to mine. softly continued to speak.
 
“can you still remember frank kromer?” asked.
 
i winked at him, and could even manage to smile.
 
“sinclair, old man, listen: i shall have to go away. perhaps you will
 need once again, on account of kromer, or something. when you call
 me, i shall not come riding on horse, or in train. you must hearken
 to the voice inside you, then you will notice it is i, that i am in
 you. do you understand? and one other thing: mother eve said that if
 ever you were ill i was to give you kiss from her, which she gave
 me.... close your eyes, sinclair!”
 
i obediently closed my eyes. i felt light kiss on my lips, on which
 there was trace of blood, which never seemed to stop flowing. and
 then i fell asleep.
 
in the morning i was awakened to have my wounds dressed. when at last
 i was properly awake, i turned quickly to the mattress by my side. a
 stranger lay upon it, man on whom i had never before set eyes.
 
the bandaging hurt me. all that has happened to since hurt me. but
 my soul is like mysterious, locked house. and when i find the key
 and step right down into myself, to where the pictures painted by my
 destiny seem reflected on the dark mirror of my soul, then i need
 only stoop towards the black mirror and see my own picture, which now
 completely resembles him, my guide and friend.
 

the end
 



transcriber’s notes
 

perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.
 
inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.
 




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook demian ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 
the project gutenberg ebook of demian
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: demian
 
author: hermann hesse
 
release date: august 10, 2024 [ebook #74222]
 
language: english
 
original publication: new york: boni and liveright
 
credits: steve mattern and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this book was produced from images made available by the hathitrust digital library.)
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook demian ***
 




demian
 
_by_ hermann hesse
 
[illustration]
 
boni and liveright
 
publishers :: new york
 



copyright, 1923
 by
 boni & liveright, inc.
 
printed in the united states of america
 



demian
 
_the story of emil sinclair’s youth_
 
by hermann hesse
 
_i wanted only to try to live in obedience to the promptings which
 came from my true self. why was that so very difficult?_
 

in order to tell my story, i must begin far back. if it were possible,
 i should have to go back much further still, to the earliest years of
 my childhood, and even beyond, to my distant ancestry.
 
authors, in writing novels, usually act as if they were god, and could,
 by broadness of perception, comprehend and present any human story as
 if god were telling it to himself without veiling anything, and with
 all the essential details. that i cannot do, any more than can the
 authors themselves. but i attach more importance to my story than can
 any other writer to his: because it is my own, and it is the story of
 human being--not that of an invented, possible, ideal or otherwise,
 non-existent creature, but that of real, unique, living man. what
 that is, real living man, one certainly knows less to-day than ever.
 for men are shot down in heaps--men, of whom each one is precious,
 unique experiment of nature. if we were nothing more than individuals,
 we could actually be put out of the world entirely with musket-ball,
 and in that case there would be more sense in relating stories. but
 each man is not only himself, is also the unique, quite special,
 and in every case the important and remarkable point where the world’s
 phenomena converge, in certain manner, never again to be repeated.
 for that reason the history of everyone is important, eternal, divine.
 for that reason every man, so long as lives at all and carries out
 the will of nature, is wonderful and worthy of every attention. in
 everyone has the spirit taken shape, in everyone creation suffers, in
 everyone is redeemer crucified.
 
few to-day know what man is. many feel it, and for that reason die the
 easier, as i shall die the easier, when i have finished my story.
 
i must not call myself one who knows. i was seeker and am still,
 but i seek more in the stars or in books; i am beginning to listen
 to the promptings of those instincts which are coursing in my very
 blood. my story is not pleasant, it is not sweet and harmonious like
 the fictitious stories. it smacks of nonsense and perplexity, of
 madness and dreams, like the lives of all men who do not wish to delude
 themselves any longer.
 
the life of everyone is way to himself, the search for road,
 the indication of path. man has ever yet attained to
 self-realization; yet strives thereafter, one ploddingly, another
 with less effort, each as best can. each one carries the remains
 of his birth, slime and eggshells of primeval world, with him to
 the end. many one will remain frog, lizard, an ant. many one
 is top-part man and bottom-part fish. but everyone is projection
 of nature into manhood. to us all the same origin is common, our
 mothers--we all come out of the womb. but each of us--an experiment,
 one of nature’s litter, strives after his own ends. we can understand
 one another; but each one is able to explain only himself.
 



chapter one
 
two worlds
 

i will begin my story with an event of the time when i was ten or
 eleven years old and went to the latin school of our little town. much
 of the old-time fragrance is wafted back to me, but my sensations
 are not unmixed, as i pass in review my memories--dark streets and
 bright houses and towers, the striking of clocks and the features of
 men, comfortable and homely rooms, rooms full of secrecy and dread of
 ghosts. i sense again the atmosphere of cosy warmth, of rabbits and
 servant-girls, of household remedies and dried fruit. two worlds passed
 there one through the other. from two poles came forth day and night.
 
the one world was my home, but it was even narrower than that, for it
 really comprised only my parents. this world was for the most part
 very well known to me; it meant mother and father, love and severity,
 good example and school. it was world of subdued lustre, of clarity
 and cleanliness; here were tender friendly words, washed hands, clean
 clothes and good manners. here the morning hymn was sung, and christmas
 was kept.
 
in this world were straight lines and paths which led into the future;
 here were duty and guilt, evil conscience and confession, pardon and
 good resolutions, love and adoration, bible texts and wisdom. to this
 world our future had to belong, it had to be crystal-pure, beautiful
 and well ordered.
 
the other world, however, began right in the midst of our own
 household, and was entirely different, had another odor, another
 manner of speech and made different promises and demands. in this
 second world were servant-girls and workmen, ghost stories and breath
 of scandal. there was gaily colored flood of monstrous, tempting,
 terrible, enigmatical goings-on, things such as the slaughter house and
 prison, drunken men and scolding women, cows in birth-throes, plunging
 horses, tales of burglaries, murders, suicides. all these beautiful and
 dreadful, wild and cruel things were round about, in the next street,
 in the next house. policemen and tramps passed to and fro, drunken
 men beat their wives, crowds of young girls flowed out of factories
 in the evening, old women were able to bewitch you and make you ill,
 robbers dwelt in the wood, incendiaries were rounded up by mounted
 policemen--everywhere seethed and reeked this second, passionate world,
 everywhere, except in our rooms, where mother and father were. and
 that was good thing. it was wonderful that here in our house there
 were peace, order and repose, duty and good conscience, pardon and
 love--and wonderful that there were also all the other things, all
 that was loud and shrill, sinister and violent, yet from which one
 could escape with one bound to mother.
 
and the oddest thing was, how closely the two worlds bordered each
 other, how near they both were! for instance, our servant lina, as
 she sat by the sitting-room door at evening prayers, and sang the
 hymn with her bright voice, her freshly washed hands laid on her
 smoothed-out apron, belonged absolutely to father and mother, to us,
 to what was bright and proper. immediately after, in the kitchen or in
 the woodshed, when she was telling the tale of the headless dwarf,
 or when she quarreled with the women of the neighborhood in the little
 butcher’s shop, then she was another person, belonged to the other
 world, and was enveloped in mystery. it was the same with everything
 and everyone, especially with myself. to be sure, i belonged to the
 bright, respectable world, i was my parents’ child, but the other
 world was present in everything i saw and heard, and i also lived in
 it, although it was often strange and foreign to me, although one had
 there regularly bad conscience and anxiety. sometimes i even liked
 to live in the forbidden world best, and often the homecoming into the
 brightness--however necessary and good it might be--seemed almost like
 return to something less beautiful, to something more uninteresting
 and desolate. at times i realized this: my aim in life was to grow
 up like my father and mother, as bright and pure, as systematic and
 superior. but the road to attainment was long, you had to go to school
 and study and pass tests and examinations. the road led past the other
 dark world and through it, and it was not improbable that you would
 remain there and be buried in it. there were stories of prodigal sons
 to whom that had happened--i was passionately fond of reading them.
 there the return home to father and to the respectable world was always
 so liberating and so sublime, i quite felt that this alone was right
 and good and desirable. but still that part of the stories which dealt
 with the wicked and profligate was by far the most alluring, and if one
 had been allowed to acknowledge it openly, it was really often great
 pity that the prodigal repented and was redeemed. but one did not say
 that, nor did one actually think it. it was only present somehow or
 other as presentiment or possibility, deep down in one’s feelings.
 when i pictured the devil to myself, i could quite well imagine him
 down below in the street, openly or in disguise, or at the annual fair
 or in the public house, but i could never imagine him with us at home.
 
my sisters also belonged to the bright world. it often seemed to me
 that they approached more nearly to father and mother; that they were
 better and nicer mannered than myself, without so many faults. they had
 their failings, they were naughty, but that did not seem to to be
 deep-rooted. it was not the same as for me, for whom the contact with
 evil was strong and painful, and the dark world so much nearer. my
 sisters, like my parents, were to be treated with regard and respect.
 if you had had quarrel with them, your own conscience accused you
 afterwards as the wrongdoer and the cause of the squabble, as the
 one who had to beg pardon. for in opposing my sisters i offended my
 parents, the representatives of goodness and law. there were secrets
 which i would much sooner have shared with the most depraved street
 urchins than with my sisters. on good, bright days when i had good
 conscience, it was often delightful to play with my sisters, to be
 gentle and nice to them, and to see myself under halo of goodness.
 that was how it must be if you were an angel! that was the most sublime
 thing we knew, to be an angel, surrounded by sweet sounds and fragrance
 like christmas and happiness. but, oh, how seldom were such days and
 hours perfect! often when we were playing one of the nice, harmless,
 proper games i was so vehement and impetuous, and i so annoyed my
 sisters that we quarreled and were unhappy. then when i was carried
 away by anger i did and said things, the wickedness of which i felt
 deep and burning within me, even while i was doing and saying them.
 then came sad, dark hours of remorse and contrition, the painful moment
 when i begged pardon, then again beam of light, peaceful, grateful
 happiness without discord, for minutes or hours.
 
i used to go to the latin school. the sons of the mayor and of the head
 forester were in my class and sometimes used to come to our house. they
 were wild boys, but still they belonged to the world of goodness and of
 propriety. in spite of that i had close relations with neighbors’ boys,
 children of the public school, whom in general we despised. with one of
 these i must begin my story.
 
one half-holiday--i was little more than ten at the time--i went
 out with two boys of the neighborhood. public-school boy of about
 thirteen years joined our party; was bigger than we were, coarse
 and robust fellow, the of tailor. his father was drunkard, and
 the whole family had bad reputation. i knew frank kromer well, i
 was afraid of him, and was very much displeased when joined us. he
 had already acquired manly ways, and imitated the gait and manner of
 speech of the young factory hands. under his leadership we stepped down
 to the bank of the stream and hid ourselves from the world under the
 first arch of the bridge. the little bank between the vaulted bridge
 wall and the sluggishly flowing water was composed of nothing but
 trash, of broken china and garbage, of twisted bundles of rusty iron
 wire and other rubbish. you sometimes found there useful things. we
 had to search the stretch under frank kromer’s direction and show him
 what we found. then either kept it himself or threw it away into the
 water. bid us note whether the things were of lead, brass or tin.
 everything we found of this description kept for himself, as well as
 an old horn comb. i felt very uneasy in his company, not because i knew
 that father would have forbidden our playing together had known of
 it, but through fear of frank himself. i was glad that treated me
 like the others. commanded and we obeyed; it seemed habitual to me,
 although that was the first time i was with him.
 
at last we sat down. frank spat into the water and looked like full
 grown man; spat through gap in his teeth, directing the sputum in
 any direction wished. began conversation, and the boys vied
 with one another in bragging of schoolboy exploits and pranks. i was
 silent, and yet, if i said nothing, i was afraid of calling attention
 to myself and inciting kromer’s anger against me. my two comrades had
 from the beginning turned their backs on me, and had sided with him;
 i was stranger among them, and i felt my clothes and manner to be
 provocation. it was impossible that frank should like me, latin
 schoolboy and the of gentleman, and the other two, i felt, as
 soon as it came to the point, would disown and leave in the lurch.
 
at last, through mere fright, i also began to relate story. i
 invented long narration of theft, of which i made myself the hero. in
 garden by the mill on the corner, i recounted, i had one night with
 the help of friend stolen whole sack of apples, and those none of
 the ordinary sorts, but russets and golden pippins, the very best. in
 the danger of the moment i had recourse to the telling of this story,
 which i invented easily and recounted readily. in order not to have to
 finish off immediately, and so perhaps be led from bad to worse, i gave
 full scope to my inventive powers. one of us, i continued, always had
 to stand sentinel, while the other was throwing down apples from the
 tree, and the sack had become so heavy that at last we had to open it
 again and leave half the apples behind; but we returned at the end of
 half an hour and took the rest away with us.
 
i hoped at the end to gain some little applause, i had warmed to my
 work and had let myself go in my narration. the two small boys waited
 quiet and expectant, but frank kromer looked at penetratingly
 through half-closed eyes and asked in threatening tone:
 
“is that true?”
 
“yes,” i said.
 
“really and truly?”
 
“yes, really and truly,” i asserted defiantly, though inwardly i was
 stifling through fear.
 
“can you swear to it?”
 
i was terribly frightened, but i answered without hesitation: “yes.”
 
“then say: ‘i swear by god and all that’s holy’!”
 
i said: “i swear by god and all that’s holy!”
 
“aw, gwan!” said and turned away.
 
i thought that everything was now all right, and was glad when got
 up and made for the town. when we were on the bridge i said timidly
 that i must now go home. “don’t be in such hurry,” laughed frank,
 “we both go the same way.” dawdled on, and i dared not tear myself
 away, especially as was actually taking the road to our house. as we
 arrived, i looked at the heavy brass-knocker, the sun on the window and
 the curtains in my mother’s room, and i breathed sigh of relief. home
 at last! what blessing it was to be at home again, to return to the
 brightness and peace of the family circle!
 
as i quickly opened the door and slipped inside, ready to shut it
 behind me, frank kromer forced his way in as well. stood beside
 in the cool, dark stone corridor which was only lighted from the
 courtyard, held by the arm and said softly: “not so fast, you!”
 
terrified, i looked at him. his grip on my arm was one of iron. i tried
 to think what had in his mind, whether was going to maltreat me.
 i wondered, if i should scream, whether anyone would come down quickly
 enough to save me. but i gave up the idea.
 
“what’s the matter?” i asked. “what d’you want?”
 
“nothing much. i only want to ask you something--something the others
 needn’t hear.”
 
“well, what do you want to tell you? i must go upstairs, you know.”
 
“you know, don’t you, whose orchard that is by the mill on the corner?”
 said frank softly.
 
“no, i don’t know; i think it’s the miller’s.”
 
frank had wound his arm round me, and drew quite close to him, so
 that i had to look up directly into his face. his look boded ill, he
 smiled maliciously, and his face was full of cruelty and power.
 
“now, kid, i can tell you whose the garden is. i have known for long
 time that the apples had been stolen, and i also know that the man said
 would give two marks to anyone who would tell him who stole the
 fruit.”
 
“good heavens!” i exclaimed. “but you won’t tell him anything?” i felt
 it was useless to appeal to his sense of honor. came from the other
 world; for him betrayal was crime. i felt that for certainty. in
 these matters people from the “other” world were not like us.
 
“say nothing?” laughed kromer. “look here, my friend, d’you think i am
 minting money and can make two shilling pieces myself? i’m poor chap,
 and i haven’t got rich father like yours, and when i get the chance
 of earning two shillings i must take it. might even give more.”
 
suddenly let go free. our house longer gave an impression
 of peace and safety, the world fell to pieces around me. would
 report as criminal, my father would be told, perhaps even the
 police might come for me. the terror of utter chaos menaced me, all
 that was ugly and dangerous was aligned against me. the fact that i
 had not stolen at all did not count in the least. i had sworn to it
 besides. dear, dear!
 
i burst into tears. i felt i must buy myself off. despairingly i
 searched all my pockets. not an apple, not penknife, absolutely
 nothing. all at once i thought of my watch. it was an old silver one
 which wouldn’t go. i wore it for special reason. it came down to me
 from my grandmother. i drew it out quickly.
 
“kromer,” i said, “listen, you mustn’t give away, that wouldn’t be
 nice of you. look here, i will give you my watch; i haven’t anything
 else, worse luck! you can have it, it’s silver one; the mechanism is
 good, there is one little thing wrong, that’s all, it needs repairing.”
 
smiled and took the watch in his big hand. i looked at his hand and
 felt how coarse and hostile it was, how it grasped at my life and peace.
 
“it’s silver,” i said, timidly.
 
“i wouldn’t give straw for your silver and your old watch!” said
 with deep scorn. “get it repaired yourself!”
 
“but, frank,” i exclaimed, quivering with fear lest should go away.
 “wait minute. do take the watch! it’s really silver, really and
 truly. and i haven’t got anything else.” gave cold and scornful
 look.
 
“very well, then, you know who i am going to; or i can tell the police.
 i know the sergeant very well.”
 
turned to go. i held him back by the sleeve. i could not let that
 happen. i would much rather have died than bear all that would take
 place if went away like that.
 
“frank,” i implored, hoarse with emotion, “please don’t do anything
 silly! tell it’s only joke, isn’t it?”
 
“oh, yes, joke, but it might cost you dear.”
 
“do tell me, frank, what to do. i’ll do anything!” examined me
 critically through his screwed-up eyes and laughed again.
 
“don’t be silly,” said with affected affability. “you know as well
 as i do. i’ve got the chance of earning couple of marks, and i’m not
 such rich fellow that i can afford to throw it away, you know that
 well enough. but you’re rich, why, you’ve even got watch. you need
 only give just two marks and everything will be all right.”
 
i understood his logic. but two marks! for that was as much, and
 just as unobtainable, as ten, as hundred, as thousand marks. i
 had money. there was money box that my mother kept for me, with a
 couple of ten and five pfennig pieces inside which i received from my
 uncle when paid us visit, or from similar sources. i had nothing
 else. at that age i received pocket-money at all.
 
“i have nothing,” i said sadly. “i have money at all. but i’ll give
 you everything i have. i’ve got book about red indians, and also
 soldiers, and compass. i’ll get that for you.”
 
but kromer only screwed up his evil mouth, and spat on the ground.
 
“quit your jawing,” said commandingly. “you can keep your old trash
 yourself. compass! don’t make angry, d’you hear? and hand over the
 money!”
 
“but i haven’t any. i never get money. i can’t help it.”
 
“very well, then, you’ll bring the two marks in the morning. i shall
 wait for you in the market after school. that’s all. if you don’t bring
 any money, look out!”
 
“yes; but where shall i get it, then? good lord! if i haven’t any----”
 
“there’s enough money in your house. that’s your business. to-morrow
 after school, then. and i tell you: if you don’t bring it----”
 
his eyes darted terrible look at me, spat again and vanished like
 shadow.
 
i could not go upstairs. my life was ruined. i wondered if i should
 run away and never come back, or go and drown myself. but these
 thoughts were not clearly formulated. i sat crouched in the dark on the
 bottom step and i surrendered myself to my misfortune. there lina found
 in tears as she came down with basket to get wood.
 
i begged her to say nothing on her return and i went up. my father’s
 hat and my mother’s sunshade hung on the rack near the glass door. all
 these things reminded of home and tenderness, my heart went out to
 them imploringly and, grateful for their existence, i felt like the
 prodigal when looked into his old homely room and sensed its
 familiar atmosphere. all this, the bright father-and-mother world, was
 mine longer, and i was buried deeply and guiltily in the strange
 flood, ensnared in sinful adventures, beset by enemies and dangers,
 menaced by shame and terror. the hat and sunshade, the good old
 sandstone floor, the big picture over the hall cupboard, and the voice
 of my elder sister in the living-room, all this was dearer and more
 precious to than ever, but it was longer consolation and secure
 possession. all of it was now reproach. all this belonged to no
 more, i could share more in its cheerfulness and peace. i carried
 mud on my shoes that i could not wipe off on the mat, i brought shadows
 in with me, of which the home-world had knowledge. how many secrets
 had i already had, how many cares--but that was play, mere nothing
 compared with what i was bringing in with that day.
 
fate was overtaking me, hands were stretched out after me, from which
 even my mother could not protect me, of which she was to be allowed no
 knowledge. it was all the same, whether my offense was thieving, or
 lie (had i not taken false oath by god?). my was not this or
 that, i had tendered my hand to the devil. why did i follow him? why
 had i obeyed kromer, more than ever i did my father? why had i falsely
 invented the story of the theft? why had i plumed myself on having
 committed crime, as if it had been deed of heroism? now the devil
 had by the hand, now the evil one was pursuing me.
 
for moment i felt further dread of the morrow, but i had the
 terrible certainty that my way was leading further and further
 downhill and into the darkness. i realized clearly that from my
 wrongdoing other wrongdoings must result, that the greetings and kisses
 i gave to my parents would be lie, that secret destiny i should
 have to conceal hung over me.
 
for an instant confidence and hope came to like lightning flash
 as i gazed at my father’s hat. i would tell him everything, would
 accept his judgment and the punishment might mete out; would
 be my confidant and would save me. confession was all that would be
 necessary, as i had made so many confessions before--a difficult
 bitter hour, serious, remorseful plea for forgiveness.
 
how sweetly that sounded! how tempting that was! but nothing came of
 it. i knew that i should not do it. i knew that i had now secret,
 that i was burdened with guilt for which i myself would have to bear
 the responsibility alone. perhaps i was at this very moment at the
 cross-roads, perhaps from this hour henceforth i should have to belong
 to the wicked, forever share secrets with the bad, depend on them, obey
 them, and become as one of themselves. i had pretended to be man and
 hero, now i had to take the consequences.
 
i was glad that my father, as entered, found fault with my wet
 boots. it diverted his attention from something worse, and i allowed
 myself to suffer his reproach, secretly thinking of the other. that
 gave birth to peculiar new feeling in me, an evil cutting feeling
 like barbed hook. i felt superior to my father! i felt, for an
 instant’s duration, certain scorn of his ignorance; his scolding over
 the wet boots seemed to petty. “if you only knew!” i thought, and
 looked upon myself as criminal who is being tried for having stolen a
 loaf of bread, while ought to confess to having committed murder. it
 was an ugly and repugnant feeling, yet strong and not without certain
 charm, and it chained to my secret and my guilt more securely than
 anything else. perhaps kromer has already gone to the police and given
 away, i thought, and storm is threatening to break over my head,
 while here i am looked upon as mere child!
 
this was the important and permanent element of the whole event up to
 this point of my narration. it was the first cleft in the sacredness of
 parenthood, it was the first split in the pillar on which my childhood
 had reposed, and which everyone must overthrow, before can attain to
 self-realization. the inward, fundamental basis of our destiny is built
 up from these events, which outsider observes. such split or cleft
 grows together again, heals up and is forgotten, but in the most secret
 chamber of the soul it continues to live and bleed.
 
i myself felt immediate terror in the presence of this new feeling, i
 would have liked to embrace my father’s feet there and then, to beg his
 forgiveness. but one cannot beg pardon for something fundamental, and a
 child knows and feels that as well and as deeply as any adult.
 
i felt the need to think over the affair and to consider ways and means
 for the morrow; but i did not get around to it. my whole evening was
 taken up solely in accustoming myself to the changed atmosphere of our
 living-room. clock and table, bible and looking-glass, bookcase and
 pictures seemed all to be saying good-bye to me. with freezing heart i
 had to stand by and watch my world, the good happy time of my life,
 sever itself from me, to be relegated to the past. i was forced to
 realize that i was being held fast to new sucking roots in the darkness
 of the unfamiliar world outside. for the first time i tasted death, and
 death tasted bitter, for it is birth, with the terror and fear of a
 formidable renewal.
 
i was glad to be lying at last in bed. but first i had passed through
 purgatory in the form of evening prayers, and we had sung hymn, one
 of my favorite ones. alas! i did not join in, and each note was gall
 and poison for me. i did not join in the common prayer, either, when
 my father gave the blessing, and when finished: “be with us all!”
 i tore myself convulsively from the circle. the grace of god was with
 them all, but with longer. cold and very tired, i went away.
 
after i had lain awhile in bed, wrapped around in warmth and safety,
 my troubled heart strayed back once again, and fluttered uneasily in
 the past. mother had wished good-night, as she always did, her step
 sounded yet in the room, the light of her candle gleamed through the
 crack in the door. now, i thought, now she will come back again--she
 has felt my need, she will give kiss and will ask, in tones kind
 and full of promise, what is the matter. then i can weep, the lump in
 my throat will melt away, i will throw my arms about her and will tell
 her, and everything will be right--i shall be saved! and when the crack
 in the door had become dark again i still listened for while and
 thought--she must come, she must.
 
then i came back to reality, and looked my enemy in the face. i saw him
 clearly, had one eye closed, his mouth laughed uncouthly. while i
 gazed at him and the inevitable gnawed at my heart, became bigger
 and more ugly, and his wicked eye lit up devilishly. was close
 beside me, until i dropped off to sleep. but i did not dream of him,
 nor of the day’s events. i dreamed instead that we were in boat, my
 parents, my sisters and i, lapped in peace and the brightness of a
 holiday. i woke up in the middle of the night, with the aftertaste of
 bliss. i still saw the white summer dresses of my sisters glistening in
 the sun, and then fell from my paradise back to reality, and the enemy
 with the wicked eye stood opposite me.
 
i looked ill when mother came in quickly in the morning and told how
 late it was and wanted to know why i was still in bed, and when she
 asked what was the matter with me, i vomited.
 
but i seemed to have gained point. i rather liked to be somewhat ill
 and to be allowed to spend the morning in bed drinking chamomile tea,
 to listen to mother clearing-up in the next room, and to hear lina
 outside in the corridor opening the door to the butcher. to stay away
 from morning school was rather like fairy-story, and the sun which
 played in the room was not the same you saw through the green curtains
 at school. but to-day all this had lost its charm for me. it had a
 false ring about it.
 
if i had died! but i was only slightly ill, as i had often been before,
 and nothing was gained by that. it prevented from going to school,
 but it did not protect in any way from kromer, who would be waiting
 for in the market at eleven o’clock. and mother’s friendliness
 was this time without comfort; it was burdensome and painful. i soon
 pretended to be asleep again, and thought the matter over, but all
 to purpose--i had to be in the market at eleven o’clock. for that
 reason i got up at ten, and said that i was better. as usual in such
 cases i was told that either i must go back to bed or go to school in
 the afternoon. i said i would rather go to school. i had formed plan.
 
i dared not go to kromer without money. i had to get possession of the
 little savings box which belonged to me. there was not enough money in
 it, far from enough, i knew; but it was still little, and something
 told that little was better than nothing; for at least kromer had
 to be appeased.
 
i felt horrible as i crept in my socks into my mother’s room and took
 my box from her writing table; but it was not so horrible as the
 previous day’s experience. my heart beat so fast i nearly died, and
 it was better when i found, at the first look, down below on the
 stairs, that the box was locked. it was easy to break it open, it
 was only necessary to cut through thin plate of tin; but the action
 caused pain, for only in doing this was i committing theft. up to
 then i had only taken lumps of sugar and fruit on the sly. now i had
 stolen something, although it was my own money. i realized i had taken
 step nearer kromer and his world, that i was slipping gradually
 downwards--and i adopted an attitude of defiance. the devil could run
 away with if liked, there was way out. i anxiously counted
 the money, it had sounded so much in the box, now in my hand it was
 miserably little. there were sixty-five pfennigs. i hid the box in the
 basement, held the money in my closed fist and went out of the house,
 with feeling different from any with which i had ever left the portal
 before. someone called to from above, i thought, but i went quickly
 on my way.
 
there was still plenty of time. i sneaked by roundabout way through
 the streets of changed town, beneath clouds i had never seen before,
 by houses which seemed to spy on me, and people who suspected me. on
 the way i recollected that one of my school friends had once found a
 thaler in the cattle market. i would have liked to pray to god to work
 miracle and allow to make such treasure-trove. but i had no
 longer the right to pray. and even then the box would not be made whole
 again.
 
frank kromer saw in the distance. however, came along very
 slowly and seemed not to be looking out for me. as approached he
 beckoned commandingly to follow. passed on tranquilly, without
 once looking round, went down straw street and over the bridge, and
 stopped on the outskirts of the town in front of new building. no
 one was working there, the walls stood bare, without doors or windows.
 kromer looked round and then went through the doorway. i followed him.
 stepped behind the wall, beckoned to and stretched out his hand.
 
“that makes sixty-five pfennigs,” said and looked at me.
 
“yes,” i said timidly. “that’s all i have--it’s too little, i know, but
 it’s all. i haven’t any more.”
 
“i thought you were cleverer than that,” exclaimed, blaming in
 what were almost mild terms. “between men of honor there must be honest
 dealing. i will not take anything from you, except what is right.
 you know that. take your pfennigs back, there! the other--you know
 who--doesn’t try to beat down. pays.”
 
“but i have absolutely nothing else. that was my money box.”
 
“that’s your affair. but i don’t want to make you unhappy. you still
 owe one mark thirty-five pfennig. when can i have it?”
 
“oh, you will soon have it, certainly, kromer. i don’t know
 yet--perhaps to-morrow, or the day after, i shall have some more. you
 understand that i can’t tell my father, don’t you?”
 
“that’s concern of mine. i don’t want to harm you. if i liked, i
 could get the money before noon, you see, and i’m poor. you wear nice
 clothes, and you get something better to eat for dinner than i do. but
 i won’t say anything. i am willing to wait few days. the day after
 to-morrow, in the afternoon, i will whistle for you, then you will
 bring it along. you can recognize my whistle?”
 
gave whistle that i had often heard before.
 
“yes,” i said, “i know it.”
 
went away, as if i didn’t belong to him. it had been only a
 transaction between us, nothing further.
 
even to-day, i believe, kromer’s whistle would terrify if i heard
 it again suddenly. from then on i heard it often. it seemed i heard it
 continually and always. place, game, work, idea in which
 this whistle would not sound. i was dependent on it, it was now the
 messenger of my fate. on mild, glowing autumn afternoons i was often in
 our little flower garden, which i loved dearly. peculiar impulse made
 take up again boyish games which i had played formerly. i played, as
 it were, that i was boy who was younger than i, who was still good
 and free, innocent and secure. but in the middle of the game, always
 expected and yet always terribly disturbing and surprising sounded
 kromer’s whistle, destroying the picture my imagination had painted.
 
then i had to go, i had to follow my tormentor to evil and ugly places,
 had to render an account and let myself be dunned. the whole business
 may have lasted few weeks, but it seemed to like year, or an
 eternity. i seldom had money--a five or ten pfennig piece stolen from
 the kitchen table when lina left the market basket standing there.
 each time i was blamed by kromer, and heaped with abuse; it was i who
 deceived him and kept back what was his due, it was i who robbed him
 and made him unhappy! seldom in life has need so oppressed me, seldom
 have i felt greater helplessness, greater dependence.
 
i had filled up the savings box with toy money--no one made any
 enquiries. but that as well could be discovered any day. i was even
 more afraid of mother than of kromer’s harsh whistle, especially when
 she stepped up to softly--was she not going to ask about the
 money box?
 
as i presented myself to my evil genius several times without money he
 began to torment and to make use of after different fashion. i
 had to work for him. had to see to various things for his father.
 i did that for him or made do something more difficult, hop on
 one leg for ten minutes, or fasten scrap of paper on to the coat of
 passer-by. many nights these torments realized themselves in my
 dreams, and i wept and broke out in cold sweat in my nightmare.
 
for time i was ill. i often vomited and felt cold, but at night i
 lay in fever, bathed in perspiration. mother felt that something was
 wrong and displayed much sympathy on my behalf, but this tortured me
 because i could not respond by confiding in her.
 
one evening, after i had already gone to bed, she brought piece
 of chocolate. this action was souvenir of former years when, if i
 had been good, i was often rewarded in this way before going off to
 sleep. now she stood there and held the piece of chocolate out to me.
 this so pained that i could do nothing but shake my head. she asked
 what was the matter with and stroked my hair. i could only sob out:
 “nothing! nothing! i won’t have anything.” she put the chocolate on my
 bed table and went away. when she wished subsequently to question me
 on the matter i made as if i knew nothing about it. once she brought
 the doctor to me, who examined and prescribed cold ablutions in the
 morning.
 
my state at that time was sort of insanity. i was shy and lived in
 torment like ghost in the midst of the well-ordered peace of our
 house. i had part in the others’ lives, and could seldom, even for
 as much as an hour, forget my miserable existence. in the presence of
 my father, who often took to task in an irritated fashion, i was
 reserved and wrapped up in myself.
 



chapter two
 
cain
 

deliverance from my troubles came from quite an unexpected quarter, and
 with it something new entered into my life, which has up to the present
 day exercised strong influence.
 
short time before we had had new boy at our latin school. was
 the of well-to-do widow who had moved to our town. was in
 mourning and wore crape band round his sleeve. his form was above
 mine, and was several years older, but i soon began to take notice
 of him, as did all of us. this remarkable boy impressed one as being
 much older than looked. made on one the impression of being a
 mere schoolboy. with us childish youngsters was as distant and as
 mature as man, or rather, as gentleman. was by means popular,
 took part in the games, much less in the fooling. it was only the
 self-conscious and decided tone which adopted towards the masters
 that pleased the others. his name was max demian.
 
one day it happened, as it occasionally did in our school, that for
 some cause or other, another class was sent into our large schoolroom.
 it was demian’s form. we little ones were having biblical history, the
 big ones had to write an essay. while we were having the story of cain
 and abel knocked into us, i kept looking across at demian, whose face
 fascinated strangely, and saw his wise, bright, more than ordinarily
 strong features bent attentively and thoughtfully over his task. did
 not look at all like schoolboy doing an exercise, but like research
 worker solving problem. i did not find him really agreeable. on the
 contrary, i had one or two little things against him. with was
 too distant and superior, was much too provokingly sure of himself,
 and the expression of his eyes was that of an adult--which children
 never like--rather sad with occasional flashes of scorn. yet i could
 not resist looking at him, whether i liked him or not. but the minute
 looked in my direction i looked away, somewhat frightened. if to-day
 i consider what looked like as schoolboy, i can say that was
 in every respect different from the others, and bore the stamp of a
 striking personality and therefore attracted attention. but at the same
 time did everything to prevent himself from being remarked--he bore
 and conducted himself like disguised prince who finds himself among
 peasant boys and makes every effort to appear like them.
 
was behind on the way home from school. when the others had run
 on, overtook and said: “hello!” even his manner of greeting,
 although imitated our schoolboy tone of voice, was polite and like
 that of grown-up person.
 
“shall we go little way together?” questioned in friendly way. i
 was flattered and nodded. then i described to him where i lived.
 
“oh, there?” said laughingly. “i know the house already. there is a
 remarkable work of art over your door, which interested at once.”
 
i did not guess immediately to what was referring, and was
 astonished that seemed to know our house better than i did. there
 was indeed sort of crest which served as keystone over the arch of
 the door, but in course of time it had become faint and had often been
 painted over. as far as i knew, it had nothing to do with us, or with
 our family.
 
“i don’t know anything about it,” i said timidly. “it’s bird, or
 something like it; it must be very old. they say that the house at one
 time belonged to the abbey.”
 
“very likely,” nodded. “we’ll have another good look at it. such
 things are often interesting. it is hawk, i think.”
 
we continued our way. i was considerably embarrassed. suddenly demian
 laughed, as if something funny had struck him.
 
“oh, i was present at your lesson,” said with animation. “the story
 of cain, who carried the mark on his forehead, was it not? do you like
 it?”
 
generally i used not to like anything of all the things we had to
 learn. but i did not dare to say so--it was as though grown-up person
 were talking to me. i said i liked the story very much.
 
demian tapped on the shoulder. “no need to impose on me, old fellow.
 but the story is really rather remarkable. i think it is much more
 remarkable than most of the others we get at school. the master didn’t
 say very much about it, only the usual things about god and sin, et
 cetera. but i believe----” broke off, smiled, and questioned: “but
 does it interest you?”
 
“well,” continued, “i think one can conceive this story of cain
 quite differently. most things we are taught are certainly quite true
 and right, but one can consider them all from different standpoint
 from the master’s, and most of them have much better meaning then.
 for instance, we can’t be quite content with the explanation given us
 with regard to this fellow cain and the mark on his forehead. don’t
 you find it so, too? it certainly might happen that should kill
 one of his brothers in quarrel, it is also possible that should
 afterwards be afraid, and have to come down peg. but that should
 be singled out into the bargain with decoration for his cowardice,
 which protects him and strikes terror into everyone else, that is
 really rather odd.”
 
“certainly,” i said, interested. the case began to interest me. “but
 how else should one explain the story?” clapped on the shoulder.
 
“quite simply! the essential fact, and the point of departure of the
 story, was the sign. here was man who had something in his face which
 terrified other people. they did not dare to molest him, made big
 impression on them, and his children. perhaps, or rather certainly,
 it was not really sign on his forehead like an office stamp--things
 are not as simple as that in real life. i would sooner think it was
 something scarcely perceptible, of peculiar nature--a little more
 intelligence and boldness in his look than people were accustomed to.
 this man had power, other people shrank from him. had ‘sign.’
 one could explain that as one wished. and one always wishes what is
 convenient and agrees with one’s opinions. people were afraid of cain’s
 children, they had ‘sign.’ and so they explained the sign not as it
 really was, distinction, but as the contrary. the fellows with this
 sign were said to be peculiar, and they were courageous as well. people
 with courage and character are always called peculiar by other people.
 that race of fearless and peculiar men should rove about was very
 embarrassing. and so people attached surname and story to this
 race, in order to revenge themselves on it, in order to compensate
 themselves more or less for all the terror with which it had inspired
 them. do you understand?”
 
“yes--that means to say, then--that cain was not at all wicked? and the
 whole story in the bible isn’t really true?”
 
“yes and no. such ancient, primitive stories are always true, but they
 have not always been recorded and explained in the proper manner. in
 short, i mean that cain was thundering good fellow, and this story
 got attached to his name simply because people were afraid of him. the
 story was merely report, something people might have set going in a
 gossiping way, and it was true in so far as cain and his children did
 actually wear sort of ‘sign’ and were different from most people.”
 
i was much astonished.
 
“and do you believe then, that the affair of the murder is absolutely
 untrue?” i asked, much impressed.
 
“not at all! it is certainly true. the strong man killed weak one.
 one may doubt of course whether it was really his brother or not. it
 is not important, for, in the end, all men are brothers. strong man,
 then, has killed weak one. perhaps it was deed of heroism, perhaps
 it was not. but in any case the other weak people were terrified,
 they lamented and complained, and when they were asked: ‘why don’t
 you simply kill him as well?’ they did not answer, ‘because we are
 cowards,’ but they said instead: ‘you can’t. has sign. god has
 singled him out!’ the humbug must have arisen something after this
 style---- oh, i am keeping you from going in. good-bye, then!”
 
turned into old street and left alone, more astonished than i
 had ever been before. scarcely had gone when everything that he
 had said seemed to quite unbelievable! cain noble fellow, abel a
 coward! cain’s sign distinction! it was absurd, it was blasphemous
 and infamous. what was god’s part in the matter? had not accepted
 abel’s sacrifice, did not love abel? demian’s story was nonsense!
 i suspected him of making fun of and of wishing to mislead me. the
 devil of clever fellow, and could talk, but--well----
 
still, i had never thought so much about any of the biblical or other
 stories before. and for some time past i had never so completely
 forgotten frank kromer, for hours, for whole evening. at home i
 read through the story once again, as it stands in the bible, short
 and clear. it was quite foolish to try to find special, secret
 meaning. if it had one, every murderer could look upon himself as a
 favorite of god! no, it was nonsense. but demian had nice way of
 saying such things, so easily and pleasantly, as if everything were
 self-evident--and then his eyes!
 
my ideas were certainly little upset, or rather they were very much
 confused. i had lived in bright, clean world, i myself had been a
 sort of abel, and now i was so firmly fixed in the other and had
 sunk so deeply, but really what could i do to help it? what was my
 position now? reminiscence glowed in which for the moment almost
 took away my breath. i remembered that wretched evening, from which my
 present misery dated, when i looked for an instant into the heart of my
 father’s bright world and despised his wisdom! then i was cain and bore
 the sign; i imagined that it was in way shameful, but distinction,
 and in my wickedness and unhappiness i stood on higher level than my
 father, higher than good and pious people.
 
it was not in such clear-thinking way that my experience then
 presented itself to me, but all this was contained therein. it was only
 flaming up of feeling, of strange emotions which caused pain and
 yet filled with pride.
 
when i considered the matter, i saw how strangely demian had spoken of
 the fearless and the cowards! how curiously had explained the mark
 on cain’s forehead. how singularly his eyes had lit up, those peculiar
 eyes of grown person! and indistinctly it shot through my brain: is
 not himself, this demian, sort of cain? why did defend him, if
 did not feel like him? why had this force in his gaze? why did he
 speak so scornfully of the “others,” of the fearsome, who are really
 the pious and the well-considered of god?
 
this thought led to definite conclusion. stone had fallen into
 the well, and the well was my young soul. and this business with cain,
 the murder and the sign, was for long, very long, time the point
 from which my seekings after knowledge, my doubts and my criticisms
 took their departure.
 
i noticed that the other boys also occupied themselves good deal with
 demian. i had not told anyone of his version of the story of cain,
 but appeared to interest the others as well. at least, many rumors
 concerning the “new boy” became current. if only i still knew all of
 them, each would help to throw fresh light on him, each would serve
 to interpret him. i only remember the first rumor was that demian’s
 mother was very rich. it was also said that she never went to church,
 nor the either. another rumor had it that they were jews, but they
 could just as easily have been, in secret, mohammedans. furthermore,
 tales were told of max demian’s strength. so much was certain, that the
 strongest boy in his form, who challenged him to fight, and who at
 his refusal branded him coward, suffered terrible humiliation at his
 hands. those who were there said that demian had simply taken him by
 the nape of the neck with one hand and had brought such pressure to
 bear that the boy went white and afterwards crawled away, and that for
 several days was unable to use his arm. for whole evening rumor
 even ran that was dead. for time everything was asserted and
 believed, everything that was exciting and wonderful. then there was
 satiety of rumors for while. little later new ones circulated,
 which asserted that demian had intimate relations with girls and “knew
 everything.”
 
meanwhile my affair with frank kromer took its inevitable course. i
 could not get away from him, for although left in peace for
 days together, i was still bound to him. in my dreams lived as my
 shadow, and thus my fantasy credited him with actions which did not,
 in reality, do; so that in dreams i was absolutely his slave. i lived
 in these dreams--i was always deep dreamer--more than in reality.
 these shadowy conceptions wasted my strength and my life force. i often
 dreamed, among other things, that kromer ill-treated me, that spat
 on and knelt on and, what was worse, that led to commit
 grave crimes--or rather i was not led, but simply forced, through his
 powerful influence. the most terrible of these dreams, from which i
 woke up half mad, presented itself as murderous attack on my father.
 kromer whetted knife and put it in my hand, as we were standing
 behind the trees of lane, and lying in wait for someone--whom i knew
 not; but when someone came along and kromer through pressure of the
 arm informed that this was the man, whom i was to stab, it turned
 out to be my father! then i woke up.
 
with all these troubles, i still thought great deal about cain and
 abel, but much less about demian. it was, strangely enough, in dream
 that first came in contact with again. i dreamed once more, of
 assault and ill-treatment which i suffered, but instead of kromer,
 this time it was demian who knelt upon me. and, what was quite new and
 profoundly impressive, everything that i suffered resistingly and in
 torment at the hands of kromer, i suffered willingly from demian, with
 feeling which was composed as much of joy as of fear. i had this
 dream twice, then kromer occupied his old position in my thoughts.
 
for long time i have not been able to separate what i experienced in
 these dreams from what i underwent in reality. but in any case my evil
 relation with kromer took its course, and was by means at an end,
 when i had at last, by petty thefts, paid the boy the sum owed. no, for
 now knew of these thefts, as always asked where the money came
 from, and i was more in his hands than ever. frequently threatened
 to tell my father everything, and my terror then was scarcely as
 great as the profound regret that i had not myself done that in the
 beginning. however, miserable as i was, i did not repent of everything,
 at least not always, and sometimes felt, i thought, that things could
 not have helped being as they were. the hand of fate was upon me, and
 it was useless to want to break away.
 
i conjecture that my parents suffered not little in these
 circumstances. strange spirit had come over me, i longer fitted
 into our community which had been so intimate, and for which i often
 felt maddening homesickness, as for lost paradise. i was treated,
 particularly by mother, more like sick person than like miserable
 wretch. but the actual state of affairs i was able to observe best
 in the conduct of my two sisters. it was quite evident from their
 behavior, which was very considerate and which yet caused endless
 pain, that i was sort of person possessed, who was more to be pitied
 than blamed for his condition, but yet in whom evil had taken up
 residence. i felt that i was being prayed for in different way from
 formerly, and realized the fruitlessness of these prayers. i often felt
 burning within an intense longing for relief, an ardent desire for
 full confession, and yet i realized in advance that i should not be
 able to tell everything to father and mother properly, in explanation
 of my conduct. i knew that i should be received in friendly way,
 that much consideration and compassion would be shown me, but that i
 should not be completely understood. the whole affair would have been
 looked upon as sort of backsliding, whereas it was really the work of
 destiny.
 
i know that many people will not believe that child scarcely eleven
 years old could feel thus. but i am not relating my affairs for their
 benefit. my narration is for those who know mankind better. the
 grown-up person who has learned to convert part of his feelings into
 thoughts, feels the absence of these ideas in child, and comes to
 believe that the experiences are likewise lacking. but they have seldom
 been so vivid and not often in my life have i suffered as keenly as
 then.
 
one rainy day i was ordered by my tormentor to castle place, and there
 i stood, waiting and digging my feet in the wet chestnut leaves, which
 were still falling regularly from the black, dripping branches. money
 i had none, but i had brought with two pieces of cake that i had
 stolen in order at least to be able to give kromer something. i had
 long since been accustomed to stand about in any odd corner waiting for
 him often for very long time, and i put up with the unalterable.
 
kromer came at last. that day did not stay long. poked several
 times in the ribs, laughed, took the cake, and even offered mouldy
 cigarette, which however i did not accept. was more friendly than
 usual.
 
“oh,” said, as went away, “before i forget--next time you can
 bring your sister along, the elder one. what’s her name? now tell the
 truth.”
 
i did not understand, and gave answer. i only looked at him
 wonderingly.
 
“don’t you get me? you must bring your sister along.”
 
“but kromer, that won’t do. i mustn’t do that, and besides she wouldn’t
 come.”
 
i thought this was only another pretext for vexing me. often did
 that, requiring to do something impossible, and so terrifying me.
 and often, after humiliating me, would by degrees become more
 tractable. i then had to buy myself off with money or with some other
 gift.
 
this time was quite different. was really not at all angry at my
 refusal.
 
“well,” said airily, “you’ll think about it, won’t you? i should
 like to make your sister’s acquaintance. it will not be so difficult.
 you simply take her out for walk, and then i come along. to-morrow
 i’ll whistle for you, and then we can talk more about it.”
 
when had gone, glimpse of the meaning of his request dawned on me.
 i was still quite child, but i knew by hearsay that boys and girls,
 when they were somewhat older, did things which were forbidden, things
 of secret and scandalous nature. and now i should also have to--it
 was suddenly quite clear to how monstrous it was! i immediately
 resolved never to do that. but i scarcely dared think of what would
 happen in that case and how kromer would revenge himself on me. new
 torment began, i had not yet been tortured enough.
 
i walked disconsolately across the empty square, my hands in my
 pockets. fresh torments, new servitude!
 
suddenly fresh, deep voice called to me. i was terrified and began to
 run on. someone ran after me, hand gripped from behind. it was max
 demian.
 
i let myself be taken prisoner. i surrendered.
 
“it’s you?” i said uncertainly. “you frightened so!”
 
looked at me, and never had his glance been more like that of an
 adult, of superior and penetrating person. for long time past we
 had not spoken with one another.
 
“i am sorry,” said in his courteous and at the same time very
 determined manner. “but listen, you mustn’t let yourself be frightened
 like that.”
 
“oh, that can happen sometimes.”
 
“so it appears. but look here: if you shrink like that from someone
 who hasn’t hurt you, then this someone begins to think. it makes him
 curious, wonders what can be the matter. this somebody thinks to
 himself, how awfully frightened you are, and thinks further: one is
 only like that when one is terrified. cowards are always frightened;
 but i believe you aren’t really coward. ain’t i right? of course, you
 aren’t hero either. there are things of which you are afraid. there
 are also people of whom you are afraid. and that should never be. no
 one should ever be afraid of other people. you aren’t afraid of me? or
 are you, perhaps?”
 
“oh no, of course not.”
 
“there, you see. but there are people you are afraid of?”
 
“i don’t know ... let go, what do you want of me?”
 
kept pace with me--i was going quicker with the idea of escaping--i
 felt his look directed on from the side.
 
“just assume,” began again, “that i mean well with you. in any
 case you needn’t be afraid of me. i would very much like to try
 an experiment with you--it’s funny, and you can learn something
 that’s very useful. listen: i often practise an art which is called
 mind-reading. there’s witchcraft in it, but it seems very peculiar
 if one doesn’t know how to do it. you can surprise people very much
 with it. well, let us try it. i like you, or i interest myself in
 you, and i would like to find out what your real feelings are. i have
 already made the first step towards doing that. i have frightened
 you--you are, then, easily frightened. there are things and people of
 which and of whom you are afraid. why is it? one need be afraid of no
 one. if you fear somebody then it is due to the fact that has power
 over you. for example, you have done something wrong, and the other
 person knows it--then has power over you. d’you get me? it’s clear,
 isn’t it?”
 
i looked helplessly into his face, which was serious and prudent as
 always, and kind as well, but without any tenderness--his features were
 rather severe. righteousness or something akin lay therein. i was not
 conscious of what was happening; stood like magician before me.
 
“have you understood?” questioned again.
 
i nodded. i could not speak.
 
“i told you mind-reading looked rather strange, but the process is
 quite natural. i could for example tell you more or less exactly what
 you thought about when i once told you the story of cain and abel.
 but that has nothing to do with the matter in hand. i also think it
 possible that you have dreamed of me. but let’s leave that out! you’re
 clever kid, most of ’em are so stupid. i like talking now and then
 with clever fellow whom i can trust. you have objections, have
 you?”
 
“oh, no! only i don’t understand.”
 
“let’s keep to our old experiment! we have found that: the boy s. is
 easily frightened--he is afraid of somebody--he apparently shares a
 secret with this other person, which causes him much disquietude. is
 that about right?”
 
as in dream i lay under the influence of his voice, of his
 personality. i only nodded. was not voice talking there, which could
 only come from myself? which knew all? which knew all in better,
 clearer way than i myself?
 
demian gave powerful slap on the shoulder.
 
“that’s right then. i thought so. now just one question more: do you
 know the name of the boy who has just gone away?”
 
i sank back, had the key to my secret, this secret which twisted
 back inside as if it did not want to see the light.
 
“what sort of fellow? there was one there, except myself.”
 
laughed.
 
“don’t be afraid to tell me,” said laughingly. “what’s his name?”
 
i whispered: “do you mean frank kromer?”
 
nodded contentedly.
 
“bravo! you’re smart chap, we shall be good friends yet. but now i
 must tell you something else: this kromer, or whatever his name is, is
 nasty fellow. his face tells he’s rascal! what do you think?”
 
“oh yes,” i sobbed out, “he is nasty, he’s devil! but mustn’t know
 anything! for god’s sake, mustn’t know anything. d’you know him?
 does know you?”
 
“don’t worry! he’s gone, and doesn’t know me--not yet. but i should
 like to make his acquaintance. goes to the public school?”
 
“yes.”
 
“in which standard?”
 
“in the fifth. but don’t say anything to him! please, don’t say
 anything to him!”
 
“don’t worry, nothing will happen to you. i suppose you wouldn’t like
 to tell little more about this fellow kromer?”
 
“i can’t! no, let go!”
 
was silent for while.
 
“it’s pity,” said, “we might have been able to carry the
 experiment still further. but i don’t want to bother you. you know,
 don’t you, that it is not right of you to be afraid of him? such fear
 quite undermines us, you must get rid of it. you must get rid of it, if
 you want to become real man. d’you understand?”
 
“certainly, you are quite right ... but it won’t do. you don’t know....”
 
“you have seen that i know lot, more than you thought. do you owe him
 any money?”
 
“yes, i do, but that isn’t the essential point. i can’t tell, i can’t!”
 
“it won’t help matters, then, if i give you the amount you owe him? i
 could very well let you have it.”
 
“no, no, that is not the point. and please: don’t say anything to
 anybody! not word! you are making miserable!”
 
“rely on me, sinclair. later you can share your secrets with me.”
 
“never, never!” i exclaimed vehemently.
 
“just as you please. i only mean, perhaps you will tell something
 more later on. only of your own free will, you understand. surely you
 don’t think i shall act like kromer?”
 
“oh no--but you don’t even know anything about it!”
 
“absolutely nothing. but i think about it. and i shall never act like
 kromer, believe me. besides, you don’t owe anything.”
 
we remained long time silent, and i became more tranquil. but
 demian’s knowledge became more and more of puzzle to me.
 
“i’m going home now,” said, and in the rain drew his coat more
 closely about him. “i should only like to repeat one thing to you,
 since we have gone so far in the matter--you ought to get rid of this
 fellow! if there is nothing else to be done, then kill him! it would
 impress and please me, if you were to do that. besides, i would help
 you.”
 
i was again terrified. i suddenly remembered the story of cain. i had
 an uncanny feeling and i began to cry softly. so much that was weird
 seemed to surround me.
 
“all right,” max demian said, smilingly. “go home now! we will put
 things square, although murder would have been the simplest. in such
 matters the simplest way is always the best. you aren’t in good hands,
 with your friend kromer.”
 
i came home, and it seemed to as if i had been away year.
 everything looked different. between myself and kromer there now stood
 something like future freedom, something like hope. i was lonely no
 longer! and then i realized for the first time how terribly lonely i
 had been for weeks and weeks. and i immediately recollected what i had
 on several occasions turned over in my mind: that confession to my
 parents would afford relief and yet would not quite liberate me. now
 i had almost confessed, to another, to stranger, and as if strong
 perfume had been wafted to me, sensed the presentiment of salvation!
 
still my fear was far from being overcome, and i was still prepared for
 long and terrible mental wrestlings with my evil genius. so it was all
 the more remarkable to that everything passed off so very secretly
 and quietly.
 
kromer’s whistle remained absent from our house for day, two days,
 three days, whole week. i dared not believe my senses, and lay
 inwardly on the watch, to see whether would not suddenly stand
 before me, just at that moment when i should expect him longer. but
 was, and remained, away! distrustful of my new freedom, i still
 could not bring myself to believe in it whole-heartedly. until at
 last i met frank kromer. was coming down the street, straight in
 my direction. when saw me, drew himself together, twisted his
 features in brutal grimace, and turned away without more ado, in
 order to avoid meeting me.
 
that was wonderful moment for me! my enemy ran away from me! my devil
 was afraid of me! surprise and joy shook through and through!
 
in few days demian showed himself once again. waited for me
 outside school.
 
“hullo,” i said.
 
“good morning, sinclair. i only wanted to hear how you’re getting on.
 kromer leaves you in peace, doesn’t he?”
 
“did you manage that? but how did you do it? how? i don’t understand
 it. hasn’t come near me.”
 
“splendid. if should come again--i don’t think will, but he’s a
 cheeky fellow--then simply tell him to remember demian.”
 
“but what does it all mean? have you had fight with him and thrashed
 him?”
 
“no, i’m not so keen on that. i simply talked to him, as i did to you,
 and i made it clear to him that it is to his own advantage to leave you
 in peace.”
 
“oh, but you haven’t given him any money?”
 
“no, kid. you have already tried that way yourself.”
 
i attempted to pump him on the matter, but disengaged himself. the
 old, embarrassed feeling concerning him came over me--an odd mixture of
 gratitude and shyness, of admiration and fear, of affection and inward
 resistance.
 
i had the intention of seeing him again soon, and then i wanted to talk
 more about everything, about the cain affair as well. but i did not see
 him. gratitude is not one of the virtues in which i believe, and to
 require it of child would seem to wrong. so i do not wonder very
 much at the complete ingratitude which i evinced towards max demian.
 to-day i believe positively that i should have been ruined for life if
 had not freed from kromer’s clutches. at that time also i already
 felt this release as the greatest event of my young life--but i left
 the deliverer on one side as soon as had accomplished the miracle.
 
as i have said, ingratitude seems to nothing strange. solely, the
 lack of curiosity i evinced is odd. how was it possible that i could
 continue for single day my quiet mode of life without coming nearer
 to the secrets with which demian had brought in contact? how could
 i restrain the desire to hear more about cain, more about kromer, more
 about the thought-reading?
 
it is scarcely comprehensible, and yet it is so. i suddenly saw myself
 extricated from the demoniacal toils, saw again the world lying
 bright and cheerful before me. i was longer subject to paroxysms
 of fear. the curse was broken, i was longer tormented and
 condemned creature, i was schoolboy again. my temperament sought
 to regain its equilibrium and tranquillity as quickly as possible,
 and so i took pains above all things to put behind all that had
 been ugly and menacing, and to forget it. the whole, long story of my
 guilt, of my terrifying anxiety, slipped from my memory wonderfully
 quick, apparently without having left behind any scars or impressions
 whatsoever.
 
the fact that i likewise tried as quickly to forget my helper and
 deliverer, i understand to-day as well. instinctively my mind turned
 from the damning recollection of my awful servitude under kromer, and
 i sought to recover my former happy, contented mental outlook, to
 regain that lost paradise which opened once more to me, the bright
 father-and-mother world, where my sisters dwelt in the fragrant
 atmosphere of purity, in loving kindness such as god had extended to
 abel.
 
on the very next day after my short conversation with demian, when i
 was at last fully convinced of my newly-born freedom and feared no
 longer relapse to my condition of slavery, i did what i had so often
 and so ardently desired to do--i confessed. i went to mother and showed
 her the little savings box with the broken lock, filled with toy mark
 pieces instead of with real money, and i told her how long i had been
 in the thrall of an evil tormentor, through my own guilt. she did not
 understand everything, but she saw the money box, she saw my altered
 look and heard my changed voice--she felt that i was healed, that i had
 been restored to her.
 
and then with lofty feelings i celebrated my readmission into the
 family, the prodigal son’s return home. mother took to father, the
 story was repeated, questions and exclamations of wonder followed in
 quick succession, both parents stroked my hair and breathed deeply, as
 in relief from long oppression. it was all lovely, like the stories
 i had read, all discords were resolved in happy ending.
 
i surrendered myself passionately to this harmonious state of affairs.
 i could not have enough of the idea that i was again free and trusted
 by my parents. i was model boy at home and played more frequently
 than ever with my sisters. at prayers i sang the dear, old hymns with
 the blissful feeling of one converted and redeemed. it came straight
 from my heart, it was lie this time.
 
and yet it was not at all as it should have been. and this is the point
 which alone can truly explain my forgetfulness of demian. i ought to
 have made confession _to him_! the confession would have been
 less touching and less specious, but for it would have borne more
 fruit. i was now clinging fast to my former paradisaical world, i had
 returned home and had been received in grace. but demian belonged in no
 wise to this world, did not fit into it. also--in different way
 from kromer--but nevertheless also was seducer, too bound to
 the second, evil, bad world, and of this world i never wanted to hear
 anything more. i could not now, and i did not wish to give up abel and
 help to glorify cain, now when i myself had again become an abel.
 
so much for the outward correlation of events. but inwardly it was like
 this: i had been freed from the hands of kromer and the devil, but not
 through my own strength and effort. i had ventured footing on the
 paths of the world, and they had been too slippery for me. now that
 the grasp of friendly hand had saved me, i ran back, without another
 glance round, to mother’s lap, to the protecting, godly and tender
 security of childhood. i made myself younger, more dependent on others,
 more childlike than i really was. i had to replace my dependence on
 kromer by new one, since i was powerless to strike out for myself.
 so i chose, in the blindness of my heart, the dependence on father
 and mother, on the old, beloved, “bright world,” on this world which
 i knew already was not the sole one. had i not done this, i should
 have had to hold to demian, to entrust myself to him. the fact that i
 did not, appeared to then to be due to justifiable distrust of his
 strange ideas; in reality it was due to nothing else than fear. for
 demian would have required more of than did my parents, much more.
 by stimulation and exhortation, by scorn and irony would have tried
 to make more independent. alas, i know that to-day: nothing in the
 world is so distasteful to man as to go the way which leads him to
 himself!
 
and yet, about half year later, i could not resist the temptation to
 ask my father while we were out for walk, what was to be made of the
 fact that many people declared cain to be better than abel.
 
was much surprised, and explained to that this was conception
 by means novel. it had even emerged in the early christian era, and
 had been professed by sects, one of which was called the “cainites.”
 but naturally this foolish doctrine was nothing else than an attempt of
 the devil to undermine our belief. for, if one believes that cain was
 right and abel was wrong, then it follows that god has erred, and that
 the god of the bible is not the true and only god, but false one. the
 cainites really used to profess and preach something approximating this
 doctrine; but this heresy vanished from among mankind long time ago
 and wondered the more that school friend had been able to learn
 something on the subject. nevertheless, earnestly exhorted not to
 let these ideas occupy my attention.
 



chapter three
 
the thief on the cross
 

i could describe scenes of my childhood, spent in peaceful security at
 the side of father and mother, relate how i passed this period of my
 life, playing contentedly in the midst of surroundings brightened by
 love and tenderness. but others have done that. i am only interested
 in the steps i took in life, in order to attain self-realization. all
 the pretty resting-places, happy isles and children’s paradises, whose
 charm is not unknown to me, i leave lying behind in the shimmer of a
 distant horizon, and i have desire to set foot there again.
 
for that reason i will speak, so far as i intend to dwell on the period
 of my childhood, only of new events which overtook me, of what impelled
 forward enabling to throw off my shackles.
 
these impulses always came from the “other” world, they always brought
 fear, coercion and bad conscience in their train, they were always
 of revolutionary tendency and danger to the peace in which i would
 willingly have been allowed to remain.
 
there came the years in which i had to discover anew that there was
 within an instinct which had to lie close and concealed in the
 bright world of moral sanction. as to every man, the slowly awakening
 sense of sex came to as an enemy and destroyer, as something
 forbidden, as seduction and sin. what my curiosity sought to know, what
 caused dreams, desire and fear, the great secret of puberty, that
 was not at all in keeping with the guarded happiness of my peaceful
 childhood. i did as everyone else. i led the double life of child,
 who is yet child longer. my conscious self lived under the
 conditions sanctioned at home; it denied the existence of the new world
 whose dawn glimmered before me. but i lived as well in dreams, impelled
 by desires of secret nature, upon which my conscious self anxiously
 attempted to build new fabric, as the world of my childhood fell in
 ruins about me. like almost all parents, my own did nothing to help
 the awakening life-instincts, about which not syllable was uttered.
 they only aided, with untiring care, my hopeless attempts to deny the
 reality, and to continue my existence in child-like world which was
 ever becoming more unreal and more mendacious. i do not know whether
 parents can do much in such case, and i make mine reproach. it
 was my own affair, to settle my difficulties and to find my way, and
 i carried through the business badly, like most of those who are well
 brought up.
 
every man passes through this difficulty. for the average person, this
 is the point in his life where the demands of his own life come most
 in conflict with his surroundings, where the road forward has to be
 attained through the bitterest fighting. for many people this is the
 only time in their lives that they experience the sequence of death
 and rebirth that is our fate, when they become conscious of the slow
 process of the decay and breaking up of the world of their childhood,
 when everything beloved of us leaves us, and we suddenly feel the
 loneliness and deathly cold of the universe around us. and for very
 many this pitfall is fatal. they cling their whole life long painfully
 to the irrevocable past, to the dream of lost paradise, the worst and
 most deadly of all dreams.
 
but to return to the story. the sensation and dream pictures in which
 the close of childhood presented itself to are not important
 enough to be described. the important point was that i was once again
 conscious of the existence of the “dark” world, the “other” world. what
 frank kromer had once been to me, was now present within myself. and
 so, from the outside as well, the other world once more gained power
 over me.
 
several years had passed since my affair with kromer. that dramatic
 and guilty time of my life lay far behind at that time and seemed
 to have passed like quick nightmare into nothingness. frank kromer
 had long since disappeared from my life; i scarcely gave it moment’s
 thought if i chanced to meet him. but the other important figure in my
 tragedy, max demian, never entirely disappeared from my life. however,
 for long time stood on the far horizon, visible, but not affecting
 me. only by degrees approached again, and i came once more under
 the ray of his power and influence.
 
i will try to recollect what i know of demian in that period. perhaps
 for year, or longer, i did not have single conversation with him.
 i avoided him, and in wise forced himself on me. once or twice,
 when we met, nodded to in friendly greeting. then it seemed to
 at times that there was note of scorn or ironical reproach in his
 friendliness, but that might only have been imagination on my part. my
 relation with him, and the strange influence had exercised over me,
 were as if forgotten, by him as well as by me.
 
i try to recall his face--as i recollect him, i see that i was
 conscious of his existence after all, and took notice of him. i can
 see him going to school, alone or with some of the other big boys. i
 see him walking among them like stranger, lonely and still like a
 celestial body, enveloped in different atmosphere and subject to
 his own laws. one liked him, was intimate with one, except
 his mother, and his relations with her did not seem like those of a
 child, but those of grown-up person. the masters left him as much as
 possible in peace. was good pupil, but did not go out of his
 way to please them. from time to time we heard, in gossip, of word, a
 comment or retort had made to master, and which left nothing to
 be desired in the way of blunt challenge or irony.
 
i call him to mind, as i close my eyes, and i see his picture emerge.
 where was it? ah, now i have it again. it was in the street, in front
 of our house. there one day i saw him standing, note book in his
 hand. i saw that was drawing. was drawing the old crest with the
 bird over the door of our house. and i stood at window, concealed
 behind curtain, and gazed at him. i saw with astonishment his
 attentive, cool, bright features turned to the crest, the features
 of man, of research worker, or an artist, superior and full of
 will-power, oddly bright and cool, with knowing eyes.
 
and again i can see him. it was little later, in the street; we had
 come out of school and were all standing round horse that had fallen
 down. it lay, still harnessed to the shaft, in front of peasant’s
 cart, and sniffed the air pitifully with open nostrils, while blood
 flowed from an invisible wound, so that the white dust in the street
 darkened as it became slowly saturated. as i, with feeling of nausea,
 turned my gaze away, i saw demian’s face. had not pressed forward,
 stood furthest back of all, rather elegant, quite at his ease, as
 was proper to him. his gaze seemed to be directed at the horse’s
 head, and expressed again that deep, quiet, almost fanatical and yet
 calm attentiveness. i could not resist watching him some considerable
 time, and i remember feeling, though quite unconsciously, that there
 was something very peculiar about him. i saw demian’s face, i saw not
 only that had not the face of boy, but that of man; i saw still
 more, i thought i saw, or felt, that it was not the face of man
 either but something else besides. there seemed to be also something
 of the woman in his features, and particularly it seemed to for a
 moment, not manly or boyish, nor old or young, but somehow or other a
 thousand years old, not to be measured by time, bearing the stamp of
 other epochs. animals could look like that, or trees, or stones--i did
 not realize that precisely, i did not experience the exact sensation
 which i, grown-up person, am now describing, but what i felt then
 approximated in some way to what i have just related. perhaps was
 beautiful, perhaps pleased me, perhaps even was repugnant--i
 could not then determine. i saw only that was different from us, he
 was like an animal, or spirit, or picture, i know not what was
 like, but was different, inconceivably different from us all.
 
my reminiscence tells nothing more, and perhaps even what has been
 described has arisen, in part, from later impressions.
 
until i was several years older, i did not come into close contact
 with him again. contrary to custom, demian had not been confirmed with
 the boys of his year, and in consequence fresh rumors concerning him
 were set afloat. in school they were again saying that was really
 jew, or no, heathen, and others pretended to know that and his
 mother professed religion, or that they belonged to bad sect in
 mythology. in connection with this i seem to remember that was
 suspected of living with his mother as with mistress. presumably
 the facts were that had been, up to that time, brought up without
 any denominational creed, and that it was now thought that this might
 be disadvantageous for his future career. in any case, his mother now
 decided after all to allow him to be prepared for confirmation, two
 years later than the boys of his own age. hence it came about that for
 months was my classmate in the confirmation class.
 
for time i kept out of his way, i did not want to have anything to do
 with him; too many mysterious rumors had become attached to his name.
 but above all things i was worried by sense of obligation, implanted
 in since my affair with kromer. and just at that time i had enough
 to do with my own secrets. for the confirmation class coincided with
 the period when i was definitively enlightened on matters of sex, and
 in spite of my good will, my interest in the pious instruction was on
 that account greatly diminished. the things of which the clergyman
 spoke lay far from in still, sacred unreality; they may have been
 quite beautiful and valuable, but in way real and stirring, as were
 in the highest degree, these other things.
 
the more indifferent i became, under these conditions, to our spiritual
 instruction, the more was my interest drawn towards max demian again.
 something or other seemed to unite us. as nearly as i remember it began
 in class early one morning, while the light was still burning in the
 schoolroom. the clergyman taking the confirmation class happened to be
 talking about cain and abel. i hardly paid any attention, i was sleepy
 and scarcely listened. then with raised voice the clergyman began to
 speak fervently of cain’s sign. at this moment i felt sort of contact
 or exhortation and looking up i saw demian’s face turned toward from
 row of desks in front, with bright speaking look, which could have
 expressed scorn as much as seriousness. looked at for moment
 only, and suddenly i was listening intently to the clergyman’s words.
 i heard him speak of cain and the mark on his forehead, and suddenly i
 felt deep within the knowledge that the story could have different
 signification, that it could be looked at from another view, that it
 was possible to be critical.
 
from that instant the bond of communication between demian and myself
 was again established. and oddly enough, scarcely had this sense of
 certain solidarity between us presented itself to my mind, than i
 saw it transferred as if by magic from the ideal world to the world of
 space. i did not know whether had been able to arrange it himself,
 or whether it was pure chance--at that time i believed firmly in
 chance--but few days after i noticed demian had suddenly changed his
 place and was now sitting directly in front of me. (i recollect still
 how pleasant it was, in the midst of the miserable workhouse atmosphere
 of the overcrowded schoolroom, to sense the delicate, fresh aroma of
 soap from his neck in the morning.) few days later had changed
 again, and now sat next to me. and there stayed, occupying the same
 place through the whole of that winter and spring.
 
morning lessons had quite changed. they were longer sleepy and
 boring. i looked forward to them. sometimes we both listened to the
 clergyman with the greatest attention. glance from my neighbor would
 suffice, calling my attention to strange story or peculiar text.
 and another glance from him, very decided one, acted on as an
 admonition, arousing criticism and doubt.
 
but very often we were bad pupils and heard nothing of the lesson.
 demian was always courteous towards masters and schoolfellows. i never
 saw him commit schoolboy prank, never heard him laugh out loud or
 talk in class; never drew on himself the master’s blame. but
 noiselessly, rather by signs and glances than by whispered words, he
 knew how to let share in his own occupations. these were, in part,
 of peculiar nature.
 
for instance, told which of the fellows interested him; and in
 what manner studied them. judged many of them with accuracy.
 used to say to before the lesson: “when i signal to you with
 my thumb, so and so will look round at us, or will scratch his neck,
 etc.” then during the lesson, when i scarcely gave thought to what
 had told me, max would attract my attention by suddenly bending
 his thumb. i would look up quickly at the boy already designated, and
 every time, as if attached to wire, the fellow would make the gesture
 required of him. i bothered max to try this on the master, but did
 not want to do it. but once, when i came into class and told him i
 had not done my preparation, and that i hoped the clergyman would not
 question that day, helped me. the master looked round for boy
 to recite portion of the catechism, and his roving eye rested on me.
 approached slowly, stretched out his finger in my direction, and
 already had my name on his lips--when suddenly became absent-minded
 or uneasy, put his hand to his collar, stepped up to demian who looked
 fixedly into his face. seemed to want to ask him something but he
 turned away, to our surprise, coughed little, and put his question to
 another boy.
 
these jokes amused very much, but only gradually did i notice that
 my friend frequently played the same game with me. it would happen
 that on my way home from school i had suddenly the feeling demian was
 little way behind me, and when i turned round, there was, sure
 enough.
 
“can you really make another person think what you want him to?” i
 asked him.
 
gave information on the subject readily enough, quietly and
 pertinently, in his grown-up manner.
 
“no,” said, “that can’t be done. that is to say, one hasn’t free
 will, even if the person acts that way. neither can the other person
 think as will, nor can i make him think what i want him to. but you
 can observe someone well, and then you can say fairly exactly what he
 thinks or feels; in this way you can generally predict what will do
 the moment after. it’s quite simple, but people merely do not know it.
 naturally it requires practice. to take an example from the butterfly
 world, there is certain species of moth, of which the female is much
 rarer than the male. the moths reproduce like other animals, the male
 impregnates the female, who then lays the egg. suppose you have in your
 possession female of this type of moth--naturalists have often made
 the experiment--then the male moths fly in the night to this female,
 they even make flight of several hours’ duration! think of it! for
 many miles around all the males are conscious of the whereabouts of the
 only female moth in the district. people have tried to explain that,
 but it is not easy. moths must have sense of smell, or something like
 it, which allows them to pick up and follow an almost imperceptible
 scent, like good hound. you understand? there are such things, nature
 is full of them, and one can explain them. now i draw the conclusion
 that if among this class of moths the females were as abundant as
 the males, then these latter would not have such refined sense of
 smell! they have it simply because they have been trained like that.
 if an animal or man concentrates his whole attention and his whole
 will-power on certain thing then attains it. that’s all. and it is
 just the same with what you have asked me. observe man sufficiently
 well, and you will know more about him than does himself.”
 
it lay on the tip of my tongue to mention the word “mind-reading,” and
 so to remind him of the scene with kromer, now relegated to such a
 distant past. but the odd thing between us both was that neither nor
 i ever made the slightest reference to the fact that several years ago
 had intervened so decisively in my life. it was as if formerly there
 had been nothing between us, or as if each of us reckoned that the
 other had forgotten the affair. it even happened once or twice when we
 were together that we met frank kromer in the street, but we exchanged
 look, neither did we speak of him.
 
“but what has that got to do with will-power?” i asked. “you said there
 was such thing as free will. and then you said one only had to
 concentrate one’s will on something to be able to attain one’s ends.
 that doesn’t agree! if i am not master of my will, then i can’t direct
 it here or there as i wish.”
 
“a good question!” said, laughing. “you should always ask questions,
 you must always doubt. but the explanation is very simple. if moth
 for instance wants to concentrate his will-power on star or something
 like that, can’t do it. only--he doesn’t try. seeks only what
 has sense and value for him, satisfies his needs, gets what he
 absolutely must have. and it is just there that the unbelievable
 succeeds--he develops marvelous sixth sense, that other animal
 besides him has! people in our position have more elbow-room,
 certainly, and more interests than an animal. but even we are confined
 to comparatively small space, beyond which we cannot go. to be sure,
 i can imagine this or that, or make myself believe that i absolutely
 want to get to the north pole or somewhere, but i can only carry that
 out and wish it strongly enough when the desire lies right in myself,
 when my whole being is really filled with it. as soon as that is the
 case, as soon as you try to carry out an inward command, then you
 succeed, then you can harness your will as you would good nag. if
 for instance i resolved that our good mr. parson shall not wear his
 spectacles for the future, then that wouldn’t work. that is merely
 play. but when last autumn i had the fixed intention of getting myself
 moved to another desk, i succeeded. someone suddenly arrived who came
 before in the alphabet and who up to then had been ill. because
 someone had to make room for him, it was naturally i who did it,
 because my willing it had made ready to seize the opportunity.”
 
“yes,” i said, “that seemed to very strange at the time. from the
 moment we began to get interested in one another, you managed to get
 nearer and nearer to me. but how was that? you did not immediately take
 place next to me; for few lessons at first you were sitting in the
 row of desks in front of me, weren’t you? how did that come about?”
 
“it was like this. i wasn’t quite certain where i wanted to go when
 i wished to move from my first place. i only knew that i wanted to
 sit further back. it was my wish to move towards you, but i was not
 conscious of this at the time. simultaneously your own will was working
 with mine and helped me. it was only when i sat in front of you that i
 realized my wish was only half fulfilled--i noticed that really i had
 desired nothing else than to sit next to you.”
 
“but on that occasion newcomer arrived.”
 
“no, but then i simply did what i wished, and sat next to you without
 hesitation. the boy with whom i changed places was simply surprised,
 and let do it without further say. and the parson indeed noticed
 once that change had taken place--in fact, whenever looks at me
 something worries him secretly. that is to say, knows my name is
 demian, and that something must be wrong that i, whose initial is d,
 am sitting back there among the s’s! but that does not penetrate his
 consciousness because my will is against it, because i prevent him
 again and again from becoming conscious of it. notices now and
 then that something is wrong. looks at and begins to study the
 question, the good fellow. but i have simple means at my disposal.
 i look at him very, very fixedly in the eyes. hardly anyone can bear
 that. they always get restive. if you want to get something out of a
 person, and you fix him unexpectedly with your eyes, and if doesn’t
 get restive, then give it up! you won’t get anything out of him, ever!
 but that happens seldom. i know only one single person with whom this
 trick won’t help me.”
 
“who is that?” i asked quickly.
 
looked at me, with eyes somewhat closed; as his fashion was when he
 meditated. then looked away and gave answer, and in spite of my
 lively curiosity i could not bring myself to repeat the question.
 
but i believe was referring to his mother. seemed to live on
 very intimate terms with her, but never spoke about her, never
 invited to his house. i scarcely knew what his mother looked like.
 
* * * * *
 
several times i attempted to imitate his example by concentrating my
 will-power on something so firmly that i would have to attain it. i had
 desires which seemed to sufficiently pressing. but nothing came of
 it. i could not bring myself to talk matters over with demian. i should
 not have been able to make him understand what i wanted. did not
 ask, either.
 
my faith in matters of religion had meanwhile suffered many breach.
 yet in my manner of thinking, which was entirely under the influence of
 demian, i was to be distinguished from those of my schoolfellows who
 professed an entire disbelief. there were few such who let occasional
 phrases be overheard, to the effect that it was laughable and unworthy
 of man’s dignity to believe in god, and that stories such as those
 of the trinity and the immaculate conception of the virgin mary were
 simply joke. it was disgraceful, they said, that such rubbish was
 peddled about to-day. this was by means my way of thinking. even
 where i had doubts, the whole experience of my childhood taught to
 believe in the efficacy of godly life such as that led by my parents,
 which i knew to be neither contemptible nor hypocritical. on the
 contrary, now as before, i had the greatest reverence for the spirit
 of religion. only demian had accustomed to consider and explain the
 stories and articles of belief from more liberal and more personal
 point of view, point of view in which fantasy and imagination had
 their share. at least, i always took great pleasure and enjoyment in
 the interpretations suggested to me. to be sure much seemed to me
 too crude; such as the affair of cain. and once, during the preparation
 for confirmation, i was terrified by conception, which, if that were
 possible, seemed to even still more daring. the master had been
 speaking of golgotha. the biblical account of the passion and death of
 christ had, from my earliest years, made deep impression on me. as a
 little boy, on such days as good friday, after my father had read out
 to us the story of the passion, i had lived in imagination and with
 much emotion in gethsemane and on golgotha, in that world so poignantly
 beautiful, pale and ghostlike, and yet so terribly alive. and when i
 listened to the passion according to st. matthew by bach, i felt the
 mystical thrills of this dark, powerful, mysterious world of passion
 and suffering. i find in this music, even to-day and in the “actus
 tragicus,” the essence of all poetry and of all artistic expression.
 
at the conclusion of the lesson demian said to contemplatively:
 
“there’s something in this, sinclair, which i don’t like. read through
 the story, consider it, there’s something there which sounds insipid. i
 mean this business of the two thieves. it’s sublime, the three crosses
 standing side by side on the hill! but what about this sentimental
 story of the honest thief, which reads more like tract? first was
 criminal who had perpetrated crimes, and god knows what, and now
 breaks out in tears and is consumed by feelings of contrition and
 repentance. i ask you what’s the sense of such repentance two steps
 from the grave? it’s nothing but real parson’s story, mawkish and
 mendacious, larded with emotion, and having most edifying background.
 if to-day you had to choose one of the two thieves as your friend, or
 if you consider which of the two you would the sooner have trusted, it
 would most certainly not be this weeping convert. no, it’s the other,
 who’s real fellow with plenty of character. doesn’t care straw
 about conversion, which in his case can mean simply nothing more than
 pretty speeches. goes his way bravely to the end, without being
 such coward as to renounce the devil in the last moment who up to
 that point has had to help him. is character, and in biblical
 history people of character always come off second best. perhaps he’s a
 descendant of cain. don’t you think so?”
 
i was dismayed. i had believed myself to be quite familiar with the
 story of the crucifixion, and now i saw for the first time what
 little personal judgment i had brought to bear on it, with what little
 force of imagination and of fantasy i had listened to it and read
 it. demian’s new ideas, therefore, were quite annoying, threatening
 to overthrow conceptions, the stability of which i had believed it
 necessary to maintain. no, one could not deal with anything and
 everything like that, certainly not with the all holiest.
 
as always, noticed my opposition immediately, even before i had
 spoken word.
 
“i know,” said he, in tone of resignation, “it’s the old story.
 everything is all right until you’re serious about it! but i’ll tell
 you something: this is one of the points where one can clearly see
 the shortcomings of this religion. the fact is that this god, of the
 old and of the new dispensation, may be an excellent conception, but
 is not what really ought to be. is everything that is good,
 noble, fatherly, beautiful, sublime and sentimental certainly! but the
 world consists of other things which are simply ascribed to the devil.
 all this part of the world, good half, is suppressed and hushed up.
 just the same as they praise god as the father of all life, but pass
 over the whole sex-life, on which all life depends, and declare it to
 be sinful and the work of the devil! i have nothing to say against
 honoring this god jehovah, nothing at all. but i think we should
 reverence everything and look upon the whole world as sacred, not
 merely this artificially separated, official half of it! we ought then
 to worship the devil as well as god. i should find that quite right.
 or we ought to create god, who would embody the devil as well, and
 before whom we should not have to close our eyes, when the most natural
 things in the world take place.”
 
contrary to his custom, had become almost vehement, but smiled
 again immediately and pressed further.
 
but in these words encountered the riddle of my whole boyhood,
 which i had hourly carried with me, but of which i had never spoken
 to anyone. what demian had said about god and the devil, about the
 official godly world and the suppressed devil’s world, that was exactly
 my own idea, my own myth, the idea of the two worlds or two halves of
 the world--the light and the dark. the realization that my problem
 was problem of humanity as whole, of life and thought in general,
 suddenly dawned on me, and this recognition inspired with fear and
 awe as i suddenly felt to what an extent my own innermost personal
 life and thought were part of the eternal stream of great ideas. the
 realization was not joyful, although it confirmed my mode of thought
 and made happy to certain extent. it was hard and tasted raw,
 because hint of responsibility lay therein, telling to put away
 childish things and to stand alone.
 
i told my friend--the first time in my life i had revealed so deep a
 secret--of my conception of the “two worlds,” conception which had
 been formed since the earliest years of my childhood. at once saw
 that i was in thorough agreement with him. but was not the kind to
 make the most of this. listened with greater attention than had
 ever given me, and looked in the eyes until i had to turn away. i
 again noticed in his look this odd, animal-like timelessness, this
 inconceivably old age.
 
“we will talk more about that another time,” said considerately: “i
 see that you think more than you can express. but if that is so, then
 you also know that you have never lived in experience all that you have
 thought, and that is not good. only the thought that we live through in
 experience has any value. you knew that your ‘world of sanction’ was
 simply one-half of the world, and yet you tried to suppress the other
 half in you, as do the parsons and teachers. you will not succeed. no
 one succeeds who has once began to think.”
 
this impressed deeply.
 
“but,” i almost shouted, “there _are_ horrible things which are
 really and actually forbidden--you can’t deny that fact. and they are
 forbidden once for all, and so we must renounce them. i know of course
 that there are such things as murder, and all possible kinds of vice,
 but shall i then, simply because such things exist, go and become a
 criminal?”
 
“we shan’t be able to finish our discussion to-day,” said max, in a
 milder tone. “you must certainly not commit murder or rape, no. but you
 haven’t yet reached that point where one can see what is ‘permitted’
 and what is really ‘taboo.’ you have realized only part of the truth.
 the remainder will come after, rely on it. for instance, for the past
 year or so you have had in you an instinct which is stronger than
 all the others, and which is held to be ‘taboo.’ the greeks and many
 other people, on the contrary, made sort of divinity out of this
 instinct, and honored it by great celebrations. what is now ‘taboo’ is
 therefore not eternally so, it can change. to-day everyone is permitted
 to sleep with woman as soon as has been with her to parson and
 has gone through the ceremony of marriage. with other races it is
 different, even to-day. for that reason each one of us must find out
 for himself what is permitted and what is forbidden--forbidden, that
 is, to himself. you need never do anything that is forbidden and yet be
 thorough rascal. and vice versa. it is really merely question of
 convenience. whoever is too lazy to think for himself and to constitute
 himself his own judge simply conforms to the taboos, whatever they
 happen to be. has an easy time of it. others realize they carry laws
 in themselves. for them things are forbidden which every man of honor
 does daily. on the other hand things are permitted them which are
 otherwise taboo. everyone must stand up for himself.”
 
suddenly seemed to regret having said so much, and broke off. i felt
 i could understand to certain extent what his sentiment was. that
 is to say, however agreeably used to present his ideas (apparently
 in cursory manner) could on account tolerate conversation
 made simply “for the sake of talking,” as once said. realized
 in my case that, although my interest was genuine enough, i was too
 much inclined to look upon discussion as game, too fond of clever
 talking--in short i was lacking in perfect seriousness.
 
* * * * *
 
as i read again the words i have just written--“perfect
 seriousness”--another scene suddenly comes into my mind, the most
 impressive experience i lived through with max demian in those still
 half-childlike times.
 
our confirmation classes were drawing to an end, and the closing
 lessons were devoted to the last supper. the clergyman thought this
 very important, and took pains to make us feel something of the
 inspiration and sacred character of his teaching. however, precisely
 in those last few lessons, thoughts were diverted to another object,
 to the person of my friend. looking forward to my confirmation, which
 was explained to us as being our solemn admission into the community
 of the church, the thought presented itself imperatively to that
 the value of this half-year’s religious instruction did not lie for
 in what i had learned in class, but rather in demian’s presence and
 influence. it was not into the church that i was ready to be received,
 but into something else, into an order of ideas and of personalities
 which surely existed somewhere or other on earth, and of which i felt
 my friend was the representative or messenger.
 
i tried to repress this thought. in spite of everything, i earnestly
 intended to go through the ceremony of confirmation with certain
 dignity, and the new notions i was forming seemed scarcely compatible
 with this. yet do what i would, the idea was there, and gradually
 identified itself with the approaching religious ceremony. i was ready
 to celebrate it in different fashion from the other confirmation
 candidates. for it would mean admission into world of ideas, with
 which i had become acquainted through demian.
 
in those days it happened that i had another discussion with him; it
 was just before lesson. my friend was wrapped up in himself and took
 little pleasure in my talk, which was perhaps rather precocious and
 bombastic.
 
“we talk too much,” said with unwonted gravity. “wise speeches have
 value at all, absolutely none. you only escape from yourself. to
 escape from yourself is sin. you should be able to creep right into
 yourself, like tortoise.”
 
we entered the schoolroom immediately after. the lesson began. i took
 pains to listen, and demian did not disturb in my effort. after a
 while i began to feel something peculiar at my side where his place
 was, sort of emptiness or coolness or something like that, as if his
 seat had suddenly become vacant. the feeling became oppressive and i
 turned round.
 
there i saw my friend sitting, upright and in his customary attitude.
 but looked quite different from usual. something i did not know
 went out from him, enveloped him. i thought his eyes were closed,
 until i saw held them open. but they were stiff as if gazing within
 or directed to an object great way off. sat there perfectly
 motionless; seemed not to be breathing and his mouth was as if
 carved out of wood or stone. his face was white, uniformly white, as
 stone. his brown hair showed more signs of life than did any other
 feature. his hands lay before him on the desk, without life, as still
 as inanimate objects, like stones or fruit, white and motionless, yet
 not relaxed, but as if controlling the secret springs of powerful
 life force.
 
the sight made tremble. is dead, i thought. i almost said it out
 loud. but i knew was not dead. mesmerized, i hung on his look; my
 eyes were riveted to this white, stone mask. i felt it was the real
 demian. the demian who was in the habit of walking and talking with me,
 that was only one side of him, half. demian, who from time to time
 played part, who accommodated himself to circumstances out of mere
 complacence. but the real demian looked like this, with just this look
 of stone, prehistorically old, like an animal, beautiful and cold, dead
 yet secretly full of fabulous life force. and around him this still
 emptiness, this infinite ethereal space, this lonely death!
 
“now has quite retired into himself,” i felt with shudder. never
 had i been so isolated. i had part in him, was unattainable, he
 was further from than if had been on the most distant isle in the
 world.
 
i scarcely understood why one besides myself noticed it. i thought
 that everyone would have to remark him, that everyone would shudder.
 but one gave him any attention. sat like picture and, as i
 could not prevent myself from thinking, as stiff as strange idol.
 fly settled on his forehead, moved slowly down over his nose and
 lips--not muscle, not nerve in his face twitched.
 
where, where was now? what was thinking, what was feeling? was
 in heaven or in hell?
 
it was impossible for to question him. when i saw him at the end of
 the lesson living and breathing again, when his glance met mine, was he
 as formerly had been? where did come from? where had been? he
 seemed tired. his face had its normal color, his hands moved again,
 but his brown hair was lustreless and fatigued, as it were.
 
in the days following i practised new exercise in my bedroom several
 times. i sat stiffly on chair, kept my eyes fixed, and held myself
 perfectly motionless. i waited to see how long i could maintain this
 attitude, and what the sensation would be like. however, i merely got
 very tired, and suffered from violent twitching of the eyelids.
 
the confirmation took place soon after, of which important
 recollections remain with me.
 
everything was now quite changed. childhood fell about in ruins. my
 parents used to look at with certain embarrassment. my sisters had
 become quite strange in their conduct towards me. disillusionment
 falsified and weakened the old sentiments and pleasures, the garden was
 without fragrance, the wood was longer inviting, the world around
 seemed like clearance-sale of old articles, insipid and without
 charm, books were merely paper, music noise. the leaves fall thus
 from tree in autumn, the tree feels it not, rain drips on it, sun
 comes and frost, and the life in it recedes slowly into the narrowest
 and most inward recess. the tree is not dying. it is waiting.
 
it was decided that after the holidays i should go to another school,
 leaving home for the first time. my mother meanwhile approached me
 with especial tenderness, sort of preliminary good-bye, endeavoring
 to charm with love from which i should go with homesickness and
 unforgetfulness in my heart. demian had gone away. i was alone.
 



chapter four
 
beatrice
 

without having seen my friend again, i traveled at the end of the
 holidays to st. ----. both my parents came with me, and handed over
 with all possible care to the protection of master of the school, in
 whose house i was to board. they would have been numb with horror, had
 they only known to what sort of fate they were leaving me.
 
it still hung in the balance whether i should become with time good
 and useful citizen, or whether my nature would break out in other
 directions. my last attempt to be happy under the roof of my father’s
 house and the spirit prevailing there had lasted for considerable
 period, and at times had almost succeeded, only in the end to fail
 completely.
 
the curious emptiness and isolation which i had begun to feel for
 the first time in the holidays after my confirmation (how i learned
 to know it later, this emptiness, this thin atmosphere) did not pass
 immediately. the parting from home was for peculiarly easy. i was
 really rather ashamed of not being sadder--my sisters wept without
 reason, i could not. i was astonished at myself. i had always been
 an emotional child, and at bottom, tolerably good. now i was quite
 changed. i was completely indifferent towards the outside world. for
 days together my sole occupation was hearkening to my inner self,
 listening to the flood of dark, forbidden instincts which roared
 subterraneously within me. i had grown very quickly in that last
 half-year, and appeared lanky, thin and immature. the amiability of
 boyhood had completely disappeared from my character; i realized myself
 that it was impossible to like thus, and i by means loved myself.
 i had often great longing for max demian; on the other hand, i hated
 him not seldom, and looked upon him as responsible for the moral
 impoverishment of my life, to which i resigned myself as to sort of
 nasty disease.
 
in the beginning i was neither liked nor respected in our school
 boarding house. first they ragged me, then kept out of my way, looking
 upon as rotter and an eccentric character; i was pleased with
 myself and i even overplayed my part, withdrawing into my solitary
 self, growling occasional cynicisms. superficially i appeared to
 despise the world in most manly fashion, whereas in reality i was
 secretly consumed by melancholy and despair. in school i could fall
 back on knowledge amassed at home. the form i was in was not so
 advanced as the same form in the school i had just left, and so i
 acquired the habit of despising my school contemporaries, regarding
 them as mere children.
 
this attitude lasted year and longer. my first holiday visits at home
 brought change, i went gladly away again.
 
it was in the beginning of november. i had formed the habit of taking
 short, meditative walks in all kinds of weather, during which i often
 experienced sort of joy, joy full of melancholy, contempt of the
 world and contempt of self. i was sauntering thus one evening through
 the damp, foggy twilight in suburb of the town. the broad drive of a
 public park stood completely deserted, inviting to enter. the road
 lay thick with fallen leaves, into which i dug voluptuously with my
 feet. it smelt damp and bitter; in the distance the trees stood up tall
 and shadowy, ghostlike in the fog.
 
at the end of the drive i stood still and undecided, staring into the
 black foliage, scenting eagerly the damp odor of decomposition and
 death, which seemed to be in harmony with my own mood. oh, how insipid
 life tasted!
 
man, with the collar of his raincoat blowing about him, came out of a
 side path. i was just going on when called to me.
 
“hello, sinclair!”
 
it happened to be alphonse beck, the senior boy of the house. i was
 always glad to see him and had nothing against him, except that he
 always treated as did all the younger boys, in an ironical and
 grandfatherly manner. passed for being as strong as bear, was
 said to have great influence on the house master, and was the hero of
 many school stories.
 
“what are you doing here?” asked affably, in the tone the seniors
 always used when they condescended on occasion to talk to us.
 “composing verse, i bet?”
 
“shouldn’t dream of it,” i disclaimed gruffly.
 
laughed, came up to me, and we chatted together in manner to which
 i had not been accustomed for some time past.
 
“you needn’t be afraid, sinclair, that i shouldn’t understand. i know
 the feeling, when one goes for walk on foggy evening--the thoughts
 autumn inspires in one. and one writes poetry about dying nature, of
 course, and spent youth; which is very much like it. read heinrich
 heine?”
 
“i am not so sentimental,” i said in self-defense.
 
“oh, all right. but in this weather, i think, it does man good to
 find quiet place where one can take glass of wine or something. are
 you coming with for bit? i happen to be quite alone. or wouldn’t
 you care to? i wouldn’t like to lead you astray, old man, if you are
 one of those model boys.”
 
little while after we sat clinking our thick glasses in little
 tavern in the suburbs, drinking wine of doubtful quality. at first
 i wasn’t much pleased, still it was rather novelty for me. but
 unaccustomed to wine, i soon became talkative. it was as if window
 had been flung open within me, and the world shining in--for how long,
 how terribly long, had i not eased my heart by talking. i gave full
 play to my imagination, and once started, i related the story of cain
 and abel.
 
beck listened to with pleasure--someone at last, to whom i was
 giving something! clapped on the shoulder, told i was
 the devil of good fellow and clever rascal. how i reveled in
 communicating my opinions, as i relieved myself of all the pent-up
 thought of the past months! my heart swelled with pride at finding my
 talents recognized by someone older than i was. when called a
 clever rascal the effect was like sweet, strong wine running through
 me. the world lit up in new colors, thoughts came to as from a
 hundred sources, wit and fire blazed up in me. we spoke of masters and
 schoolfellows, and i thought we understood one another wonderfully
 well. we talked of greeks and of pagans, and beck wished absolutely
 to draw out on the subject of women. but on this point i could not
 converse. i had experience, nothing to relate. true, all that i
 had felt and imagined was burning within me, but i could not impart
 my thoughts, not even under the influence of wine. beck knew much
 more about girls, and i listened to his tales with glowing eyes. the
 things i heard were unbelievable. what i should never have conceived
 to be possible entered the sphere of commonplace reality and seemed
 self-evident. alphonse beck, who was perhaps eighteen years old, was
 already man of experiences. among other things, told that
 girls liked boys to play the gallant with them, but in general were
 too frightened to go any further. you could hope for more success with
 women. women were much cleverer. for instance, there was mrs. jaggelt,
 who sold pencils and copybooks, who was much easier to deal with. all
 that had happened behind the counter in her shop was unprintable in any
 book.
 
i sat on captivated; my head was swimming. to be sure, i could not
 exactly have loved mrs. jaggelt, but still, it was unheard of. it
 seemed as if things happened, at least to older people, of which i had
 never dreamed. there was false ring about it, to be sure, everything
 seemed more trivial and commonplace, and did not coincide with my own
 ideas about love, but still, it was reality, it was love and adventure,
 someone sat next to who had lived it in experience, to whom it
 seemed matter of course.
 
our conversation had reached lower level, had deteriorated. i was
 longer clever little fellow, i was just mere boy listening
 to man. but even then--in comparison with what my life had been
 for months and months, this was delicious, this was heaven. besides,
 as i gradually began to realize, all this was forbidden, absolutely
 forbidden, everything from sitting in public house, down to the
 subject of our conversation. in any case, i thought i was showing
 spirit; i was in revolt.
 
i can recollect that night with the greatest clearness. we both of us
 wended our way home at late hour under the dimly burning gas lamps
 through the cool, damp night, and for the first time in my life i was
 drunk. it was not agreeable, it was in the highest degree unpleasant,
 but there was sort of charm about it, sweetness--it smacked of
 orgy and revolt, of spirit and life. beck bravely took in hand, and
 although grumbled at as being bloody novice, half carried,
 half dragged home, where, by good fortune, was able to smuggle us
 both through window which stood open on the ground floor.
 
but maddening pang accompanied the sobering up as i painfully awoke
 after short heavy sleep. i sat up in bed and saw that i was still
 wearing my shirt. my clothes and shoes lay round about on the floor,
 smelling of tobacco and vomit. and between headache, nausea and a
 maddening thirst, picture came before my mind on which i had not
 set eyes for many long day. i saw my home, the house where dwelt my
 parents. i saw father and mother, my sisters and the garden. i saw
 my peaceful, homely bedroom, the school and the marketplace. demian
 and the confirmation class--and all this was bright, lustrous, all
 was wonderful, godly and pure, all that, i realized now, had until
 yesterday belonged to me, had waited for me. but now, in this hour, it
 was mine longer, it spurned and looked upon with disgust. all
 that was loving and intimate, all that i had received from my parents
 since the first golden days of my childhood, each kiss mother had given
 me, each christmas, each godly bright sunday morning there at home,
 each flower in the garden, all that was laid waste, i had trampled on
 it all with my foot! if the police had come for then and had bound
 and led away to the gallows as desecrator and as the scum of
 humanity, i should have acquiesced; should have gone gladly. i would
 have found it right and fitting.
 
that was the state of my feelings. i, who had gone about despising the
 world! i, who had been so proud in spirit and who had shared demian’s
 thoughts! so i appeared filthy pig, to be classed with the scum of
 the earth, drunk and befouled, disgusting and common, dissolute
 beast, carried away by abominable instincts. so i appeared, i who came
 from those gardens whose bright flowers had been purity and sweet
 gentleness, i who had loved bach’s music and beautiful poetry! i could
 still hear, with aversion and disgust, my own laugh, the drunken,
 uncontrolled, convulsive and silly laugh which escaped me. that was i!
 
but in spite of everything there was certain enjoyment in suffering
 these torments. i had lived for so long blind, dull existence, for
 so long had my heart been silent, impoverished and shut up, that
 even this self-accusation, this self-aversion, this entirely dreadful
 feeling was welcome. at least it was feeling; flowers were flaring up,
 emotion was quivering therein. i experienced in the midst of my misery
 confused sensation of liberation, of the approach of spring.
 
however, as far as outward appearances went, i was going fast down
 the hill. the first debauch was soon followed by others. there was
 much drinking at school, and other things not in accord with study.
 i was among the youngest who carried on in this way, but from being
 just tolerated and looked upon as mere youngster, i soon rose to be
 considered as leader and star. i was renowned as daredevil and
 could drink with the best. once again i belonged entirely to the dark
 world, to the devil, and i passed in this world for being splendid
 fellow.
 
but at the same time i was in pitiful state of mind. i lived in a
 whirl of self-destroying debauchery, and while i was looked up to by
 my friends as leader and the devil of good fellow, as cursed
 witty and spirited drinking companion, my anxious soul was full of
 apprehension. i remember on one occasion tears started to my eyes when,
 on coming out of tavern one sunday morning, i saw children playing
 in the street, bright and contented, with freshly combed hair, and
 in their sunday clothes. and while i amused and often terrified my
 friends with monstrous cynicisms, as we sat at dirty tables stained
 with puddles of beer, in low public houses, i had in my heart secret,
 deep reverence for everything at which i scoffed--inwardly i was
 weeping bitterly at the thought of my past life, of my mother, of god.
 
there is good reason for the fact that i was never one with my
 companions, that i remained lonely even in their midst, that i suffered
 in the manner above described. i was hero of drinking bouts, with
 the roughest of them, i was scoffer after their own heart. i showed
 courage and wit in my ideas and in my talks about masters, school,
 parents, the church--i listened to their smutty stories unflinchingly
 and even ventured one or two myself--but i was never about when my
 boon companions went off with girls. i remained behind alone, filled
 with an ardent desire for love, hopeless longing, whereas to judge
 from my conversation i must have been hardened rake. one was more
 vulnerable, one more chaste than i. and when from time to time i saw
 young girls pass by in the town, pretty and clean, bright and charming,
 they seemed to like wonderful, pure dream women, thousand times
 too good and too pure for me. for long time i could not bring myself
 to enter mrs. jaggelt’s stationery shop, because i blushed when i saw
 her and thought of what alphonse beck had told about her.
 
the more i realized how different i was from the members of my new
 set, how isolated i was in their midst, the less easy was it for that
 very reason to break with them. i do not really know whether the
 toping and bragging ever caused much pleasure, and i could never
 so accustom myself to hard drinking that i did not feel the painful
 consequences after each bout. i was as if coerced into doing this. i
 did it because i had to, because i was otherwise absolutely ignorant of
 course to follow, i knew not where to begin. i was afraid of being
 long alone. i was frightened of the many tender, chaste, intimate moods
 to which i constantly felt myself inclined, i was afraid of the tender
 notions of love which so often came to me.
 
one thing i lacked most of all--a friend. there were two or three
 schoolfellows whom i liked very much. but they belonged to the good set
 and my vices had for long time been secret to one. they avoided
 me. with all i passed for hopeless gamester under whose feet the very
 earth quaked. the masters knew much about me, severe punishments were
 several times inflicted on me, my final expulsion from the school was
 waited for with more or less certainty. i knew that myself; for long
 time i had ceased to be good pupil; i got through my work by hook or
 by crook, with the feeling that the state of affairs could not last
 much longer.
 
there are many ways by which god can make us feel lonely and lead us
 to consciousness of ourselves. with it was in this way: it was
 like bad dream, in which i saw myself ostracized, foul and clammy,
 creeping restlessly and painfully over broken beer glasses, down an
 abominably unclean road. there are such dreams, when you imagine you
 have set out to find beautiful princess, but you stick in stinking
 back streets full of rubbish and dirty puddles. so it was with me. in
 this scarcely refined way i was destined to become lonely and to put
 between myself and my childhood locked door of eden over against
 which stood merciless sentinels on guard in beaming rays of light. it
 was beginning, an awakening of that homesickness, that longing to
 return to my true self.
 
i was terribly frightened when my father, alarmed by letter from my
 house master, appeared for the first time in st. ---- and faced me
 unexpectedly. when came for the second time, towards the end of that
 winter, i was hard and indifferent, i let him heap blame on me, i let
 him beg to think of my mother, i was unmoved. finally grew very
 angry and said that if i did not turn over new leaf would have me
 disgraced and chased out of the school, and would have placed in a
 reformatory. little i cared! when went away i felt sorry for him,
 but had accomplished nothing; had found approach to me, and
 for few moments i felt that it served him right.
 
i was indifferent as to what might become of me. in my peculiar and
 unlovely manner, with my carrying on and my frequenting of public
 houses, i was at odds with the world--this was my way of protesting.
 i was ruining myself thereby, but what of it? sometimes the case
 presented itself to in this wise: if the world had use for such
 as me, if there was better place for us, if there were higher
 duties, then people like myself simply went to the devil. so much the
 worse for the world.
 
the christmas holidays of that year were exceedingly unpleasant. my
 mother was terrified when she saw again. i had grown taller, and
 my thin face looked gray and ravaged by dissipation, with flabby
 features and inflamed rings round the eyes. the first indications
 of moustache, and the spectacles which i had but lately taken to
 wearing, made look stranger still. my sisters started back and
 giggled when they saw me. it was all very pleasant. unpleasant was
 the conversation with my father in his study, unpleasant the greeting
 of couple of relations, unpleasant above all things was christmas
 night. that has been since my birth the great day of our house, the
 evening of festivity and love, of gratitude, of the renewal of the bond
 between my parents and myself. this time everything was depressing
 and embarrassing. as usual my father read the portion of the gospel
 about the shepherds in the field “keeping watch over their flock by
 night”; as usual my sisters stood radiantly before the table on which
 the presents were laid out. but my father’s voice was sad, and he
 looked old and constrained. mother was unhappy; for everything was
 equally painful and unwished for, presents and good wishes, gospel and
 christmas tree. the ginger-bread smelt delicious and exhaled thick
 clouds as of sweet remembrances. the christmas tree was fragrant and
 told of things which existed longer. i longed for the end of the
 evening and of the holidays.
 
so passed the whole winter. it was not long before i was severely
 reprimanded by the faculty and threatened with expulsion. it could not
 last much longer. well it made difference to me.
 
i had special grudge against max demian, whom i had not seen for the
 whole of this period. in my first term at st. ---- i had written to him
 twice, but had received reply; for that reason i had not paid him a
 visit in the holidays.
 
* * * * *
 
in the same park, where i had met alphonse beck in the autumn, it
 chanced that in the first days of spring, just as the thorn hedges were
 beginning to turn green, girl attracted my attention. i was out for a
 walk by myself, full of gnawing cares and thoughts, for my health was
 bad. besides that i was in continual financial embarrassment. i owed
 various sums to my friends and had to invent excuses to procure some
 money from home. in several shops i had run up accounts for cigars and
 such things. not that these cares were very pressing--if the end of my
 school career was approaching, and if i drowned myself or was sent to
 reform school, these trifles would not make much difference either.
 but i was nevertheless constantly facing these unpleasant things and i
 suffered from it.
 
on that spring day in the park i met girl who had strong attraction
 for me. she was tall and slender, elegantly dressed, and had wise,
 boyish face. she pleased at once, she belonged to the type that i
 loved, and she began to work upon my imagination. she was scarcely
 older than i, but she was more mature; she was elegant and possessed
 good figure, already almost woman, but with touch of youthful
 exuberance in her features, which pleased exceedingly.
 
it was never my good fortune to approach girl with whom i could
 have fallen in love, neither was it my luck in this case. but the
 impression was deeper than all the former ones, and the influence of
 this infatuation on my life was powerful.
 
suddenly i had again picture standing before me, revered
 picture--ah, and need, impulse was so deep or so strong in me
 as the desire to revere, to adore. i gave her the name of beatrice,
 of whom, without having read dante, i knew something from an english
 painting, reproduction of which i had in my possession. the picture
 was of an english pre-raphaelite girlish figure, very long-limbed and
 slender, with small, long head and spiritualized hands and features.
 my beautiful young girl did not completely resemble this, although
 she had the same slenderness and boyish suppleness of figure, which i
 loved, and something of the spiritualization of the face, as if her
 soul lay therein.
 
i never spoke single word to beatrice. yet at that time she exercised
 the deepest influence over me. her picture fastened itself on my mind;
 in my imagination she opened sanctuary for me, she caused to
 pray in temple. from one day to another i remained absent from the
 drinking bouts and the nightly excursions. once more i could bear being
 alone, i read gladly, i liked to go for walks again.
 
i was much scoffed at for my sudden conversion. but i had now something
 to love and to worship, i had again an ideal, life was once more full
 of suggestion, of gaily colored secret nuances, that made insensible
 to the jeers of my companions. i again felt at home with myself,
 although i was now the servant and slave of picture which i revered.
 
i cannot think of that time without certain emotion. with earnest
 striving, i again endeavored to build “bright world” out of the ruins
 of that period of my life which had broken up around me, i again lived
 entirely and single-mindedly in the desire to put away the dark and
 the bad, and to dwell completely in the light, on my knees before my
 gods. still, this “bright world” i built up was to certain extent my
 own creation. it was not the action of flying back or of crawling back
 to mother, to security without responsibilities. it was new service
 upon which i entered, invented by myself for my own requirements, with
 responsibilities and discipline of self. the sex consciousness from
 which i suffered and before which i was in constant flight was now
 transmuted in this sacred fire to spirit and devotion. the grim and
 horrible would disappear, i should groan through more agonizing
 nights, there would be more heart-beatings in front of lewd
 pictures, more listening at forbidden doors, more lasciviousness.
 instead of all this, i set up my altar, with the picture of beatrice,
 and in dedicating myself to her i dedicated myself to the spirit and
 to the gods. that part of myself which i withdrew from the powers of
 darkness i brought as sacrifice to the powers of light. not lust was
 my aim, but purity; not happiness, but beauty and spirituality.
 
this cult for beatrice completely changed my life. precocious cynic
 but short while before, i had now become servant in the temple,
 whose aim it was to be saint. i not only renounced the evil life to
 which i had accustomed myself, but i endeavored to change everything,
 to set myself standard of purity, nobility and dignity, which i even
 applied to eating and drinking, to my manner of speech and dress. i
 began each morning to wash with cold water, to the use of which i had,
 in the beginning, to force myself. i behaved with gravity and dignity,
 carried myself erect and acquired slower and more dignified gait. to
 an observer it might have seemed rather ludicrous, but to it was the
 performance of divine worship.
 
of all the ways in which i sought to find expression for my new faith,
 one bore fruit. i began to paint. to start with, the english picture of
 beatrice i had in my possession did not bear sufficient resemblance
 of beatrice. i wanted to try to paint her for myself. full of new
 pleasure and hope i carried into my room--i had recently been given
 room to myself--beautiful paper, colors, and paint-brush. i made
 ready my palette, porcelain bowls, glass and pencils. the fine water
 colors in little tubes which i had bought captivated me. there was a
 bright chromic green which i think i can see yet as it flashed out for
 the first time from the little white tube.
 
i began with caution. to paint face was difficult; i wished first
 of all to try something else. i painted ornaments, flowers, and small
 landscapes from imagination, tree near chapel, roman bridge with
 cypresses. i often lost myself completely in this pastime, i was
 as happy as child with box of paints. at last i began to paint
 beatrice.
 
the first few attempts were abortive, and i threw them away. the more
 i tried to conjure up in my mind the face of the girl, whom i met from
 time to time in the street, the less i seemed able to transfer my
 impressions to paper. finally i gave up the idea, and began simply to
 paint face according to the guidance of my imagination, face which
 gradually grew out of the one already begun, as if by itself, at the
 mercy of color and brush. the result was face i had dreamed of, and i
 was not ill pleased with it. yet i made another essay immediately, and
 each new picture was clearer, and approached more nearly to the type,
 but was by means like the reality.
 
more and more i accustomed myself, in dreamy sort of way, to draw
 lines with my brush, to fill in surfaces. my sketches grew out of a
 few strokes of the brush, out of the unconscious. at last one day i
 finished face, almost unconsciously, which made stronger appeal to
 than the former ones. it was not the face of the girl, for i had
 long since given up the idea of trying to paint my beatrice to the
 life. it was something else, something unreal, and yet not of less
 value for on that account. it looked more like the head of youth
 than of girl. the hair was not blond like that of my pretty girl,
 but brown with tinge of red; the chin was strong and firm, but the
 mouth was red as blossom. the features were rigid, like mask, but
 impressive and full of secret life.
 
as i sat before the finished sketch, it made peculiar impression on
 me. it seemed to sort of picture of god or of sacred mask,
 half man, half woman, ageless, the expression being at once dreamy
 and strong-willed, stiff and yet secretly alive. this face seemed to
 have something to say to me, it belonged to me; its look was rather
 imperative, as if requiring something of me. and there was certain
 resemblance to someone or other, to whom i knew not.
 
the picture played an important rôle for while, sharing my thoughts
 and my life. i kept it concealed in drawer, in order that one should
 not get possession of it and so be able to sneer at me. but as soon
 as i found myself alone in my little room i took out the picture and
 communed with it. each evening i pinned it on to the wall over against
 my bed, and gazed at it until i dropped off to sleep. in the morning it
 was the first object which met my gaze.
 
just at that time i began again to dream great deal, as i had
 constantly done when child. it seemed to that for years i had had
 more dreams. now they came again, quite new kind of pictures,
 and often and often the painted image appeared therein, living and
 speaking, friendly or inimical, with the features sometimes twisted
 into grimace, sometimes infinitely beautiful, harmonious and noble.
 
and one morning, as i awoke out of such dream, i suddenly realized
 who was the original of the picture, i recognized it. it gazed at me
 in such fabulously well-known way, and seemed to be calling my name.
 it seemed to know me, like mother, seemed to love as if since the
 beginning of time. with beating heart i stared at the paper, at the
 thick brown hair, at the half-womanly mouth, the strong forehead with
 the wonderful brightness (it had dried that way of itself) and more and
 more i felt in the knowledge, the certainty of having somewhere met
 the original of the picture.
 
i sprang out of bed, placed myself in front of the face, and gazed at
 it from the closest proximity, straight into the wide open, greenish,
 staring eyes, the right eye somewhat higher than the other. and all at
 once this right eye twitched perceptibly, but still decidedly, and from
 this twitching i recognized the picture....
 
how was it that i had found it out so late? it was demian’s face. later
 i often and often compared the picture with demian’s real features, as
 they had remained in my memory. they were not quite the same, although
 there was resemblance. but it was demian, nevertheless.
 
once, on an evening in early summer the red sun shone obliquely through
 my window, which looked towards the west. in the room the dusk was
 gathering. i suddenly had the idea of pinning the picture of beatrice,
 or of demian, to the cross-bar of the window and of gazing at it,
 while the evening sun was shining through. the whole outline of the
 face disappeared, but the reddish ringed eyes, the brightness of the
 forehead and the strong red mouth glowed deeply and wildly from the
 surface of the paper. i sat opposite it for long time, even after the
 light had died away. and by degrees the feeling came to that this
 was not beatrice or demian but--myself. the picture did not resemble
 me--it was not meant to, i felt--but there was that in it which seemed
 to be made up of my life, something of my inner self, of my fate or of
 my dæmon. my friend would look like that, if i ever found another. my
 mistress would look like that, if ever i had one. my life and death
 would be like that. it had the ring and rhythm of my fate.
 
in those weeks i had begun to read book which made deeper
 impression on than anything i had read before. even in later years
 i have seldom chanced upon books which have made such strong appeal
 to me, except perhaps those of nietzsche. it was volume of novalis,
 containing letters and apothegms. there was much that i did not
 understand. but the book captivated and occupied my thoughts to an
 extraordinary degree. one of the aphorisms now occurred to me. i wrote
 it with pen under the picture: “fate and soul are the terms of one
 conception.” that i now understood.
 
i frequently used to meet the girl i called beatrice. i felt emotion
 on seeing her, but i was often sensible of harmony of sentiment,
 which seemed to say: we are connected, or rather, not you and i, but
 your picture and i; you are part of my destiny.
 
* * * * *
 
my longing for max demian was again eager. i had had news of him
 for several years. on one occasion only i had met him in the holidays.
 i see now that i have failed to mention this short meeting in my
 narrative, and i see that this was owing to shame and self-conceit on
 my part. i must make up for it now.
 
so then, once in the holidays, i was parading my somewhat tired, blasé
 self through the town. as i was sauntering along, swinging my stick and
 examining the old, unchanged features of the bourgeois philistines whom
 i despised, i met my one-time friend. scarcely had i caught sight of
 him when i started involuntarily. with lightning rapidity my thoughts
 were carried back to frank kromer. i hoped and prayed demian had really
 forgotten the story! it was so disagreeable to be under this obligation
 to him--simply owing to silly, childish affair--still, i was under an
 obligation....
 
seemed to be waiting to see whether i would greet him. i did, as
 calmly as possible under the circumstances, and gave his hand.
 that was indeed his old handshake! so strong, warm and yet cool, so
 manly!
 
looked attentively in the face and said: “you’ve grown lot,
 sinclair.” himself seemed quite unchanged, just as old, just as
 young as ever.
 
proposed we should go for walk, and we talked of secondary
 matters, not of the past. i remembered that i had written to him
 several times, without having received an answer. i hoped had
 forgotten this as well, those silly, silly letters. made mention
 of them.
 
at that time there was beatrice and picture, i was still in the
 period of my dissipation. outside the town i invited him to come with
 into an inn. came. with much ostentation i ordered bottle
 of wine and filled couple of glasses. i clinked glasses with him,
 showing him how conversant i was with student drinking customs, and i
 emptied my first glass at gulp.
 
“do you frequent public houses often?” asked me.
 
“oh yes,” i said with drawl, “what else is there to do? it’s
 certainly more amusing than anything else; after all.”
 
“you think so? perhaps. it may be so. there’s certainly something very
 pleasing about it--intoxication, bacchanalian orgies! but i find, with
 most people who frequent public houses, this sense of _abandon_
 is lost. it seems to there is something typically philistine,
 bourgeois, in the public house habit. of course, for just one night,
 with burning torches, to have proper orgy and drunken revel. but
 to do the same thing over and over again, drinking one glass after
 another--that’s hardly the real thing. can you imagine faust sitting
 evening after evening drinking at the same table?”
 
i drank, and looked at him with some enmity.
 
“yes, but everyone isn’t faust,” i said curtly.
 
looked at with somewhat surprised air.
 
then laughed, in his old superior way. “what’s the good of
 quarreling about it? in any case the life of toper, of libertine,
 is, i imagine, more exciting than that of blameless citizen. and
 then--i have read it somewhere--the life of profligate is one of
 the best preparations for mystic. there are always such people as
 saint augustine, who become seers. before, was sort of rake and
 profligate.”
 
i was distrustful and wished by means to let him take superior
 attitude towards me. so i said, with blasé air: “well, everyone
 according to his taste! i haven’t the slightest intention of doing
 that, becoming seer or anything.”
 
demian flashed glance at from half-closed eyes.
 
“my dear sinclair,” said slowly, “it wasn’t my intention to hurt
 your feelings. besides--neither of us knows to what end you drink.
 there is that in you, which orders your life for you, and which knows
 why you are doing it. it is good to realize this; there is someone in
 us who knows everything, wills everything, does everything better than
 we do ourselves. but excuse me, i must go home.”
 
we did not linger over our leave-taking. i remained seated, very
 dejected, and emptied the bottle. i found, when i got up to go, that
 demian had already paid for it. that made more angry still.
 
* * * * *
 
this little event recurred to my thoughts, which were full of demian.
 and the words had spoken in the inn came back to my mind, retaining
 all their old freshness and significance: “it is good to know there is
 one in us who knows everything!”
 
i looked at the picture hanging in the window, now quite dark. the
 eyes glowed still. it was demian’s look. on it was the look of the one
 inside me, who knows all.
 
oh, how i longed for demian! i knew nothing of his whereabouts, for me
 was unattainable. i knew only that was supposed to be studying
 somewhere or other, and that after the conclusion of his school career
 his mother had left the town.
 
i called up in my mind all my reminiscences of max demian, from the
 kromer affair onwards. great deal had formerly said came back
 to me. to-day everything still had meaning, all was of real concern
 to me! and what had said at our last, not very agreeable, meeting,
 about the libertine and the saint, suddenly crossed my mind. was it not
 just so with me? had i not lived in filth and drunkenness, my senses
 blunted by dissipation, until new life impulse, the direct contrary
 of the old, awoke in me, namely the desire for purity, the longing to
 be saintly?
 
so i went on, from reminiscence to reminiscence. night had long since
 fallen, and outside it was raining. in recollection, as well, i heard
 it rain; it was the hour under the chestnut trees when first
 questioned concerning frank kromer, so guessing my first secrets.
 one after another these souvenirs came to mind, conversations on the
 way to school, the confirmation class. and then i recollected my very
 first meeting with max demian. what had we been talking about? i could
 not for the moment recollect, but i took my time, i thought deeply. at
 last i remembered. we were standing in front of our house; after he
 had imparted to his opinion about cain. then spoke to about
 the old, almost obliterated crest which stood over the door, in the
 keystone which widened as it got higher. said it interested him and
 that one ought not to let such things escape one’s notice.
 
that night i dreamt of demian and of the crest. it changed perpetually,
 now demian held it in his hands, now it was small and grey, now very
 large and multicolored, but explained to that it was always one
 and the same. but at last forced to eat the crest. as i swallowed
 it, i felt with terror that the bird on the crest was alive inside me,
 my stomach was swollen and the bird was beginning to consume me. with
 the fear of death upon me, i commenced to struggle. then i woke up.
 
i felt relieved. it was the middle of the night, and i heard the rain
 blowing into the room. i got up to close the window; and in doing
 so trod on bright object which lay on the floor. in the morning i
 found it was my painting. it was lying there in the wet and had rolled
 itself up. in order to dry it i stretched it out between two sheets of
 blotting paper and placed it under heavy book. when i looked at it
 the next day it was dry. but it had changed. the red mouth had paled
 and had become smaller. now it was exactly demian’s mouth.
 
i now began to paint new picture, namely, that of the bird on the
 crest. i could not recollect any more what it really looked like,
 neither could i form clear image of the whole, as even if one stood
 directly in front of our door, the crest was scarcely recognizable, it
 was so old and had several times been painted over. the bird stood or
 sat on something, perhaps on flower, or on basket or nest, or on a
 tree-top. i did not bother about that, and began with the part i could
 picture clearly. in answer to confused prompting, i began straight
 away with strong colors; on my paper the head of the bird was golden
 yellow. i continued my work at intervals, when i was in the mood for
 it, and after few days the thing was completed.
 
now it was bird of prey, with sharp, bold hawk’s head. the lower
 half of the body was fixed in dark terrestrial globe, out of which
 it was working to escape, as if out of giant egg. the background was
 sky-blue. the longer i gazed at the sheet, the more it seemed to me
 this was the colored crest which i had visualized in my dream.
 
it would not have been possible for to have written letter to
 demian, even if i had known where to send it. but i decided, acting
 under suggestion which came to in dreamy sort of way, as under
 all my promptings of that period, to send him the picture with the
 hawk--whether it would reach him or not. i wrote nothing thereon, not
 even my name. i carefully cut the border, bought large paper cover
 and wrote on it my friend’s former address. then i sent it off.
 
the approach of an examination caused to work harder than usual
 in school. the masters had again received into grace, since i had
 suddenly changed my vile conduct. i was not, even now, by any means a
 good pupil, but neither i nor anyone else seemed to remember that, half
 year before, my expulsion from the school had been imminent.
 
my father now wrote to as formerly, adopting his old cheerful tone,
 without reproaches or threats. yet i had impulse to explain to him
 or to anyone how the change was brought about. it was merely chance
 that this change coincided with the wishes of my parents and the
 masters. it did not bring into closer contact with the others but
 isolated still more. i myself was ignorant of the tendency of the
 change in me, it might be leading to demian, to distant fate. it
 had begun with beatrice, but for some time past i had been living in
 quite an unreal world with my paintings and my thoughts of demian, so
 that she quite disappeared from my mind, as she did from my view. i
 should not have been able to say word to anyone of my dreams, of my
 expectations, of the inner change realized in me, not even if i had
 wished to do so.
 
but i had not the faintest desire ever to broach the subject.
 



chapter five
 
the bird fights its way out of the egg
 

my painted dream-bird was on its way, searching out my friend. an
 answer came to in the most curious manner.
 
in my classroom in school i found at my desk, in the interval between
 two lessons, piece of paper slipped between the pages of my book. it
 was folded in the manner we used for passing notes to one another in
 class. i wondered who could have sent such note, as i was not so
 intimate with any of the boys that one of them should wish to write to
 me. i thought it was summons to participate in some school rag or
 other, in which however i should not have taken part, and i replaced
 the note unopened in my book. during the lesson it fell by chance into
 my hands again.
 
i toyed with the paper, unfolded it without thinking, and discovered a
 few words written thereon. i threw glance at the writing, one word
 riveted my attention. terrified, i read on, while my heart seemed to
 become numb with sense of destiny.
 
“the bird fights its way out of the egg. the egg is the world. whoever
 will be born must destroy world. the bird flies to god. the name of
 the god is abraxas.”
 
i sank into deep meditation after i had read the words through several
 times. it admitted of doubt: this was demian’s answer. none could
 know of the bird, except our two selves. had received my picture. he
 had understood and helped to explain its significance. but where was
 the connection in all this? and--what worried above all--what did
 abraxas mean? i had never read or heard of the word. “the name of the
 god is abraxas!”
 
the hour passed without my hearing anything of the lesson. the next
 lesson began, the last of the morning. it was taken by quite young
 assistant master, fresh from the university, to whom we had already
 taken liking, because was young and pretended to false dignity
 with us.
 
we were reading herodotus under doctor follen’s guidance. this was
 one of the few school subjects which interested me. but this time my
 attention wandered. i had mechanically flung open my book, but i did
 not follow the translation, and remained lost in thought. for the
 rest, i had already several times had the experience that what demian
 had said to in the confirmation class was right. if you willed a
 thing strongly enough, it happened. if during the lesson i was deeply
 immersed in thought, i need not fear that the master would disturb my
 peace. certainly, if you were absent-minded or sleepy, then stood
 suddenly there; that had already happened to several times. but if
 you were really thinking, if you were genuinely sunk in thought, then
 you were safe. and i had already put to the test what had said to me
 about fixing person with one’s eyes. when at school with demian i had
 never been successful in this attempt, but now i often realized that
 you could accomplish much simply by fixed look and deep thinking.
 
so i was sitting now, my thoughts far from herodotus and school.
 but the master’s voice unexpectedly fell on my consciousness like a
 thunder-crash, so that i started with fright. i listened to his voice,
 was standing quite close to me, i thought had already called me
 by name. but did not look at me. i breathed sigh of relief.
 
then i heard his voice again. loudly the word “abraxas” fell from his
 lips.
 
continuing his explanation, the beginning of which had escaped me,
 doctor follen said: “we must not imagine the ideas of those sects and
 mystical corporations of antiquity to be as naïve as they appear from
 the standpoint of rationalistic outlook. antiquity knew absolutely
 nothing of science, in our sense of the word. on the other hand more
 attention was paid to truths of philosophical, mystical nature, which
 often attained to very high stage of development. magic in part arose
 therefrom, and often led to fraud and crime. but none the less, magic
 had noble origin and was inspired by deep thought. so it was with the
 teaching of abraxas, which i have just cited as an example. this name
 is used in connection with greek charm formulas. many opinions coincide
 in thinking it is the name of some demon of magic, such as some savage
 people worship to-day. but it appears that abraxas had much wider
 significance. we can imagine the name to be that of divinity on
 whom the symbolical task was imposed of uniting the divine and the
 diabolical.”
 
the learned little man continued his discourse with much seriousness,
 one was very attentive, and as the name did not recur, i was soon
 immersed in my own thoughts again.
 
“to unite the divine and the diabolical,” rang in my ears. here was a
 starting-point. i was familiar with that idea from my conversations
 with demian in the very last period of our friendship. demian told me
 then, we had indeed god whom we revered, but this god represented
 part of the world only, the half which was arbitrarily separated from
 the rest (it was the official, permitted, “bright” world). but one
 should be able to hold the whole world in honor. one should either have
 god who was at the same time devil, or one should institute devil
 worship together with worship of god. and now abraxas was the god, who
 was at the same time god and devil.
 
for long time i zealously sought to follow up the trail of ideas
 farther, without success. in addition, i rummaged through whole
 library to find out more about abraxas, but in vain. however, it was
 not my nature to concentrate my energies on methodical search after
 knowledge, search which would reveal truths of dead, useless,
 documentary kind.
 
the figure of beatrice, which had for certain time occupied so much
 of my attention, vanished by degrees from my mind, or rather receded
 slowly, drawing nearer and nearer to the horizon, becoming paler, more
 like shadow, as it retreated. she satisfied my soul longer. new
 spiritual development now began to take place in the dreamy existence i
 led, this existence in which i was strangely wrapped up in myself. the
 longing for full life glowed in me, or rather the longing for love.
 the sex instinct, which for time had been merged into my worship
 of beatrice, required new pictures and aims. fulfillment was denied
 me, and it was more impossible than ever for to delude myself by
 expecting anything of the girls who seemed to have the happiness of my
 comrades in their keeping. i again dreamed vividly, even more by day
 than by night. images presented themselves to me, desires in the shape
 of pictures rose up in my imagination, withdrawing from the outside
 world, so that my relations with these pictures, with these dreams
 and shadows, were more real and more intimate than with my actual
 surroundings.
 
certain dream, or play of fantasy, which recurred to me, was full of
 significance. this dream, the most important and the most enduring of
 my life, was as follows: i returned home--over the front door shone
 the crest with the yellow bird on the blue ground--my mother came to
 meet me--but as i entered and wished to embrace her, it was not she,
 but shape i had never before seen, tall and powerful, resembling max
 demian and my painting, yet different, and quite womanly in spite of
 its size. this figure drew towards it, and held in quivering,
 passionate embrace. rapture and horror were mixed, the embrace was a
 sort of divine worship, and yet crime as well. too much of the memory
 of my mother, too much of the memory of max demian was contained in the
 form which embraced me. the embrace seemed repulsive to my sentiment
 of reverence, yet i felt happy. i often awoke out of this dream with
 deep feeling of contentment, often with the fear of death and a
 tormenting conscience as if i were guilty of terrible sin.
 
it was only gradually and unconsciously that i realized the connection
 between this mental picture and the hint which had come to from
 outside concerning the god of whom i was in search. however, this
 connection became closer and more intimate, and i began to feel that
 precisely in this dream, this presentiment, i was invoking abraxas.
 rapture and horror, man and woman, the most sacred things and the
 most abominable interwoven, the darkest guilt with the most tender
 innocence--such was the dream picture of my love, such also was
 abraxas. love was longer dark, animal impulse, as i had felt
 with considerable anxiety in the beginning. neither was it pious
 spiritualized form of worship any longer, such as i had bestowed upon
 the picture of beatrice. it was both--both and yet much more, it was
 the image of an angel and of satan, man and woman in one, human being
 and animal, the highest good and lowest evil. it was my destiny, it
 seemed that i should experience this in my own life. i longed for it
 and was afraid of it, i followed it in my dreams and took to flight
 before it; but it was always there, was always standing over me.
 
the next spring i was to leave school and go to some university to
 study, where and what i knew not. small moustache grew on my lip,
 i was grown man, and yet completely hopeless and aimless. only one
 thing was firm: the voice in me, the dream picture. i felt it my duty
 to follow this guidance blindly. but it was difficult, and daily i was
 on the point of revolting. perhaps i was mad, i often used to think;
 perhaps i was not as other men? but i could do everything the others
 did; with little pains and industry i could read plato, i could solve
 trigonometrical problem or work out chemical analysis. only one
 thing i could not do: discover the dark, concealed aim within and
 make up my mind, as others did--others, who knew well enough whether
 they wanted to be professors or judges, doctors or artists. they knew
 what career to follow and what advantages they would gain by it. but i
 was not like that. perhaps i would be like them some day, but how was
 i to know? perhaps i should have to seek and seek for years, and would
 make nothing of myself, would attain end. perhaps i should attain an
 end, but it might be wicked, dangerous, terrible.
 
i wanted only to try to live in obedience to the promptings which came
 from my true self. why was that so very difficult?
 
i often made the attempt to paint the powerful love-figure of my dream.
 but i never succeeded. if i had been successful i would have sent the
 picture to demian. where was he? i knew not. i only knew there was a
 bond of union between us. when should i see him again?
 
the pleasant tranquillity of those weeks and months of the beatrice
 period was long since gone. i thought at that time i had reached a
 haven and had found peace. but it was ever so--scarcely did i begin to
 adapt myself to circumstances, scarcely had dream done good, when
 it faded again. in vain to complain! i now lived in fire of unstilled
 desires, of tense expectation, which often rendered completely wild
 and mad. i frequently saw before the picture of my dream-mistress
 with extraordinary clearness, much more clearly than i saw my own
 hand. i spoke to it, wept over it, cursed it. i called it mother and
 knelt before it in tears. i called it my beloved and felt its ripe kiss
 of fulfilled desire. i called it devil and whore, vampire and murderer.
 it invited to the tenderest dreams of love and to the most horrible
 abominations--nothing was too good and precious for it, nothing too bad
 and vile.
 
i passed the whole of that winter in state of inward tumult difficult
 to describe. i had long been accustomed to loneliness--that did not
 depress me. i lived with demian, with the hawk, with my picture of the
 big dream-figure, which was my fate and my mistress. it sufficed to
 live in close communion with those things, since they opened up large
 and broad perspective, leading to abraxas. but i was not able to summon
 up these dreams, these thoughts, at will. i could not invest them in
 colors, as i pleased. they came of themselves, taking possession of me,
 governing and shaping my life.
 
i was secure in so far as the outside world was concerned. i was afraid
 of one. my schoolfellows had learned to recognize that, and observed
 secret respect towards me, which often caused to smile. when i
 wished, i could penetrate most of them with look, thereby surprising
 them occasionally. only, i seldom or never wanted to do this. it was my
 own self which occupied my attention, always myself. and yet i longed
 ardently to live bit of real life, to give something of myself to
 the world, to enter into contact and battle with it. sometimes as i
 wandered through the streets in the evening and could not, through
 restlessness, return home before midnight, i thought to myself: now
 i cannot fail to meet my beloved, i shall overtake her at the next
 corner, she will call to from the next window. sometimes all this
 seemed to torture unbearably, and i was quite prepared to take my
 own life some day.
 
at that time i found peculiar refuge--by “chance,” as one says. but
 really such happenings cannot be attributed to chance. when person
 is in need of something, and the necessary happens, this is not due to
 chance but to himself; his own desire leads him compellingly to the
 object of which stands in need.
 
two or three times during my wanderings through the streets i had heard
 the strains of an organ coming from little church in the suburbs,
 without, however, stopping to listen. the next time i passed by the
 church i heard it again, and recognized that bach was being played.
 i went to the door, which i found to be locked. as the street was
 practically empty i sat down on curb-stone close to the church,
 turned up the collar of my coat and listened. it was not large organ,
 but good one nevertheless. whoever was playing played wonderfully
 well, almost like virtuoso, but with peculiar, highly personal
 expression of will and perseverance, which seemed to make the music
 ring out like prayer. i had the feeling that the man who was playing
 knew treasure was shut up in the music and struggled and tapped
 and knocked to get at the treasure, as if his life depended on his
 finding it. in the technical sense i do not understand very much
 about music, but this form of the soul’s expression i have from my
 childhood intuitively understood; i feel music is something which i can
 comprehend without initiation.
 
the organist next played something modern, it might have been reger.
 the church was almost completely dark, only very narrow beam of light
 shone through the window nearest to me. i waited until the end, and
 then walked up and down till the organist came out. was still a
 young man, though older than myself, robust and thick-set. walked
 quickly, taking powerful strides, but as if forcing the pace against
 his will.
 
many an evening thereafter i sat before the church, or walked up and
 down. once i found the door open, and for half an hour i sat shivering
 and happy inside, while the organist played in the organ loft by
 the dim gas light. of the music played i heard not only what he
 himself put into it. there seemed also to be secret coherence
 in his repertory, each piece seemed to be the continuation of the
 one preceding. everything played was pious, expressing faith
 and devotion. but not pious like church-goers and clergymen, but
 like pilgrims and beggars of the middle ages, pious with reckless
 surrender to world-feeling, which was superior to all confessions of
 faith. frequently played music by the pre-bach composers, and old
 italian music. and all the pieces said the same thing, all expressed
 what the musician had in his soul: longing, longing to identify
 oneself with the world and to tear oneself free again, listening to
 the workings of one’s own dark soul, an orgy of devotion and lively
 curiosity of the wonderful.
 
i once secretly followed the organist as left the church. he
 continued his way to the outskirts of the town and entered little
 tavern. i could not resist the temptation to go in after him. for
 the first time i had clear view of him. sat at the table in the
 corner of the little room, black felt hat on his head, measure of
 wine before him, and his face was just as i had expected it to be.
 it was ugly and somewhat uncouth, with the look of seeker and of
 an eccentric, obstinate and strong-willed, with soft and childish
 mouth. the expression of what was strong and manly lay in the eyes
 and forehead; on the lower half of the face sat look of gentleness
 and immaturity, rather effeminate and showing lack of self-mastery.
 the chin indicated boyish indecision, as if in contradiction with
 the eyes and forehead. i liked the dark brown eyes, full of pride and
 hostility.
 
silently i took my place opposite him. there was one else in the
 tavern. glared at me, as if wished to chase away. nevertheless
 i maintained my position, looking at him unflinchingly, until at last
 growled testily: “what the deuce are you staring at for? do you
 want anything of me?”
 
“i don’t want anything,” i said. “you have already given much.”
 
wrinkled his forehead.
 
“ah, you’re music enthusiast, are you? i think it’s disgusting to go
 mad over music.”
 
i did not let myself be intimidated.
 
“i have so often listened to your playing, there in the church,” i
 said. “but i don’t want to bother you. i thought perhaps i should
 discover something in you, something special, i don’t know exactly
 what. but please don’t mind me. i can listen to you in the church.”
 
“why, i always lock the door!”
 
“just lately you forgot, and i sat inside. otherwise i stand outside or
 sit on the curb-stone.”
 
“is that so? another time you can come inside, it’s warmer. you’ve
 simply got to knock on the door. but loudly, and not while i’m playing.
 now--what did you want to say? but you’re quite young, apparently a
 schoolboy or student. are you musician?”
 
“no. i like music, but only the kind you play, absolute music, where
 one feels that someone is trying to fathom heaven and hell. i like
 music so much, i think, because it is not concerned with morals.
 everything else is question of morals, and i am looking for something
 different. whatever has been concerned with morals has caused only
 suffering. i don’t express myself properly. do you know that there must
 be god who is at the same time god and devil? there must have been
 one, i have heard so.”
 
the organist pushed back his broad hat and shook the dark hair from
 his forehead. looked at penetratingly and bent forward his face
 towards over the table.
 
softly and tensely questioned:
 
“what’s the name of the god of whom you are talking?”
 
“unfortunately i know practically nothing about him really, only his
 name. his name’s abraxas.”
 
the musician looked distrustfully around, as if someone might be
 eavesdropping. then bent towards and said in whisper: “i
 thought so. who are you?”
 
“i’m student from the school.”
 
“how do you know about abraxas?”
 
“by chance.”
 
thumped on the table, so that his wine spilled over.
 
“chance! don’t talk nonsense, young man! one doesn’t know of abraxas
 by chance, mark you. i will tell you something more of him. i know a
 little about him!”
 
ceased talking and pushed back his chair. i looked at him
 expectantly, and made grimace.
 
“not here! another time. there, take these!”
 
dug his hand into the pocket of his overcoat, which had not taken
 off, and pulled out couple of roasted chestnuts, which threw to me.
 
i said nothing. i took and ate them, and was very contented.
 
“well,” whispered after while. “how do you know about--him?”
 
i did not hesitate to tell him.
 
“i was lonely and perplexed,” i related. “i called to mind friend of
 former years who, i think, knows great deal. i had painted something,
 bird coming out of terrestrial globe. i sent this to him. after a
 time, when i had begun to lose hope of reply, piece of paper fell
 into my hands. on it was written: ‘the bird fights its way out of the
 egg. the egg is the world. whoever will be born must destroy world.
 the bird flies to god. the name of the god is abraxas.’”
 
answered nothing. we peeled our chestnuts and ate them, and drank
 our wine.
 
“shall we have another drink?” asked.
 
“thanks, no. i don’t care much for drinking.”
 
laughed, somewhat disappointedly.
 
“as you wish! i am different. i am staying here. you can go now!”
 
the next time i saw him after the organ recital, was not very
 communicative. conducted through an old street to an old, stately
 house and upstairs into large, somewhat gloomy and untidy room where,
 besides piano, there was nothing to indicate that its occupant was a
 musician. instead, huge bookcase and writing table gave the room a
 somewhat scholarly air.
 
“what lot of books you have!” i said appreciatively.
 
“a part of them belongs to the library of my father, with whom i
 live. yes, young man, i live with my father and mother, but i cannot
 introduce you to them, as i and my acquaintances meet with but scant
 respect at home. i am prodigal son, you see. my father is very much
 looked up to, is well-known clergyman and preacher in this town.
 and i, to let you know at once, am his talented and promising son, who,
 however, is guilty of many back-slidings, and, to certain extent,
 mad. i was studying theology, and deserted this worthy faculty shortly
 before my final examination, although really i am still in the same
 line, as far as concerns my private studies. for it is still of the
 highest importance and interest what sort of gods people have invented
 for themselves at various times. i am musician into the bargain, and
 shall soon get post as organist, i think. then i shall be in the
 church again.”
 
i glanced over the backs of the books and found greek, latin, hebrew
 titles, as far as i could see by the feeble light of the lamp on the
 table. my acquaintance, meanwhile, had taken up position on the floor
 in the dark by the wall.
 
“come here,” called after while, “we will practice little
 philosophy. that means keeping one’s mouth shut, lying on one’s stomach
 and thinking.”
 
struck match and applied it to the paper and wood in the
 fireplace, in front of which was lying. the flame leapt up; poked
 and blew the fire with great skill. i lay down near him on the ragged
 carpet. stared into the flames, which drew my attention as well, and
 we lay silent for perhaps whole hour stretched out in front of the
 flaring wood fire. we watched it flame and roar, die down and flicker
 up again, until finally it settled down into subdued glow.
 
“fire worship was not by any means the silliest form of worship
 invented,” murmured without looking up. those were the only words
 spoken. with staring eyes i gazed into the fire. lulled by the
 tranquillity of the room, i sank in dreams, seeing shapes in the smoke
 and pictures in the ashes. once i started up. my companion had thrown
 little bit of resin into the glow. little slender flame shot up,
 i saw in it the bird with the gold hawk’s head. in the glow which
 died away in the fireplace, golden glittering threads wove themselves
 together into net, letters and pictures, memories of faces, of
 animals, of plants, of worms and serpents. when i woke from my reveries
 and looked across at my companion, was absorbed, staring at the
 ashes with the fixed gaze of fanatic, his chin in his hands.
 
“i must go now,” i said softly.
 
“well, go then, good-bye!”
 
did not get up, and as the lamp had gone out, i had to feel my way
 across the dark room, through dark corridors and down the stairs, and
 so out of the enchanted old dwelling. once in the street i stopped and
 looked up at the house. in not one of the windows was light burning.
 little brass-plate shone in the gleam of the gas-lamp before the door.
 
“pistorius, vicar,” i read thereon. as i sat in my little room after
 supper i remembered that i had learnt nothing about abraxas, or
 anything else from pistorius. we had scarcely exchanged ten words.
 but i was quite contented with the visit i had paid him. and had
 promised to play next time an exquisite piece of organ music, a
 passacaglia by buxtehude.
 
without my having realized it, the organist pistorius had given a
 first lesson, as we lay on the floor in front of the fireplace of his
 melancholy hermit’s room. staring into the fire had done good, it
 had confirmed and set in activity tendencies which i had always had,
 but had never really followed. gradually and in part i saw light on the
 subject.
 
when quite child i had from time to time the propensity to watch
 bizarre forms of nature, not observing them closely, but simply
 surrendering myself to their peculiar magic, absorbed by the
 contemplation of their curling shapes. long dignified tree-roots,
 colored veins in stone, flecks of oil floating on water, flaws in
 glass--all things of similar nature had had great charm for me
 at that time, above all, water and fire, smoke, clouds, dust, and
 especially the little circulating colored specks which i saw when i
 closed my eyes. in the days following my first visit to pistorius this
 began to come back to me. i noticed that i was indebted solely to
 staring into the open fire for certain strength and pleasure, for
 the increase in my depth of feeling which i had felt since. it was
 curiously beneficial and enriching--dreaming and staring into the fire!
 
to the few experiences i had gained on the road to the attainment of my
 proper ends in life was added this new one: the contemplation of such
 shapes, the surrendering of oneself to these irrational, twisting, odd
 forms of nature, engenders in us feeling of the harmony of our inner
 being with the will which brought forth these shapes; we soon feel the
 temptation to look upon them as our own creations, as if made by our
 own moods; we see the boundary between ourselves and nature waver and
 vanish; we learn to know the state of mind by outside impressions, or
 by inward. in way so simply and so easily as by this practice do we
 discover to what great extent we are creators, to what great extent
 our souls have part in the continual creation of the world. or rather,
 it is the same indivisible godhead, which is active in us and in
 nature. if the outside world fell in ruins, one of us would be capable
 of building it up again, for mountain and stream, tree and leaf, root
 and blossom, all that is shaped by nature lies modeled in us, comes
 from the soul, whose essence is eternity, of whose essence we are
 ignorant, but which is revealed to us for the most part as love-force
 and creative power.
 
many years later i found this observation confirmed in book, one of
 leonardo da vinci’s, who in one passage remarks how good and deeply
 moving it is to look at wall on which many people have spat. felt
 the same sensation before those spots on the wet wall as pistorius and
 i before the fire.
 
at our next meeting the organist enlightened still further on the
 subject.
 
“we confine our personality within much too narrow bounds. we count as
 composing our person only that which distinguishes us as individuals,
 only that which we recognize as irregular. but we are made up from
 the entire world stock, each one of us, and just as in our body is
 displayed the genealogical table of development back to the fish
 stage and still further, so we have accumulated in our souls all the
 experiences through which human soul has ever lived. all the gods and
 devils which have ever been, whether those of the greeks or chinese
 or zulus, all are in us, are there as potentialities, as desires,
 as starting points. if all mankind died out, with the exception of
 single moderately gifted child, who had not enjoyed the slightest
 instruction, so would this child rediscover the whole process of
 things; it would be able to produce gods, demons, paradises, the
 commandments and prohibitions, old and new testaments--everything.”
 
“well and good,” i objected; “but then what does the worth of the
 individual consist of? why do we continue to strive if everything has
 already been achieved in us?”
 
“stop!” exclaimed pistorius vehemently. “there is great difference
 between whether one merely carries the world in oneself, or whether one
 is conscious of that as well. madman can have ideas which remind one
 of plato, and pious little boy in moravian boarding school will
 recreate in his thought profound mythological ideas which occur in the
 gnostics or in zoroaster. but does not realize it! is tree or
 stone, at best an animal, as long as does not know it. but, when
 the first spark of this knowledge glimmers in him becomes man. you
 will not consider all the two-legged creatures who walk out there in
 the street as human beings, simply because they walk erect and carry
 their young nine months in the womb? look how many of them are fish or
 sheep, worms or leeches, how many are ants or bees. well, in reach of
 them are the possibilities of becoming human creatures, but only when
 they feel this, it is only when, if even in part, they learn to make
 them conscious, that these potentialities become theirs.”
 
our conversations were somewhat after this style. they seldom taught
 anything completely new, anything absolutely surprising. but all,
 even the most banal, hit like light persistent hammer-stroke on the
 same point in me, all helped in my development, all helped to peel
 off skins, to break up eggshells, and after each talk i held my head
 somewhat higher, i was more sure of myself until my yellow bird pushed
 his beautiful bird-of-prey crest through the ruins of the world-shell.
 
we frequently related our dreams to one another. pistorius knew how
 to interpret them. curious example comes to my mind. i dreamed i
 was able to fly. i was flung through the air, so to speak--impelled
 by great force over which i had not the mastery. the sensation of
 this flight was exhilarating, but soon changed to fear as i saw myself
 snatched up involuntarily to risky heights. there i made the saving
 discovery that i could control my rise and fall by arresting my breath
 and by breathing again.
 
pistorius interpreted it as follows: “the swing, which sent you
 up into the air, is the great property of mankind, which everyone
 possesses. it is the feeling of close relationship with the springs
 of every force, but it soon causes anxiety. it is cursedly dangerous!
 for that reason most people willingly renounce flying, preferring to
 walk according to prescribed laws along the footpath. but not you. you
 fly higher, as befits an intelligent fellow. and behold, you make a
 wonderful discovery there, namely, you gradually get the mastery over
 the impelling force. in other words, you acquire fine little force of
 your own, an instrument, rudder. that is splendid. without that one
 goes floating into the air without any will of one’s own; madmen, for
 instance, do that. they have deeper presentiments than the people on
 the footpath. but they have key and rudder, they fall whistling
 through the air, down into the fathomless depths. but you, sinclair,
 you manage all right! and how, pray? you probably don’t even know.
 you manage with new instrument, with breath regulator. and now
 you can see, that your soul isn’t really ‘personal’ at bottom. i mean
 that you didn’t invent this regulator. it isn’t new. it is loan, it
 has existed for thousands of years. it is the balancing organ fish
 have--the air-bladder. even to-day we actually still have few very
 rare kinds of fish whose air-bladder is at the same time sort of
 lung; and on occasion can use it to breathe with. in your dream you
 made use of your lungs in exactly the same way as these fish do their
 air-bladder.”
 
even brought volume on zoölogy, and showed the original
 drawings of these ancient fish. and with peculiar thrill i felt an
 organ of early evolutionary epochs functioning in me.
 



chapter six
 
jacob wrestles with god
 

i cannot relate in brief all that i learned from the singular musician
 pistorius about abraxas. the most important result of his teaching was
 that i made further step forward on the road to self-realization. i
 was then about eighteen years old. i was young man rather out of the
 ordinary, precocious in hundred things, in hundred other things
 backward and helpless. when from time to time i used to compare myself
 with others, i was often proud and conceited, but just as frequently
 i felt depressed and humiliated. i had often looked upon myself as a
 genius, often as half mad. i could not share the pleasures and life of
 the fellows of my age, and often i heaped reproaches on myself and was
 consumed with cares, thinking i was hopelessly cut off from them, and
 that life was closed to me.
 
pistorius, himself full-grown and an eccentric, taught to preserve
 my courage and my self-esteem. in constantly finding some value in my
 words, in my dreams, in the play of my imagination and in my ideas, in
 taking them seriously and discussing them, set an example.
 
“you have told me,” said, “that you like music because it is not
 moral. well, all right. but you should be moralist yourself! you
 should not compare yourself with others. if nature had created you to
 be bat, you ought not to want to make yourself into an ostrich. you
 often consider yourself as singular, you reproach yourself with going
 ways different from most people. you must get out of that habit. look
 in the fire, look at the clouds, and as soon as you have presentiments,
 and the voices of your soul begin to speak, yield to them and don’t
 first ask what the opinion of your master or your father would be, or
 whether they would be pleasing to some god or other. one spoils oneself
 that way. in doing that one treads the common road, becomes fossil.
 sinclair, my dear fellow, the name of our god is abraxas. is god
 and is satan; has the light and the dark world in him. abraxas
 has objection to urge against any of your ideas or against any of
 your dreams. never forget that. but deserts you if you ever become
 blameless and normal. deserts you and seeks out another pot in order
 to cook his ideas therein.”
 
of all my dreams, that dark love-dream recurred most frequently. often,
 often have i dreamed of it; often i stepped under the crest with the
 bird on it into our house, and wished to draw my mother to me, but
 instead of her i found i was embracing the tall, manly, half-motherly
 woman, of whom i was afraid, and yet to whom i was drawn by most
 ardent desire. and i could never relate this dream to my friend. i kept
 it back, although i had opened my heart to him on everything else. it
 was my secret, my retreat, my refuge.
 
when i was depressed, i used to beg pistorius to play the
 passacaglia of old buxtehude. i sat in the dark church in the evening,
 engrossed in this singularly intimate music, which seemed to be
 hearkening to itself, as if entirely self-absorbed. each time it did me
 good and made more ready to follow the promptings of my inward self.
 
sometimes we stayed awhile in the church after the strains of the organ
 had died away. we sat and watched the feeble light shine through the
 high lancet window; the light seemed to lose itself in the body of the
 church.
 
“it sounds funny,” said pistorius, “that i once did theology and almost
 became parson. but it was only an error in form that i committed.
 to be priest, that is my vocation and my aim. only i was too easily
 satisfied, and gave myself to the service of jehovah before ever i knew
 abraxas. ah, every religion is beautiful! religion is soul. it is all
 one whether you take communion as christian or whether you make a
 pilgrimage to mecca.”
 
“then really you might have been clergyman,” i suggested.
 
“no, sinclair, no. i should have had to have lied in that case. our
 religion is so practised, as if it were none. it is carried on as if it
 were work of the understanding. catholic i could well be, if need
 were, but protestant clergyman--no! there are two kinds of genuine
 believers--i know such--who hold gladly to the literal interpretation.
 i could not say to them that for christ was not mere person, but a
 hero, myth, wonderful shadow-picture, in which mankind sees itself
 painted on the wall of eternity. and what should i find to say to the
 other sort, those who go to church to hear wise words, to fulfill a
 duty, in order to leave nothing undone, etc.? convert them, you think,
 perhaps? but that is not at all my idea. the priest does not wish to
 convert. only wants to live among the believers, among those of his
 own kind, so that through him they may find expression for that feeling
 out of which we make our gods.”
 
broke off. then continued: “our new faith, for which we have now
 chosen the name of abraxas, is beautiful, my friend. it is the best we
 have. but it is still nestling. its wings have not yet grown. alas, a
 lonely religion, that is not yet the true one. it must become an affair
 of many, it must have cult and orgy, feasts and mysteries....”
 
was sunk in reflection.
 
“can one not celebrate mysteries alone, or in very small circle?” i
 asked hesitatingly.
 
“yes, one can,” nodded. “i have been celebrating them for long
 time past. i have celebrated cults for which i should have been
 imprisoned for years in convict station, if they had been found out.
 but i know it is not the right thing.”
 
suddenly clapped on the shoulder, making jump. “young friend,”
 said impressively, “you also have mysteries. i know that you must
 have dreams of which you make mention to me. i don’t wish to know
 them. but i tell you: live them, these dreams, play your destined
 part, build altars to them! it is not yet the perfect religion, but
 it is way. whether you and i and few other people will one day
 renew the world remains to be seen. but we must renew it daily within
 us, otherwise we are of account. think over it! you are eighteen,
 sinclair, you don’t go with loose women, you must have love-dreams,
 desires. perhaps they are such that you are frightened by them! they
 are the best you have! believe me! i have lost great deal by doing
 violence to these love-dreams when i was your age. one should not do
 that. when one knows of abraxas, one should do that more. we should
 fear nothing. we should hold nothing forbidden which the soul in us
 desires.”
 
frightened, i objected: “but you can’t do everything which comes into
 your mind! you can’t murder man because you can’t tolerate him.”
 
pressed closer to me.
 
“there are cases where you can. only, generally it’s mistake. i don’t
 mean that you can simply do everything which comes into your mind. no,
 but you shouldn’t do injury to those ideas in which there is sense, you
 shouldn’t banish them from your mind or moralize about them. instead of
 getting oneself crucified or crucifying others, one can solemnly drink
 wine out of cup, thinking the while on the mystery of sacrifice. one
 can, without such actions, treat one’s impulses and one’s so-called
 temptations with esteem and love. then you discover their meaning, and
 they all have meaning. next time the idea takes you to do something
 really mad and sinful, sinclair, if you would like to murder someone
 or to do something dreadfully obscene, then think moment, that it is
 abraxas who is indulging in play of fancy. the man you would like to
 kill is never really mr. so and so, that is really only disguise.
 when we hate man, we hate in him something which resides in us
 ourselves. what is not in us does not move us.”
 
never had pistorius said anything to which went home so deeply as
 this. i could not reply. but what moved most singularly and most
 powerfully was that pistorius in this conversation had struck the same
 note as demian, whose words i had carried in my mind for years and
 years past. they knew nothing of one another, and both said to the
 same thing.
 
“the things we see,” said pistorius softly, “are the same things which
 are in us. there is reality except that which we have in ourselves.
 for that reason most people live so unreally, because they hold the
 impressions of the outside world for real, and their own world in
 themselves never enters into their consideration. you can be happy like
 that. but if once you know of the other, then you longer have the
 choice to go the way most people go. sinclair, the road for most people
 is easy, ours is hard. let us go.”
 
few days later, after i had on two occasions waited for him in vain,
 i met him late one evening in the street. came stumbling round a
 corner, blown along by the cold night wind. was very drunk. i did
 not like to call him. passed by without noticing me, staring in
 front of him with strange, glowing eyes, as though were moving in
 obedience to dark call from the unknown. i followed him down one
 street. drifted along as if drawn by an invisible wire, with the
 swaying gait of fanatic, or like ghost. sadly i went home, to the
 unsolved problems of my dreams.
 
“thus renews the world in himself!” i thought, and felt instantly
 that my thought was base and moral. what did i know of his dreams?
 perhaps in his intoxication was going surer way than in my anxiety.
 
* * * * *
 
in the intervals between lessons it struck once or twice that a
 boy who had never before attracted my notice was hovering about in
 my proximity. it was little, weak-looking, slim youngster with
 reddish-blond thin hair, who had something peculiar in his look and
 behavior. one evening as i came home was on the watch for in the
 street. let pass by, then walked behind me; and remained standing
 in front of the door of the house.
 
“can i do anything for you?” i asked.
 
“i only want to speak to you,” said timidly. “be good enough to come
 few steps with me.”
 
i followed him, observing that was deeply excited and full of
 expectation. his hands trembled.
 
“are you spiritualist?” asked quite suddenly.
 
“no, knauer,” i said, laughing. “not bit. how did you get hold of
 that idea?”
 
“but you are theosophist?”
 
“no again.”
 
“oh, please don’t be so reserved. i feel with absolute certitude there
 is something singular about you. it is in your eyes. i thought it
 certain you communed with spirits. i am not asking out of curiosity,
 sinclair, no! i am myself seeker, you know, and i am so lonely.”
 
“tell me, then!” i encouraged him. “i know absolutely nothing of
 ghosts. i live in my dreams: that is what you have felt about me.
 other people live in dreams as well, but not in their own, that is the
 difference.”
 
“yes, perhaps so,” whispered. “only it depends on the sort of dreams
 you live in. have you ever heard of white magic?”
 
i had to admit my ignorance.
 
“it’s when you learn to get the mastery over yourself. you can be
 immortal, and have magical powers as well. have you never practised
 such experiments?”
 
on my evincing curiosity with regard to those practices, was
 mysteriously silent, but when i turned to go burst out in
 explanation.
 
“for example, when i go to sleep or when i wish to concentrate my
 thoughts i do such exercises. i think of something or other, word
 for instance, or name, or geometrical figure. then i think it into
 myself, as strongly as i can. i try to get it into my head, until i
 feel it is there. then i think it in my neck, and so on, until i am
 quite full of it. then my thoughts are concentrated and nothing more
 can disturb my repose.”
 
i understood to certain degree what meant. yet i felt had
 something else in his mind, was oddly excited and hasty. i tried to
 make the questions easy for him, and soon gave an indication of
 what immediately concerned him.
 
“you are also continent?” asked anxiously.
 
“what do you mean by that? do you mean it from the sex point of view?”
 
“yes, yes. i have been continent for two years, since i knew of what i
 have told you. before that i practised vice, you know what. you have
 never been with woman, then?”
 
“no,” i said. “i haven’t found the right one.”
 
“but if you should find her, the one you consider the right one, then
 would you sleep with her?”
 
“yes, naturally. if she had nothing against it,” i said with some scorn.
 
“oh, then you are on false track! one can only perfect one’s inner
 forces if one remains entirely continent. i have done it, for two whole
 years. two years and little more than month! it’s so hard. often i
 can scarcely hold out any longer.”
 
“listen, knauer, i don’t believe that continency is so terribly
 important.”
 
“i know,” parried, “they all say that. but i did not expect to hear
 it from you. whoever will go the higher spiritual way must remain pure,
 unconditionally!”
 
“well, then, do so! but i don’t understand why one man should be purer
 than another, because represses his sex instincts. or can you switch
 off all sexual matters from your thoughts and dreams?”
 
looked despairingly at me.
 
“no, that’s just it. god! and yet it must be. at night i have dreams
 which i couldn’t relate even to myself. terrible dreams, terrible!”
 
i recollected what pistorius had said to me. but however much i felt
 his words to be right i could not pass them on. i could not give advice
 which did not result from my own experience, advice the observance
 of which i did not yet feel myself equal to. i was silent and felt
 humiliated that someone should come to for counsel when i had none
 to give.
 
“i have tried everything!” wailed knauer beside me. “i have done all
 that man can do, with cold water, with snow, with gymnastic exercises
 and running, but all that doesn’t help bit. each night i wake up out
 of dreams on which i dare not think. and most dreadful of all, i am by
 degrees losing everything that i had gained spiritually. it is almost
 impossible for any longer to concentrate my thoughts or to lull
 myself to sleep. often i lie awake the whole night through. i shall
 not be able to bear that much longer. finally, when i can carry on the
 struggle further, when i give in and make myself impure again, then
 i shall be worse than all the others who have never struggled against
 it. you understand that, don’t you?”
 
i nodded, but could say nothing to the point. began to bore me, and
 i was horrified at myself, because his obvious need and despair made
 deep impression on me. my only sentiment was: i can’t help you.
 
“then you know nothing that would help me?” asked at last, exhausted
 and sad. “nothing at all? there must be some way! how do you manage?”
 
“i cannot tell you anything, knauer. people can’t help one another in
 this case. one has helped me, either. you must think of something
 yourself, and you must obey the prompting which really comes from your
 own nature. there is nothing else. if you cannot find yourself, you
 won’t find any spirits, either.”
 
disappointed, and suddenly become dumb, the little fellow looked at me.
 then his look suddenly glowed with hate, made grimace at and
 cried with rage: “ah, you’re nice sort of saint! you have your vice
 as well, i know! you pretend to wisdom, and secretly you stick in the
 same filth as i and all of us! you’re swine, swine, like myself. we are
 all swine!”
 
i went away and left him standing there. made two, three steps in my
 direction, then stopped, turned round and ran away. i felt sick from
 feeling of pity and horror. i could not get rid of the feeling until
 i got home to my little room, and placing my few pictures before me, i
 surrendered myself up with passionate fervor to my dreams. my dreams
 came back at once, the dream of front door and crest, of mother and the
 strange woman, and i saw the features of the woman so very clearly
 that i began to draw her picture the same evening.
 
in few days this drawing was finished, painted in as if unconsciously
 in dreamy quarter-of-an-hour periods. in the evening i hung it on
 the wall, put the reading lamp in front of it, and stood before it
 as before spirit with whom i had to fight until victory should be
 decided one way or the other. it was face similar to the former,
 resembling my friend demian, in certain traits even resembling myself.
 one eye stood perceptibly higher than the other, the look passed over
 me, sunk in staring gaze, full of destiny.
 
i stood before it. such was my inward exertion that i became cold to
 the marrow. i questioned the picture, i abused it, i caressed it,
 i prayed to it. i called it mother, i called it beloved, called it
 strumpet and whore, called it abraxas. meanwhile words of pistorius
 crossed my mind, or of demian? i could not recollect on what occasion
 they had been spoken, but i thought i heard them again. they were the
 words of jacob wrestling with the angel of god. “i will not let thee
 go, except thou bless me.”
 
the painted face in the lamplight changed at each appeal. it was bright
 and shining, was black and gloomy; it closed pale lids over dead eyes,
 opened them again and flashed burning look. it was woman, man, girl,
 was little child, an animal, vanished to speck, was again tall and
 clear. at last, in response to strong inward prompting, i closed my
 eyes, and saw the picture inwardly in me, stronger and more powerful.
 i wished to kneel down before it, but it was so much within me, that i
 could separate it from myself more; it seemed as if it had entirely
 identified itself with me.
 
then i heard loud confused roar as of spring storm. i trembled
 in an indescribably new feeling of fear and excitement. stars darted
 before and died out, recollections even of the first forgotten years
 of my childhood, of time further back still, of pre-existence
 and the early stages of existence, pressed through me. but the
 recollections which seemed to piece together my life’s whole history
 even to its most secret details did not cease with yesterday and
 to-day, they went farther, mirrored the future, tearing away from
 to-day, changing into new forms of life, of which the pictures were
 very bright and blinding. but of none of them could i call up just
 image later.
 
in the night i woke up out of deep sleep. i was dressed and lying
 transversely across the bed. i struck light, feeling that i must try
 to remember something important that had happened. i knew nothing of
 the hours just passed. i turned on the light, and recollection came
 back gradually. i looked for the picture. it was not hanging on the
 wall, neither was it lying on the table. i thought confusedly that i
 must have burned it. or was it dream, that i had burned it in my
 hands and had eaten the ashes?
 
great inquietude convulsed and drove forth. i put on my hat,
 went out of the house and down the street, as if under coercion.
 i walked and walked through streets and squares as if blown along
 by storm, i listened in front of the gloomy church of my friend,
 searched in obedience to blind impulse, without knowing what i was
 looking for. i went through suburb, where brothels stood. here and
 there light was still shining. further on stood new buildings and
 brick heaps, covered in part with grey snow. i went on through this
 wilderness, driven forward by strange impulse, like man walking in
 dream. the thought of the new building in my native town crossed my
 mind, that building to which my tormentor kromer had drawn to settle
 accounts with him. in the grey night similar building stood there in
 front of me, its black doorway yawning wide. i was drawn towards it,
 but wanted to shun it and stumbled over sand and rubbish. the impulse
 was stronger than i, i had to go in.
 
i staggered over planks and broken bricks into the deserted room. there
 was mouldy smell of damp, cold stones. heap of sand lay there, a
 grey bright speck, otherwise all else was dark.
 
suddenly terrified voice called to me: “in god’s name, sinclair,
 where have you come from?”
 
and human figure rose out of the darkness close to me, little thin
 shape like ghost. i recognized, while yet my hair was standing on
 end, my school companion knauer.
 
“how did you get here?” asked, as if mad with excitement. “how have
 you been able to find me?”
 
i did not understand.
 
“i wasn’t looking for you,” i said, dazed. i spoke with difficulty, the
 words came from painfully, as if from dead, heavy, frozen lips.
 
“you weren’t looking for me?”
 
“no. i was drawn here. did you call me? you must have called. but what
 are you doing here? it’s still night.”
 
put his thin arms convulsively round me.
 
“yes, night. but it must soon be morning. oh, sinclair, to think that
 you didn’t forget me! can you ever forgive me?”
 
“what then?”
 
“ah, i was so hateful!”
 
then i recollected our conversation. had that taken place four, five
 days ago? it seemed to like lifetime. but suddenly i knew all. not
 only what had occurred between us, but also why i had come and what
 knauer wanted to do there.
 
“you wanted, then, to take your life, knauer?”
 
shuddered through cold and fear.
 
“yes, i wanted to. i don’t know whether i could have. i wished to wait
 until the morning came.”
 
i drew him into the open. the first oblique rays of day glimmered
 indescribably cold through the grey atmosphere.
 
i led the boy on my arm little way. i heard my own voice saying: “now
 go home, and don’t say anything to anybody. you were on false track,
 false track! and we are not swine, as you think. we are men. we make
 gods, and we wrestle with them, and they bless us.”
 
silently we went on, and separated. when i came home it was day.
 
the best that mystery in st. ---- had yet to give was the hours with
 pistorius at the organ or by the chimney fire. we read greek text
 about abraxas together. read to portions of translation of the
 veda and taught to say the sacred “om.” however, it was not this
 learned instruction which was of service to my inner self, but rather
 the contrary. what did good was the self-progression i made, the
 increasing confidence in my own dreams, thoughts and presentiments, and
 the consciousness of the power that i carried in me.
 
i had an excellent understanding with pistorius in every way. i needed
 only to think intently of him, and i could be sure that he, or a
 greeting from him, would come to me. i could ask him, just as i could
 demian, something or other, without his being there in person. i
 needed only to imagine his presence and to put my questions to him as
 intensive thoughts. then all the soul-force i had put into the question
 came back to as answer. only it was not the person of pistorius
 which i called up in my imagination; nor that of max demian, but it
 was the picture i had painted and of which i had dreamed. it was the
 half-man, half-woman, dream picture of my dæmon, to which i called. it
 lived now not only in my dreams, it was longer painted on paper, but
 it was in me, as desire-picture and an enhancement of my spiritual
 self.
 
the relation into which the unsuccessful suicide knauer entered with
 was peculiar and sometimes amusing. since the night i had been sent
 to him, dogged my steps like faithful servant or hound, sought
 to attach himself to and followed blindly. came to with
 curious questions and wishes. wanted to see spirits, to learn the
 cabbala, and did not believe when i assured him i understood
 nothing of all these things. credited with being able to do
 anything. but it was singular that often came to with his queer
 and silly questions just at the moment when i myself had mental knot
 to be disentangled. his moody ideas and concerns often gave the cue,
 the impulse which helped in the solution of my own problems. was
 often tiresome and i imperiously drove him away. i felt, however,
 that had been sent to me, and what i gave to him, i received
 twofold in return. also was guide, or rather way. the mad books
 and publications brought me, and in which sought the key to
 happiness, taught more than i realized at the time.
 
this knauer vanished later from my path, neither did i miss him. no
 arrangement, understanding was necessary with him. but it was with
 pistorius. towards the close of my school career in st. ---- i lived
 through another peculiar experience with my friend.
 
even innocuous, innocent people are not altogether spared the shock
 of conflict. even they come once in their lives in conflict with
 the beautiful virtues of piety and gratitude. each must make the step
 which parts him from his father, from his teachers. each must once feel
 something of the bitterness of loneliness, though most people cannot
 support it for long and soon creep back to their homes again. it was
 not great struggle for to part from my parents and their world,
 the “bright” world of my beautiful childhood. but slowly and almost
 imperceptibly i had got further from them and become more of stranger
 to them. i regretted it; it often caused bitter hours during my
 visits home; but it was not deep. i could bear it.
 
but when we have offered love and reverence of our own accord, and
 not out of habit, when we have been disciples and friends with our
 innermost feelings--then it is bitter and terrible moment when the
 realization is suddenly brought home to us that the guiding current of
 our life is bearing us away from those we love. then every thought of
 ours which rejects our friend and teacher enters our own heart like a
 poisoned sting, every blow of self-defense strikes back into our own
 face. then who felt that the dictates of his own conscience were an
 authentic guide reproaches himself with the terms “faithlessness” and
 “ingratitude.” then the terrified heart flees anxiously back to the
 valleys of childhood virtues, and cannot believe that the rupture must
 take place, that another bond must be severed.
 
in the course of time feeling had slowly developed in which
 refused to recognize my friend pistorius unconditionally as my guide.
 what i experienced in the most important moments of my youth was my
 friendship with him, his counsel, his consolation, his proximity.
 god had spoken to through him. through him my dreams returned to
 me, from his mouth came their explanation, from him i learned their
 significance. had given the courage to realize myself. and now,
 alas, i felt growing opposition against him. in his conversation he
 evinced too clearly desire to instruct me. i felt it was only one
 side of my nature that thoroughly understood.
 
there was quarrel, scene between us, rupture. i said to him
 only single, really harmless word, but nevertheless it was the
 moment when an illusion between us fell in colored pieces.
 
the presentiment had for some time already oppressed me, but one sunday
 in his scholarly old room this presentiment changed to definite
 feeling. we were lying on the floor before the fire. was speaking
 of mysteries and religious forms which was studying, and on which
 was meditating. occupied himself with trying to picture their
 possible future. to all this seemed curious and interesting, but
 scarcely of vital importance. it smacked of erudition. it was like a
 fatiguing search among the ruins of former worlds. and all at once i
 felt an aversion from the whole business, from this cult of mythology,
 from this sort of piecing together, this mosaic work of religious forms
 which had been handed down to posterity.
 
“pistorius,” i said suddenly, in malicious outburst which surprised
 and frightened even myself, “relate dream, real dream, one that you
 have had in the night. what you have just been talking about is so--so
 cursedly antiquarian!”
 
had never heard speak thus. with shame and terror i realized
 the very same moment that the arrow i had shot at him, and which had
 entered his heart, was taken from his own quiver--i realized that i had
 heard him reproach himself in an ironical tone on this very account,
 and that now i had maliciously turned one of his own reproaches
 against him like resharpened arrow.
 
felt it instantly, and was silent. i looked at him with terror in my
 heart and saw that had become very pale.
 
after long, heavy pause put some wood on the fire and said
 quietly: “you are quite right, sinclair. you’re wise fellow. i will
 spare you all this antiquarian business.”
 
spoke very quietly, but his tone told how deeply had been
 wounded. what had i done!
 
i was on the point of tears. i wanted to beg his pardon with all my
 heart, to assure him of my affection and gratitude. moving words came
 into my mind--but i could not utter them. was silent as well, and so
 we lay there, while the flames leaped up and then sank, and with each
 flame that paled fell something beautiful and fervid that ceased to
 glow and had vanished--never again to come back.
 
“i fear you have misunderstood me,” i said at last, much crushed,
 and with dry, hoarse voice. the silly, senseless words came as if
 mechanically from my lips, as if i had been reading them out of news
 sheet.
 
“i understood you perfectly,” said pistorius softly. “you are quite
 right.” we waited. then continued slowly: “so far as one man can be
 right in his judgment of another.”
 
no, no, voice inside said, i am wrong; but i could not say
 anything. i knew that i had aimed my single little word at his one
 essential weakness. i had touched the point of which himself
 was distrustful. his idea was “antiquarian.” was seeker, but
 retrogressive, was romantic. and suddenly i realized that it was
 just what had been to and had given that could not be and
 give to himself. had guided to point on the road, beyond which
 he, the guide, could not go.
 
god knows how i could have uttered such word! i had not meant it
 badly. i had had idea it would lead to catastrophe. i had uttered
 something, the import of which i did not myself realize at the moment
 of utterance. i had surrendered myself to somewhat witty, somewhat
 malicious inspiration, and fate used it as her instrument. i had been
 guilty of little thoughtlessness, crudeness, and had accepted it
 as judgment.
 
oh, how much i wished then that would have got angry, have defended
 himself, have shouted at me! but did nothing. i had all that to do
 within myself. would have smiled, had been able. the fact that he
 could not, showed more than anything else how hard i had hit him.
 
and because pistorius took the blow from me, his presumptuous and
 ungrateful pupil, so quietly, because silently agreed with me,
 because recognized my word as judgment of fate, caused to
 hate myself, made my thoughtlessness seem thousand times greater
 than it was. as i struck, i had thought to hit strong man, capable of
 defending himself--now was meek, suffering creature, defenseless,
 who surrendered in silence.
 
we remained long time lying before the dying fire, in which each
 glowing figure, each crumbling ash heap called to my memory happy,
 beautiful, rich hours, making my guilt and my obligation to pistorius
 greater and greater. finally i could bear it longer. i got up and
 went. long time i stood before his door, long time i listened on
 the dark staircase, long time i stood outside in front of the house,
 waiting to see whether perhaps would come out to me. then i went on,
 walking for hours and hours through town and suburbs, park and wood,
 until evening fell. at that moment i felt for the first time the mark
 of cain on my forehead.
 
i fell to pondering and rumination. i had every intention, in thinking
 matters over, to accuse myself and to defend pistorius. but all ended
 to the contrary. thousand times i was ready to repent of my rash word
 and to withdraw it--but it had been true, nevertheless. now i succeeded
 in understanding pistorius, in building up his whole dream. this dream
 had been to be priest, to proclaim new religion, to invent new
 forms of exultation, of love, of worship, to set up new symbols. but
 this was not within his province. lingered too long in the past, he
 knew too much of what had been, knew too much of egypt, of india,
 of mithras, of abraxas. his love was attached to ideas with which
 the world was already familiar. and in his inmost self probably
 recognized that the new religion had to be different, that it had to
 spring from fresh sources and not be drawn out of collections and
 libraries. his office was, perhaps, to help men to find themselves, as
 had done with me. but to found new doctrine, to give new gods to
 the world, was not his function in life.
 
and at this point the realization came upon that everyone has an
 “office,” charge. but to one is it permitted to choose his office
 for himself, and to discharge it as likes. it was wrong to want new
 gods, it was entirely wrong to wish to give the world anything. man
 has absolutely other duty than this: to seek himself, to grope his
 own way forward, matter whither it leads. that thought impressed
 itself deeply on me; that was the fruit of this new event for me.
 often had i pictured the future. i had dreamed of filling rôles which
 might be destined for me, as poet perhaps or as prophet, as painter,
 or some such rôle. all that was of account. i was not here to
 write, to preach, to paint, neither i nor anyone else was here for
 that purpose. all that was secondary. the true vocation for everyone
 was only to attain to self-realization. might end as poet or as
 madman, as prophet or as criminal--that was not his affair, that was
 of consequence in the long run. his business was to work out his
 own destiny, not any destiny, but his own, to live for that, entirely
 and uninterruptedly. everything else was merely an attempt to shun his
 fate, to fly back to the ideals of the masses, to adapt himself to
 circumstances. it was fear of his own inner being. there rose before
 this new picture, terrible and sacred, suggested to hundred
 times ere this, perhaps often already expressed, but now for the first
 time lived. i was throw from nature’s dice box, projection into the
 unknown, perhaps into something new, perhaps into the void, and my sole
 vocation was to let this throw-up from primeval depths work itself out
 in me, to feel its will in and to make it mine. that solely!
 
i had already known what it was to be very lonely. now i felt i could
 be lonelier still, and that i could not escape from it.
 
i made attempt to reconcile myself with pistorius. we remained
 friends, but our relation towards one another had changed. only one
 single time did we mention it, or rather, it was only who spoke of
 the matter. said: “i want to be priest, you know that. i would
 best of all like to be the priest of the religion of which we have
 so many presentiments. i can never be that, i know. i have known it
 already for some time, without fully admitting it. i will do some
 other priestly service, perhaps at the organ, perhaps in another way.
 but i must always be surrounded by something which i find beautiful
 and sacred, organ music and mysteries, symbol and myth, i need that
 and cannot persuade myself to leave it--that is my weakness. i often
 realize, sinclair, that i should not have such desires, that they are
 luxury and weakness. it would be greater, it would be more right,
 if i placed myself quite simply at the disposition of fate, without
 pretensions. that is the sole thing i cannot do. perhaps you will some
 time be able to do it. it is hard, it is the only thing really hard
 there is, my friend. i have often dreamed of it, but i cannot do it,
 i tremble at the thought of it. i cannot stand so completely naked
 and alone. i am poor, weak hound, who needs little warmth and
 food, who occasionally likes to feel the proximity of his own kind.
 whose only desire it is to work out his own destiny has kith or
 kin, but stands alone and has only the cold world space around him.
 do you know, that is jesus in the garden of gethsemane? there have
 been martyrs who willingly let themselves be nailed to the cross, but
 even they were not heroes, they were not free, they also wished for
 something to which they had been accustomed, which they had loved; with
 which they had felt at home. they had examples or ideals. who will
 fulfill his destiny has neither examples nor ideals, has nothing
 dear to him, nothing to comfort him. and one really ought to go this
 way. people like you and i are certainly very lonely, but we still
 have each other, we have the secret satisfaction of being different,
 of revolting, of wanting the unusual. but we must drop that, too, if
 we would go the whole way. we must not wish to be revolutionaries, or
 examples, or martyrs. to think the thought to its logical end----”
 
no, one could not think beyond that. but one could dream of it, could
 sense it, could anticipate it. few times i realized something of
 this, in very quiet hour. then i looked straight into the open,
 staring eyes of my fate. they could have been full of wisdom, or full
 of madness, they could be full of love or full of wickedness, it
 was all one. one was to choose nothing of all that; one was to want
 nothing, one was only to want oneself, one’s destiny. in that way had
 pistorius served me, for time, as guide.
 
in those days i walked about as if i were blind, storms roared within
 me, every step meant danger. i was conscious of nothing but the
 precipitous darkness in front of me, down to which all the roads i
 had trodden hitherto seemed to lead. and in my inward self i saw the
 picture of the guide, who resembled demian, and in whose eyes stood my
 fate.
 
i wrote on sheet of paper: “a guide has left me. i stand in complete
 darkness. i cannot take step alone. help me!”
 
i wished to send that to demian. yet i omitted to do this, for each
 time i wished to do it, it seemed foolish and meaningless. but i
 knew that little prayer by heart, and often said it to myself. it
 accompanied hourly. i began to realize what prayer is.
 
* * * * *
 
my school career was over. my father had arranged that during the
 holidays i was to travel and then i was to go to the university. in
 which faculty, i knew not. i was to be allowed to take philosophy for
 one semester. i should have been equally content with anything else.
 



chapter seven
 
mother eve
 

in the holidays i went once to the house in which, years before, max
 demian and his mother had lived. an old lady was walking in the garden.
 i entered into conversation and learned that the house belonged to
 her. i enquired after the demians. she remembered them very well. but
 she did not know where they were living at that moment. as she felt
 my interest, she took into the house, searched through leather
 album and showed photograph of demian’s mother. i scarcely had any
 recollections of what she was like. but when i saw the little picture
 my heart stood still. it was my dream picture! there it was, the tall,
 almost masculine woman’s figure, resembling her son, with traits
 of motherliness, traits which denoted severity, and deep passion,
 beautiful and alluring, beautiful and unapproachable, demon and mother,
 destiny and mistress. that was she!
 
i was filled with wild wonder, when i learned that my dream picture
 lived on earth! there was woman, then, who looked like that, who
 bore my fate in her features! where was she? where? and she was
 demian’s mother!
 
i started on my travels soon after. strange journey! i went
 restlessly from place to place as impulse directed, always in search of
 this woman. there were days when i met shapes which reminded of her,
 and which resembled her. these shapes led on through the streets
 of strange towns, into railway stations, into trains, as in tangled
 dream. there were other days when i saw how useless my search was. then
 i sat inactive, anywhere, in park or the garden of hotel, in a
 waiting room; i looked into myself and tried to make the picture live
 in me. but it was now shy and elusive. i could not sleep, i only nodded
 for quarter of an hour or so on railway journeys through country
 unknown to me. once in zürich, woman followed me, pretty, rather
 forward woman. i scarcely noticed her and went on, as if she were air.
 i would rather have died at once, than have shown sympathy for another
 woman, even if only for an hour.
 
i felt that my destiny was leading on. i felt that fulfillment was
 nigh. i was mad with impatience, to think that i could do nothing to
 help myself. once at station, i think it was at innsbruck, i saw, at
 the window of train which was just moving out, form which reminded
 of her, and i was miserable for days. and suddenly the form appeared
 again to at night in dream. i woke up with feeling as of shame,
 realizing the fruitlessness and senselessness of my chase, and i went
 home by the most direct route.
 
couple of weeks later i matriculated in the university of h----.
 everything disappointed me. the course of lectures i followed, on the
 history of philosophy, was just as vain and mechanical as the common
 ground of student life. everything was so much according to pattern,
 one person did as the other, and the boyish faces, although inflamed
 with forced gaiety, looked so distressingly vacant. it was like the
 gloss of ready-made article! but i was free, i had the whole day to
 myself, and lived quietly in beautiful old building outside the town.
 i had couple of volumes of nietzsche on my table. i lived with him,
 feeling the loneliness of his soul, sensing his destiny, which impelled
 him onwards unceasingly. i suffered with him, and was happy that there
 had been one who had gone his way so inflexibly.
 
late one evening i wandered through the town; an autumn wind was
 blowing and i heard the student societies singing in their taverns.
 tobacco smoke rose in clouds through the open windows; songs were being
 roared out, loudly and tensely; but the noise did not soar up, it fell
 dully on the ear, and was lifelessly uniform.
 
i stood at street corner and listened. from two cafés the flood of
 song rolled forth into the night. everywhere community, everywhere
 this huddling together, everywhere this unloading of the burden of
 destiny, this flight into the warm proximity of the herd!
 
two men passed by slowly. i caught phrase of their conversation.
 
“isn’t it just like an assembly of youths in nigger village?” said
 one. “they all do the same things. even tattooing is in fashion. look,
 that’s the young europe.”
 
the voice rang suggestively in my ear. i followed behind the two in the
 dark street. one of them was japanese, small and elegant. i saw his
 yellow smiling face shine under the lamp.
 
the other spoke again.
 
“well, i don’t suppose it’s any better with you in japan. people who do
 not follow the herd are everywhere rare. there are few here, too.”
 
every word went through me. i felt pleasure and dread. i recognized the
 speaker. it was demian.
 
in the windy night i followed him and the japanese through the dark
 streets, listening to their conversation and enjoying the ring of
 demian’s voice. it had the old tone, the old, beautiful sureness and
 tranquillity, and it had the same power over me. now everything was
 right. i had found him.
 
at the end of street in the suburbs the japanese took leave and
 closed house door behind him. demian took the way back. i had
 remained standing, and awaited him in the middle of the street. with
 beating heart i saw him approaching erect and walking with an elastic
 step. wore brown raincoat and carried thin stick, hanging from
 his arm. advanced without altering his regular stride until got
 right up to me. took off his hat, displaying his old, bright face
 with the determined mouth and the peculiar brightness on the broad
 forehead.
 
“demian!” i called.
 
stretched out his hand to me.
 
“so it’s you, then, sinclair? i expected you.”
 
“did you know i was here?”
 
“i did not know for certain, but i hoped it might be true. i saw you
 first this evening. you have been behind us the whole time.”
 
“you recognized then at once?”
 
“of course. you’re very much changed to be sure; but you have the sign.
 we used to call it the mark of cain, if you recollect. it is our sign.
 you have always had it; for that reason i became your friend. but now
 it is clearer.”
 
“i did not know. or rather i did. i once painted picture of you,
 demian, and was astonished that it was also like me. was that the sign?”
 
“that was it. it’s fine that you are here now! my mother will be glad
 as well.”
 
i started.
 
“your mother? is she here? she doesn’t know bit.”
 
“oh, she knows of you. she will know, without even my asking her, who
 you are. you haven’t let hear from you for long time.”
 
“oh, i often wanted to write, but nothing came of it. for some time
 past i have felt i should find you. i was waiting for it every day.”
 
pushed his arm through mine and we went on. tranquillity seemed to
 emanate from him and pass on to me. we were soon chatting together as
 formerly. we mentioned our schooldays, the confirmation class and that
 unlucky meeting of ours in the holidays--only mention was made of
 the earliest and closest bond between us, of the affair with frank
 kromer.
 
unexpectedly we found ourselves in the middle of singular and ominous
 conversation. having recalled demian’s discourse with the japanese,
 we spoke of student life in general and from that we had branched
 off to something else, which seemed to be rather out of the way of
 the former trend of our talk. nevertheless, from demian’s manner of
 introducing the subject, there seemed to be lack of coherence in our
 conversation.
 
spoke of the spirit of europe, and of modern tendencies. everywhere,
 said, reigned desire to come together, to form herds, but nowhere
 was freedom or love. all this life in common, from the student clubs
 and choral societies to the state, was an unnatural, forced phenomenon.
 the community owed its origin to sense of fear, of embarrassment, to
 desire for flight; inwardly it was rotten and old, and approaching a
 general break-up.
 
“community,” demian said, “is beautiful thing. but what we see
 blossoming everywhere is by means that. it will arise anew from the
 mutual understanding of individuals, and after time the world will be
 remodeled. what is now called community is merely formation of herds.
 mankind seeks refuge together because men have fear of one another--the
 masters combine for their own ends, the workmen for theirs, and the
 intellectuals for theirs! and why are they afraid? one is only afraid
 when one is not at one with oneself. they are afraid because they
 have never had the courage to be themselves. community of men who
 are afraid of the unknown in themselves! they all feel that the laws
 of their life longer hold good, that they are living according to
 outworn commandments. neither their religion nor their morals conform
 to our needs. for hundred years and more europe has simply studied
 and built factories. they know exactly how many grams of powder it
 takes to kill man, but they do not know how to pray to god. they
 have idea how to amuse themselves, even for an hour. look at these
 students drinking in their tavern! or take any place of amusement
 where rich people go! hopeless! my dear sinclair, cheerfulness,
 serenity can come of all that. these creatures, who move about so
 uneasily in crowds, are full of fear and full of wickedness, one
 trusts the other. they adhere to ideals which have ceased to exist,
 and they stone everyone who proposes new one. i feel that there
 are troubles ahead of us. they will come, believe me, they will come
 soon! of course the world won’t be bettered! whether the workmen kill
 the manufacturers, or whether the russians and germans shoot at one
 another, it will only be change of proprietors. but it will not be
 in vain. it will free the world from the chains of present-day ideals,
 there will be clearing away of stone-age gods. the world, as it is
 now, wants to die, it wants to perish, and it will.”
 
“and what will happen to us then?” i asked.
 
“to us? oh, perhaps we shall perish as well. they can also murder
 people in our position. only we shall not be entirely wiped out.
 the will of the future will realize itself from what remains of our
 influence, or with the aid of those of us who survive. the will of
 humanity will make itself felt, which our europe has for long time
 past tried to drown in its sale yard of scientifically manufactured
 articles. and then it will be seen that there is nothing in common
 between the will of humanity and that of our present-day communities,
 of the states and peoples, of the societies and churches. but what
 nature wills with man, is written in the individual few, in you and in
 me. it is found in jesus, in nietzsche. for these (the only important
 currents of thought which naturally can alter their course each day)
 there will be place when the present-day communities break up together.”
 
it was late when we made halt before garden by the river.
 
“we live here,” said demian. “come and see us soon! we shall expect
 you.”
 
i cheerfully wended my long way home through the night, which had
 become cold. here and there brawling students were lurching through
 the town. i had often felt, sometimes with feeling of privation,
 sometimes with scorn, the contrast between their curious sort of
 gaiety and my lonely life. but now, tranquil and strong in sense of
 secret power i felt as never before how little that affected me, how
 far removed was their world from mine. i reminded myself of officials
 of my native town, worthy old gentlemen, who clung to memories of the
 semesters they had passed in drinking, as they would to memories of a
 blissful paradise, and who practised cult, calling up reminiscences
 of the vanished “freedom” of their university life with all the
 seriousness which some poet or other romantic would devote to an
 account of his childhood. everywhere the same! everywhere they sought
 “liberty” and “happiness” behind them, in the past, for fear of being
 reminded of their own responsibility, of being warned they were not
 striking out for themselves, but merely going the way of all the world.
 two or three years passed in drinking and jollification, and then they
 crept under the common shelter and became serious gentlemen in the
 service of the state. yes, it was rotten, our whole system was rotten
 and these student sillinesses were less stupid and not so bad as a
 hundred others.
 
however, when i reached my distant dwelling and went to bed, all these
 thoughts had flown. everything else was in suspense as i looked forward
 to the fulfillment of the promise made to that day. as soon as i
 wished, in the morning if i liked, i could see demian’s mother. let
 the students hold their drinking bouts and tattoo their faces, let the
 world be rotten and on the brink of ruin--what had that to do with me?
 i was waiting for one single thing, that my fate might meet in new
 picture.
 
i woke up late in the morning from deep sleep. the day broke for
 as solemn festal day, such as i had not experienced since the
 christmas celebrations of my boyhood. i was full of deep unrest, yet
 entirely without fear. i felt that an important day had broken for
 me. i saw and felt the world around changed: it was full of secret
 portent, expectant and solemn. even the gently falling autumn rain was
 beautiful, full of the quiet, glad, serious music of festal day. for
 the first time the outer world was in tune with my inner world--then it
 is feast-day for the soul, then living is worth while! house, no
 shop window, face in the street disturbed me. everything was as it
 had to be, but did not wear the empty features of every day and of the
 habitual. it was like expectant nature, standing full of awe to meet
 its fate. thus, as little boy, i used to see the world on the morning
 of great feast-day, at christmas or at easter. i had not known that
 this world could still be so beautiful. i had been accustomed to
 living shut up in myself, and to content myself with the idea that my
 understanding for the outside world had been lost, that the loss of
 glistening colors was inevitably connected with the loss of childish
 vision.
 
so the hour came when i found again that garden in the suburbs, at
 the gate of which i had taken leave of max demian the night before.
 concealed behind trees in grey mist of rain stood little house,
 bright and homely, tall flowers stood behind big glass partition,
 and behind shining windows were dark room walls with pictures and
 bookcases. the front door led immediately into little hall, and a
 silent old servant, black, with white apron, showed in and took my
 raincoat from me.
 
she left alone in the hall. i looked about me. i looked round; and
 immediately i was in the middle of my dream. on the dark wood wall
 above door, under glass and in black frame, hung picture i knew
 well, my bird with the golden yellow hawk’s crest, forcing its way out
 of the sphere. much moved, i remained standing. my heart felt glad and
 sorry, as if in that moment everything i had done and had experienced
 came back to as answer and fulfillment. like lightning flash a
 crowd of pictures passed through my soul: my home, the house of my
 father, with the old stone crest over the arch of the door, the boy
 demian drawing the crest, myself as boy, fearsome under the evil
 spell of my enemy kromer, myself, as youth, at the table in my little
 room at school painting the bird of my dream, the soul caught in web
 of its own weaving, and everything, everything up to this moment found
 echo in again, and was confined, answered, approved.
 
with misty eyes i stared at my picture and read in the book of my soul.
 my glance dropped. in the open door under the picture of the bird stood
 tall lady in dark dress. it was she.
 
i could not utter word. the beautiful woman smiled at in a
 friendly way beneath features like her son’s, timeless and without
 age, full of an animated will. her look was fulfillment, her greeting
 meant home-coming. in silence i stretched out my hands to her. she
 seized both mine with her strong, warm ones.
 
“you are sinclair. i knew you at once. i am very glad to see you!”
 
her voice was deep and warm, i drank it in like sweet wine. and now i
 looked up in her tranquil face, into the black eyes of unfathomable
 depth. i looked at her fresh, ripe mouth, queenly forehead, which bore
 the sign.
 
“how glad i am!” i said to her and kissed her hands. “i believe i have
 been on my way all my life long--but now i have come home.”
 
she smiled in motherly way.
 
“one never comes home,” she said gently. “but where friendly roads
 converge, the whole world looks for an hour like home.”
 
she gave expression to what i myself had felt on my way to her.
 her voice and her words were like those of her son, and yet quite
 different. everything was more mature, warmer, more assured. but just
 as max in years past had made on one the impression of being mere
 boy, so his mother did not look like the mother of grown-up son, so
 young and sweet was the breath of her face and hair, so smooth her
 golden skin, so blossoming her mouth. more queenly still than in my
 dream she stood before me. her presence was love’s happiness, her look
 was fulfillment.
 
this, then, was the new picture, in which my fate displayed itself, no
 longer severe, longer isolating, but mature and full of promise.
 i took resolutions, i made vows. i had attained an end, i had
 reached point of vantage on the way, from which the further road
 displayed itself, broad and lovely, leading on to lands of promise,
 shaded by treetops of happiness near at hand, cooled by gardens of
 delight. come what might, i was happy to know of this woman’s existence
 in the world, to drink in her voice, to sense her presence. whether she
 would be to mother, mistress, goddess--what mattered it as long as
 she was present! as long as my way lay near to hers!
 
she indicated my picture of the hawk.
 
“you have never given max more pleasure than by sending this bird,”
 she said musingly. “and i was pleased as well. we expected you, and
 when the picture arrived we knew that you were on the way to us. when
 you were little boy, sinclair, my came one day from school and
 said: ‘there’s boy who has the sign on his forehead, must be my
 friend.’ that was you. you have not had an easy time of it, but we had
 confidence in you. once in the holidays when you were at home, max met
 you again. you were at that time about sixteen years old. max told
 me----”
 
i interrupted: “oh, that should have told you that. it was the most
 miserable time i have had!”
 
“yes, max said to me: ‘now sinclair has the hardest time before him. he
 is making an attempt to escape to the community, has even taken to
 drinking with the others; but won’t succeed in that. his sign has
 become dulled, but it shines secretly.’ was not that the case?”
 
“oh yes, it was, exactly. then i found beatrice, and finally guide
 came to me. his name was pistorius. for the first time it was clear to
 why my boyhood was so bound up with max’s, why i could not break
 away from him. dear lady--dear mother, at that time i often thought i
 should have to take my life. is the way so hard for everyone?”
 
she let her fingers stray through my hair, as gently as if light
 breeze were blowing.
 
“it is always hard, to be born. you know, it is not without effort that
 the bird comes out of the egg. look back and ask yourself: was the way
 then so hard?--only hard? was it not beautiful as well? could you have
 had one more beautiful, more easy?”
 
i shook my head.
 
“it was hard,” i said, as if in sleep, “it was hard, until the dream
 came.”
 
she nodded and looked at penetratingly.
 
“yes, one must find one’s dream, then the way is easy. but there is
 dream which endures for always. each sets new one free, to none
 should one wish to cleave.”
 
i started. was that already warning? was that already warding-off?
 but matter, i was ready to let myself be led by her, and not enquire
 after the end.
 
“i do not know,” i said, “how long my dream is to last. i wish it would
 be forever. my fate received under the picture of the bird, like a
 mother, and like mistress. to it i belong and to one else.”
 
“as long as the dream is your fate, so long must you remain true to
 it,” she said, in earnest confirmation of my remark.
 
i was very sad, and i wished ardently to die in this hour of
 enchantment; i felt the tears--for what an interminably long time had i
 not wept--rise irresistibly and overmaster me. i turned violently away
 from her. i stepped to the window, and looked out, my eyes blinded with
 tears, away over the flower-pots.
 
i heard her voice behind me; it rang out calmly and yet was so full of
 tenderness, like cup filled to the brim with wine.
 
“sinclair, what child you are! of course your fate loves you. one day
 it will belong to you entirely, just as you dreamt it, if you remain
 true to it.”
 
i had composed myself and turned my face to her again. she gave her
 hand.
 
“i have few friends,” she said, smiling, “very few, very close
 friends, who call mother eve. you may call so as well, if you
 like.”
 
she led to the door, opened it and indicated the garden. “you will
 find max out there, i think.”
 
i stood under the tall trees, stunned and stupefied. i knew not whether
 i was more awake or more dreaming than ever. softly the rain dripped
 from the branches. i went slowly through the garden, which stretched
 far along the river bank. at last i found demian. stood in an open
 summer house. naked to the waist, was doing boxing exercises with a
 little sack of sand hung from beam.
 
astonished, i remained standing there. demian looked magnificent; his
 broad chest, the firm manly head, the uplifted arms were strong and
 sturdy. the movements came from the hips, the shoulders, the joints of
 the arm, as easily as if they bubbled out of spring of strength.
 
“demian!” i called. “what are you doing there?”
 
laughed gaily.
 
“i am exercising. i have promised to box with the little jap; the
 fellow is as agile as cat, and naturally just as sly. but won’t be
 able to manage me. i owe him just one little beating.”
 
drew on shirt and coat.
 
“you have already seen mother?” asked.
 
“yes, demian, what marvellous mother you have! mother eve! the name
 suits her perfectly; she is like the mother of all being.”
 
gazed for an instant musingly in my face.
 
“you know her name already? you ought to be proud, young friend.
 you are the only one to whom she has said it in the first hour’s
 acquaintance.”
 
from this day on i went in and out of the house like and a
 brother, but also like lover. when i closed the gate behind me, even
 when i saw the tall trees of the garden emerge in the distance, i was
 happy. outside was “reality,” outside were streets and houses, human
 beings and institutions, libraries and lecture rooms--here inside were
 love and the life of the soul, here was the kingdom of fairy stories
 and dreams. and yet we lived by means shut off from the world. in
 thought and word we often lived in its midst, only on another plane. we
 were not separated from the majority of creatures by boundaries, but
 rather by different sort of vision. our task was to be, as it were,
 an island in the world, perhaps an example, in any case to proclaim
 that it was possible to live different sort of life. i, who had been
 isolated for so long, learned to what extent community of feeling is
 possible between people who have experienced complete loneliness. i no
 longer desired to be back at the tables of the happy, at the feasts
 of the merry. i longer felt envious or homesick when i saw others
 living in community. and slowly i was initiated into the mystery of
 those who bore “the sign.”
 
we, who bore the sign, were probably justly considered by the world
 as peculiar--yes, mad even, and dangerous. for we were awake, or were
 waking, and our endeavor was to be more and more completely awake,
 whereas the others strove to be happy, attaching themselves to the
 herd, the opinions and ideals of which they made their own, taking
 up the same duties, making their life and happiness depend on common
 interests. true, there was certain greatness, vigorousness, in
 their endeavor. but whereas, from our point of view, we who bore the
 sign carried out the will of nature as individuals and as men of the
 future, the others persisted in stubbornness which hindered all
 progress. for them mankind, which they loved just as we did--was
 something already complete, which must be maintained and protected. for
 us mankind was distant future, to which we were all on the way. no
 one could image this future, neither did its laws stand written in any
 book.
 
besides mother eve, max and myself, there belonged to our circle in
 greater or lesser degree of intimacy many seekers of very various
 sorts. many of them were going along their own special paths, had set
 up special aims and adhered to special opinions and duties. amongst
 these were astrologers and cabbalists, also an adherent of count
 tolstoy, and all kinds of tender, timid, sensitive people, followers of
 new sects, men who practised indian cults, vegetarians and others. with
 all these we had really nothing of spiritual nature in common, except
 the esteem which each accorded the secret life-dream of the other.
 some were in closer contact with us, such as those who traced the
 searchings of mankind after gods and new ideals in the past, and whose
 studies often reminded of my friend pistorius. they brought books
 with them, translated for us texts from ancient tongues and showed us
 illustrations of ancient symbols and rites. they taught us to see how
 all the ideals of mankind up to the present have their origin in dreams
 of the subconscious soul, dreams in which humanity is, as it were,
 feeling its way forward into the future, guided by premonitions of the
 future’s potentialities. so we went through the religious history of
 the ancient world with its thousand gods, to the dawn of christianity.
 the confessions of the isolated saints were known to us, and the
 changes of religion from race to race. and from all the knowledge
 we thus acquired resulted criticism of our and of present-day
 europe, of this continent which through enormous exertions had created
 powerful new weapons for humanity, only to fall finally into deep
 spiritual devastation, the effects of which were at last being felt.
 for it had gained the whole world, only to lose its own soul.
 
there were with us believers as well, advocates of doctrines of
 salvation, in the efficacy of which they were very hopeful. there were
 buddhists who wished to convert europe, and disciples of tolstoy, and
 of other confessions. we in our narrow circle listened, but accepted
 none of these doctrines except as symbols. we who bore the sign had no
 cares as regarded the formation of the future. to us every confession,
 every doctrine of salvation appeared in advance dead and useless. our
 whole duty, our destiny, was, we felt, to attain to self-realization,
 in order that in us nature might find scope for its full activities,
 and that the unknown future might find us ready to fill any rôle which
 should be allotted us.
 
whether we expressed our opinion in so many words or not, it was clear
 to all of us that break-up of the present-day world was approaching,
 to be followed by new birth. demian said to on more than one
 occasion: “what will come is beyond conception. the soul of europe
 is an animal which has been chained up for an immeasurably long
 period. when it is set free, its first movements will not display much
 amiability. but the way it will take, whether direct or indirect, is
 not of importance, provided that the soul’s true need is realized,
 this soul which has been deluded and dulled for so long. then our day
 will come, then we shall be needed, not as guides or new law-givers--we
 shall not live to see the new laws--but rather as volunteers, as those
 who are ready to follow and to stand wherever fate shall call us. look,
 all men are ready to perform the incredible, when their ideals are
 threatened. but one comes forward when new ideal, new, perhaps
 dangerous and uncanny impulse of spiritual growth declares itself. we
 shall be of those few who are there, ready to go forward. for that
 purpose have we been singled out just as cain was marked with the sign
 to inspire fear and hate, to drive the men of his time out of narrow
 idyllic existence into the broad pastures of greater destiny. all men
 whose influence has affected the march of humanity, all such, without
 differentiation, owe their capabilities and their efficacy to the fact
 that they were ready to do the bidding of destiny. that applies to
 napoleon and bismarck. the immediate purpose to which they direct their
 energies does not lie within their choice. if bismarck had understood
 the social democrats and had thrown in his lot with them, would have
 been prudent fellow, but would never have been the instrument of
 fate. the same applies to napoleon, to caesar, to loyola, to all of
 them! one must always look at such things from the point of view of
 biology and evolution! when the changes which took place in the earth’s
 surface transferred to the land animals which lived in water, and vice
 versa, then those specimens which were ready to fulfill their functions
 as instruments of fate, brought new and unheard-of things to pass and
 were able, through new adaptations, to save their kind. whether these
 specimens were the same that had previously been conservatives and
 preservers of the status quo or the eccentrics and revolutionaries, is
 not known. they were ready to be used by fate, and for that reason were
 able to help their race through new stage of evolution. that we do
 know. for that reason we want to be ready.”
 
mother eve was often present when such conversations took place, but
 she did not join in. for each of us who chose to express his thoughts
 she was as it were listener and an echo, full of confidence, full
 of understanding. it appeared as if our ideas all emanated from her
 and returned to her again. my happiness consisted in sitting near her,
 in hearing her voice from time to time, and in participating in that
 atmosphere of maturity and of the soul, which surrounded her.
 
she felt immediately when change was taking place in me, when my soul
 was troubled, or when renewal was in progress. it seemed to as if
 the dreams i had in my sleep were inspired by her. i often related
 them to her. she found them quite comprehensible and natural, there
 were peculiarities which she could not follow clearly. for time
 i had dreams which were like reproductions of the day’s conversation.
 i dreamed that the whole world was in revolt, and that i, alone or
 with demian, tensely waited the signal of fate. fate remained half
 concealed, but bore somehow or other the traits of mother eve--to be
 chosen or rejected by her, that was fate.
 
sometimes she said with smile: “your dream is not complete, sinclair,
 you have forgotten the best part”--and it sometimes happened that i
 recalled it then, and i could not understand how i had come to forget
 any of it.
 
at times i was discontented and was tormented by desire, i thought i
 could not bear to see her near any longer without taking her in my
 arms. she noticed that immediately. once, when i had stayed away for
 several days and had returned distraught, she took aside and said:
 “you should not give yourself up to wishes in which you do not believe,
 i know what you wish. you must give up these desires, or else surrender
 yourself to them completely. if one day you are able to ask, convinced
 that your wishes will be fulfilled, then you will find satisfaction.
 but you wish, and repent again, and are afraid. you must overcome all
 that. i will tell you fairy-tale.”
 
and she told of youth who was in love with star. stood on the
 sea-shore, stretched out his hands, and prayed to the star. dreamed
 of it and all his thoughts were of it. but knew, or thought he
 knew, that star could not be embraced by man. held it to be his
 fate to love star without hope of fulfillment, and created from
 this thought whole life-poem about renunciation, and mute, faithful
 suffering which should better him and purify him. but his dreams all
 went up to the star. once again stood at night by the sea-shore,
 on high cliff. gazed at the star, and his love for it flamed up
 within him. and in moment of great longing made spring, throwing
 himself into space to meet the star. but at the moment of leaping,
 the thought flashed through his mind: it is impossible! and so was
 dashed to pieces on the rocks below. did not know how to love. had
 had the strength of soul, at the moment of leaping, to believe in
 the fulfillment of his wish, would have flown up and have been
 united with the star.
 
“love must not beg,” she said, “nor demand either. love must have the
 force to be absolutely certain of itself. then it is attracted no
 longer, but attracts. sinclair, i am attracting your love. as soon as
 you attract my love, i shall come. i do not want to make present of
 myself. i want to be won.”
 
on later occasion she told another fairy-story. there was lover,
 who loved without hope of success. withdrew entirely into himself
 and thought his love would consume him. the world was lost to him, he
 saw the blue sky and the green wood longer, did not hear the
 murmuring of the stream, or the notes of the harp; all that meant
 nothing to him, and became poor and miserable. but his love grew,
 and would much rather have died and have made an end of it all than
 renounce the chance of possessing the beautiful woman whom loved.
 then suddenly felt that his love had consumed everything else in
 him, it became powerful and exercised an irresistible attraction, the
 beautiful woman had to follow, she came and stood with outstretched
 arms to draw her to him. but as she stood before him, she was
 completely transformed, and with thrill felt and saw that had
 drawn into his embrace the whole world, which had lost. she stood
 before him and surrendered herself to him, sky and wood and brook, all
 was decked out in lovely new colors, all belonged to him, and spoke
 his tongue. and instead of merely winning woman, had taken the
 whole world to his heart, and each star in the heaven glowed in him,
 and twinkling, communicated desire to his soul. had loved, and
 thereby had found himself. but most people love only to lose themselves
 thereby.
 
my whole life seemed to be contained in my love for mother eve. but
 every day she looked different. many times i felt decidedly that it was
 not her person for which my whole being was striving, but that she was
 symbol of my inward self, and that she wished only to lead to see
 more deeply into myself. i often heard words fall from her lips, which
 sounded like answers to the burning questions asked by my subconscious
 self. then again there were moments when in her presence i burnt with
 desire, and afterwards kissed objects she had touched. and by degrees
 sensual and unsensual love, reality and symbol merged into one another.
 then it happened that i could think of her at home in my room with
 quiet fervor. i thought i felt her hand in mine and my lips pressed
 to hers. or i was at her house, gazing up into her face, talking with
 her and listening to her voice; and i did not know whether it was
 really she, or whether it was dream. i began to foresee how one can
 have lasting and immortal love. in reading book i had acquired new
 knowledge, and it was the same feeling as kiss from mother eve. she
 stroked my hair and smiled at me, i sensed the perfume of her warm ripe
 mouth, and i had the same feeling as if i had been making progress
 within myself. all that was important and fateful for seemed to be
 contained in her. she could transform herself into each of my thoughts,
 and every one of my thoughts was transformed into her.
 
i feared that it would be torture to spend the two weeks of the
 christmas holidays, separated from mother eve, with my parents at home.
 but it was torture, it was lovely to be at home and to think of her.
 when i returned to h---- i remained away from her house another two
 days, in order to enjoy the security and independence of her actual
 presence. i also had dreams in which my union with her was accomplished
 by way of allegory. she was sea, into which i, river, flowed. she
 was star, and i myself was star on my way to her. we felt drawn to
 one another. we met, and remained together always, turning blissfully
 round one another in close-lying orbits, to the music of the spheres.
 
i related this dream to her, when i visited her again after the
 holidays.
 
“it is beautiful dream,” she said softly. “see that it comes true!”
 
there came day in early spring that i shall never forget. i entered
 the hall. window stood open and the heavy scent of hyacinths, wafted
 by warm breath of air, permeated the room. as one was to be seen,
 i went upstairs to max demian’s study. i knocked softly on the door and
 entered without waiting for permission, as i was in the habit of doing
 with him.
 
the room was dark. the curtains were all drawn. the door to little
 room adjoining stood open, where max had set up chemical laboratory.
 from there came the bright, white light of the spring sun, shining
 through rain clouds. i thought one was there and pulled back one of
 the curtains.
 
there i saw max demian, sitting on stool by curtained window. his
 attitude was cramped and was oddly changed. the thought flashed
 through me: you have seen him like this once before! his arms were
 motionless at his side, his hands in his lap; his face inclined
 slightly forward, with open eyes, was without sight, as if dead. in the
 eyes there glimmered dully little reflex of light, as in piece of
 glass. the pale face was self-absorbed and without any expression, save
 that of great rigidity. looked like very ancient mask of an animal
 at the door of temple. appeared not to be breathing.
 
the recollection came to me--thus, exactly thus, had i once seen
 him, many years ago, when i was still quite boy. thus had his eyes
 stared inwards, thus his hands had been lying motionless, close to one
 another, fly had been crawling over his face. and had then, six
 years ago perhaps, looked just as old and as ageless, not wrinkle in
 his face had changed.
 
i was frightened, and went softly out of the room and down the stairs.
 in the hall i met mother eve. she was pale and seemed tired: i had not
 seen her like that before. shadow came through the window, the bright
 white sun had suddenly disappeared.
 
“i went into max’s room,” i whispered hastily. “has anything happened?
 is asleep, or absorbed, i don’t know what; i once saw him like that
 before.”
 
“but you didn’t wake him?” she asked quickly.
 
“no. did not hear me. i came out immediately. mother eve, tell me,
 what is the matter with him?”
 
she passed her hand over her forehead.
 
“don’t worry, sinclair, nothing has happened to him. has retired
 into himself. it will not last long.”
 
she got up and went out into the garden, although it had begun to rain.
 i felt that i must not follow her. so i walked up and down in the hall,
 inhaling the scent of the hyacinths which dulled my senses, and gazing
 at my picture of the bird over the door. i felt oppressively the odd
 shadow which seemed to fill the house that morning. what was it? what
 had happened?
 
mother eve came back soon. rain drops hung in her dark hair. she sat
 down in her easy chair. she was very tired. i went to her, bent down
 and kissed the raindrops in her hair. her eyes were bright and soft,
 but the raindrops tasted like tears.
 
“shall i go and see how is?” i asked in whisper.
 
she smiled weakly.
 
“don’t be child, sinclair!” she admonished loudly, as if to relieve
 her own feelings. “go now and come back later, i cannot talk to you
 now.”
 
i went. i walked out of the house and out of the town, towards the
 mountains. the thin rain was falling obliquely, and clouds were driving
 at low altitude under heavy pressure, as if in fear. down below there
 was hardly any breeze, but on the heights above storm seemed to be
 raging. several times the sun, pale and bright, broke for an instant
 through the steely grey of the clouds.
 
there came fleecy, yellow cloud driving across the sky. it collided
 with the grey cloud wall, and in few seconds the wind formed a
 picture of the yellow and blue, of bird of giant size, which tore
 itself free from the blue mêlée and with wide fluttering wings
 disappeared in the sky. then the storm became audible and rain mixed
 with hail rattled down. short burst of thunder with an unnatural and
 terrific sound cracked over the whipped landscape. immediately after
 the sun broke through and on the mountains close at hand above brown
 woods glistened, pale and unreal, the fresh snow.
 
when i returned after several hours, wet from the rain and wind, demian
 himself opened the front door to me.
 
took with him up to his room. gas flame burned in the
 laboratory, paper lay about, appeared to have been working.
 
“sit down,” invited, “you must be tired, it was terrible storm;
 it’s evident, you were overtaken by it. tea is coming at once.”
 
“something is the matter to-day,” i began hesitatingly, “it can’t only
 be that bit of storm.”
 
looked at penetratingly.
 
“have you seen anything?”
 
“yes. i saw picture clearly in the clouds, for an instant.”
 
“what sort of picture?”
 
“it was bird.”
 
“the hawk? was it that? the bird of your dream?”
 
“yes, it was my hawk. it was yellow and of giant size, it flew up into
 the blue-black heaven.”
 
demian took deep breath. someone knocked at the door. the aged
 servant brought in tea.
 
“take cup, sinclair, do. i don’t think it was by chance you saw the
 bird.”
 
“chance? does one see such things by chance?”
 
“well, no. it means something. do you know what?”
 
“no. i only feel, it means violent shock, the approach of fate. i
 think it will affect all of us.”
 
walked violently up and down.
 
“the approach of fate!” exclaimed loudly. “i dreamed the same
 thing myself last night, and my mother yesterday had premonition,
 portending the same thing. i dreamed i was going up ladder, placed
 against tree trunk or tower. when i reached the top i saw the whole
 country. it was wide plain, with towns and villages burning. i cannot
 yet relate everything, because it isn’t all quite clear to me.”
 
“do you interpret the dream as affecting you?” i asked.
 
“me? naturally. one dreams of what does not concern him. but it
 does not concern alone, you are right. i distinguish tolerably
 well between the dreams which indicate agitation of my own soul, and
 the others, the rare ones, which bear on the fate of all humanity. i
 have seldom had such dreams, and never one of which i can say that it
 was prophecy, and that it has been fulfilled. the interpretations
 are too uncertain. but this i know for certainty, i have dreamed of
 something which does not concern alone. for the dream belongs to
 others, former ones i have had; this is the continuation. these are the
 dreams, sinclair, in which i had the premonitions which i have already
 mentioned to you. we know that the world is absolutely rotten, but
 that is reason to prophesy its ruin, or to make prophecy of like
 nature. but for several years past i have had dreams, from which i
 conclude, or feel, or what you will, which, then, give the feeling
 that the break-up of an old world is drawing near. at first they were
 simply faint presentiments, but since they have become more and more
 significant. even now i know nothing more than that something big and
 terrible is approaching, which will concern me. sinclair, we shall go
 through the experiences of which we have so often talked. the world is
 about to renew itself. it smacks of death. nothing new comes without
 death. it is more terrible than i had thought.”
 
frightened, i looked at him fixedly.
 
“can’t you tell the rest of your dream?” i begged timidly.
 
shook his head.
 
“no.”
 
the door opened and mother eve entered.
 
“there you are, sitting together! children, i hope you aren’t sad?”
 
she looked fresh, her fatigue had quite vanished. demian smiled at her,
 she came to us as mother comes to frightened children.
 
“we aren’t sad, mother. we were simply trying to solve the riddle of
 these new signs. but that is of importance; what is to come, will
 be here all of sudden, and then we shall learn what we need to know.”
 
but i did not feel happy. when i said good-bye and went down alone
 through the hall, i felt that the hyacinths were faded and withered,
 reminding of corpses. shadow had fallen over us.
 



chapter eight
 
beginning of the end
 

it had been decided that i should remain in h---- for the summer
 semester. instead of staying in the house, we were almost always in the
 garden by the river. the japanese, who by the way had been thoroughly
 beaten in the boxing match, was away, and the disciple of tolstoy was
 also missing. demian had procured horse, and went for long rides
 every day. i was often alone with his mother.
 
sometimes i wondered greatly at the peaceableness of my life. i had
 been so long accustomed to being alone, to practise renunciation, to
 fight toilfully my own battles, that these months in h---- seemed to me
 like time passed on dream island, where i might live tranquilly in
 beautiful, enchanted surroundings. i felt that this was foretaste of
 that new, higher community, on which we meditated. and now and then i
 was seized by deep feeling of sadness, for i knew that this happiness
 could not last. i was not destined to breathe in the fulness of peace
 and comfort, i needed torment to spur on. i felt that one day i
 should wake up from these dreams of beautiful love-pictures to find
 myself standing once more alone, in the cold world of others, where for
 there would be only loneliness and fighting, peace, community
 of spirit.
 
then i yielded myself to the charms of mother eve’s presence. my
 feeling for her was now doubly tender. i was glad that my fate bore
 still these beautiful, tranquil features.
 
the summer weeks passed quickly and easily. already the semester was
 drawing to close. leave-taking was near, i dared not think of it, and
 did not, but clung to the beautiful days like butterfly to honeyed
 flower. that was my period of happiness, the first fulfillment of my
 life’s wishes, and my reception into the league--what was to come next?
 i would again have to fight my battles, be consumed by longing, have
 dreams, be alone.
 
at this time the feeling, the foretaste of separation, came over me
 so strongly that my love for mother eve blazed up suddenly, causing
 pain. my god! how soon would the time come to say good-bye, and
 i should see her more, more hear her firm step in the house,
 should find more her flowers on my table! and what had i attained?
 i had dreamed and had lulled myself in comfort, instead of winning
 her, instead of fighting for her and drawing her to for always! all
 that she had said to about genuine love crossed my mind, hundreds
 of fine, suggestive words, hundred tender invitations, promises
 perhaps--and what had i made of them? nothing! nothing!
 
i took up position in the middle of my room, collected my whole
 conscious self together and thought of eve. i wished to concentrate the
 forces of my soul, in order to let her feel my love, in order to draw
 her to me. she was to come, longing for my embrace. my kisses were to
 suck insatiably the ripe fruit of her lips.
 
i stood tense, until fingers and feet became stiff with cold. i felt
 force was going out of me. for few seconds something seemed to take
 shape with me, something bright and cool; i had for moment the
 sensation as if i carried crystal in my heart, and i knew that was
 myself. cold chill pierced to my heart.
 
as i woke out of my fearful state of tension i felt something was
 approaching. i was exhausted to the point of death, but i was prepared
 to see eve step into the room, burning with passion, ravished.
 
the sound of horse’s hoofs clattering down the long street rang nearer
 and nearer, then suddenly ceased. i sprang to the window. below demian
 was dismounting.
 
“what is the matter, demian? nothing can have happened to your mother?”
 
did not listen to my words. was very pale, and perspiration ran
 down both sides of his forehead over his cheeks. his horse was flecked
 with foam. tied the reins to the garden fence, then took my arm
 and walked with down the street.
 
“have you already heard the news?” i had heard nothing.
 
demian pressed my arm and turned his face to me, with dark,
 compassionate, singular look.
 
“yes, old man, now we’re in for it. you know of the strained relations
 with russia----”
 
“what? is it war? i had never believed it.”
 
spoke in an undertone, although one was near.
 
“it is not yet declared. but it’s war. rely on it. i haven’t worried
 you lately, but i have seen three new omens since. it will be no
 foundering of the world, earthquake, revolution. it’s war. you
 will see how that strikes everybody. it will be joy to people;
 everyone already rejoices that hostilities are about to commence. so
 insipid has life become for them. but you will see now, sinclair, that
 is only the beginning. this will perhaps be great war, very great
 war. the new dispensation commences and for those who adhere to the
 old, the new will be terrible. what will you do?”
 
i was perplexed, everything sounded so strange and improbable.
 
“i don’t know--and you?”
 
shrugged his shoulders.
 
“as soon as mobilization orders are out, i join up. i am lieutenant.”
 
“you? i had idea of that.”
 
“yes. it was one of my adaptations. you know, i have never wanted to
 appear out of the ordinary, and have rather done too much, in order to
 be correct, to do the right thing. in eight days, i think, i shall be
 already in the field.”
 
“for god’s sake!”
 
“look here, old fellow, you mustn’t take things so sentimentally. at
 bottom it certainly won’t give pleasure to order machine gunfire to
 be turned on living creatures, but that is secondary matter. now each
 one of us will be seized by the great wheel of fate. you as well. you
 will certainly be called up.”
 
“and your mother, demian?”
 
then for the first time i recollected what i was doing quarter of an
 hour before. how the world had changed! i had summoned together all my
 force in order to conjure up the sweetest picture, and now fate had
 suddenly put on new, horrible mask.
 
“my mother? we need have cares for her safety. she is safe, safer
 than anyone else in the world to-day. you love her so very much?”
 
“you knew it, demian?” laughed brightly and without any
 embarrassment.
 
“you child! naturally i knew it. one has yet called my mother mother
 eve without loving her. by the way, how was that? you have called to
 either her or myself to-day, haven’t you?”
 
“yes, i called--i called to mother eve.”
 
“she felt it. she suddenly sent away, i was to come to you. i had
 just told her the news about russia.”
 
we turned back, scarcely speaking, untied his horse and mounted.
 
i first realized in my room how exhausted i was by demian’s message,
 and even more so by my previous spiritual exertions. but mother eve had
 heard me! my thoughts had reached her. she would have come herself,
 if--how wonderful all this was, and how beautiful! now it was to be
 war. now what we had so often spoken of was about to happen. and demian
 had known so much in advance. how strange that the world’s stream would
 longer flow somewhere or other by us--that now it was suddenly
 flowing through us, that fate and adventure called us, and that now, or
 soon, the moment would come when the world would need us, when it would
 be transformed. demian was right, one should not be sentimental over
 it. only it was strange that i was now to experience that lonely thing,
 “fate,” with so many, with the whole world. good then!
 
i was ready. in the evening, when i went through the town, every corner
 was alive with bustle and excitement. everywhere the word “war”!
 
i went to mother eve’s house. we had supper in the summer house. i was
 the only guest. one spoke word about the war. but later, shortly
 before i left, mother eve said: “dear sinclair, you called to-day.
 you know why i did not come myself. but don’t forget, you know the call
 now and if ever you need someone who bears the sign, call again.”
 
she rose and went out through the gloaming into the garden. tall and
 queenly, invested with mystery, she stepped between the trees, the
 foliage ceased its whispering at her approach, and over her head
 glimmered tenderly the many stars.
 
* * * * *
 
i am coming to the end. events marched quickly. war was declared.
 demian, who looked strange in uniform, with silver-grey cloak, went
 away. i brought his mother home. soon after i also said good-bye to
 her. she kissed on the lips and held moment on her breast, and
 her large eyes burned steadily close to mine.
 
and all men were like brothers. they had in mind their country and
 their honor. but it was fate, they peeped for moment into the
 unveiled face. young men came out of barracks, stepped into trains, and
 on many face i saw sign--not ours--a beautiful and dignified sign,
 signifying love and death. i as well was embraced by people i had never
 seen before. i understood and responded gladly. it was an atmosphere
 of intoxication in which they moved, not that of fated will. but the
 intoxication was sacred, it was due to the fact that they had all
 looked into the rousing eyes of destiny.
 
it was already nearly winter when i went to the front.
 
at first, in spite of the sensation of the bombardment, i was
 disappointed with everything. formerly i had often wondered why people
 so seldom were able to live for an ideal. now i saw that many, yes, all
 men, are capable of dying for an ideal, provided that such an ideal is
 not personal, not chosen of their own free will. for them it had to be
 an ideal accepted by and common to great number.
 
but with time i saw that i had underestimated men. although service and
 common danger renders them uniform, i saw many, living and dying,
 approach fate magnificently. not only in an attack, but the whole time,
 many, very many of them had fixed, far-away look, rather like that
 of person possessed, look which indicates entire ignorance of the
 end pursued, and complete surrender of self to the unknown. matter
 what they might believe and think they were ready, they were there in
 case of need, out of them would the future be formed. and, however
 strongly the world’s attention appeared to be focused on war and heroic
 deeds, on honor and other old ideals, however distantly and unnaturally
 sang the voices of humanity--all this was merely the surface, just
 as the question with regard to the foreign and political aims of the
 war was superficial. deep down, below the surface of human affairs,
 something was in process of forming. something which might be new
 order of humanity. for i could see many--many such died at my side--to
 whom the understanding was brought home that hate and rage, murder and
 destruction had connection with the real object of the war. no, the
 object, just as the aims in view, was purely matter of chance. their
 deepest and most primitive feelings, even their wildest instincts were
 not actually directed against the enemy, their murderous and bloody
 work was an expression of their own inner being, of their cleft soul,
 which wished to rave and kill, to destroy and die, in order to be able
 to be born anew. giant bird was fighting its way out of the egg, and
 the egg was the world, and the world had to go to ruin.
 
one night in early spring i was doing sentry duty in front of farm
 we had occupied. the wind was blowing in fitful gusts, shrieking and
 moaning according to the vagaries of its mood; over the high flanders
 sky rode an army of clouds, somewhere or other behind was suspicion
 of moon. i had been restless throughout the whole of that day, troubled
 by cares which i could not precisely define. now, at my dark post,
 i thought with fervor of the picture of my life up to that time, of
 mother eve, of demian. i stood leaning against poplar, staring into
 the agitated sky, the mysterious quivering brightness of which soon
 resolved itself into series of pictures. i felt by the odd slowness
 of my pulse, by the insensibility of my skin to wind and rain, by the
 lively wakefulness of my inner being, that guide was near me.
 
in the clouds large city could be seen, out of which millions of men
 were streaming, spreading in swarms over the broad countryside. in
 their very midst there appeared the mighty figure of god, as big as
 mountain, with glittering stars in its hair, and with the features
 of mother eve. into it disappeared the processions of men, as into a
 gigantic cave, and were lost to view. the goddess shrank down on the
 ground, the sign on her forehead glittered brightly. she seemed to
 be under the influence of dream. she closed her eyes and her large
 features were twisted in pain. suddenly she cried out, and out of her
 forehead sprang stars, which hurried in lovely arcs and half-circles
 over the black sky.
 
one of the stars rushed noisily through the air to meet me, as if
 seeking out. with crash it burst into thousand sparks, lifting
 off my feet and hurling on to the ground. the world broke up
 thunderously about me.
 
they found close to the poplar, covered with earth and wounded in
 several places.
 
i lay in cellar, guns growled and rumbled overhead, i lay in cart,
 and was jolted over empty fields. for the most part i was either asleep
 or unconscious. but the more deeply i slept, the more strongly i felt
 that i was being drawn, that i followed at the will of force over
 which i was not master.
 
i lay on straw in stable, it was dark, someone trod on my hand. but
 my inner self willed to go further, the mysterious force drew on.
 again i lay in cart, and later on stretcher. even more strongly
 i felt in the command to go forward, i was conscious only of the
 pressure, the force which seemed to be controlling my journeying thus
 from place to place.
 
at last i was there. it was night. i was fully conscious and i felt
 strongly the secret attraction and power which had brought to that
 place. now i was lying in room, on bed made up on the floor. i
 felt i had arrived at the place to which i had been called. i glanced
 around, close to my mattress was another, on which someone was lying,
 someone who bent over and looked at me. it was max demian.
 
i could not speak, and either could not or would not. only looked
 at me. lamp which hung over him on the wall cast light on his face.
 smiled at me.
 
for what seemed an immeasurably long time gazed unwaveringly into my
 eyes. slowly inclined his face towards me, until we almost touched.
 
“sinclair!” said in whisper.
 
i signaled to him with my eyes that i understood him.
 
smiled again, almost as if in compassion.
 
“little one!” said, smiling.
 
his mouth lay now quite close to mine. softly continued to speak.
 
“can you still remember frank kromer?” asked.
 
i winked at him, and could even manage to smile.
 
“sinclair, old man, listen: i shall have to go away. perhaps you will
 need once again, on account of kromer, or something. when you call
 me, i shall not come riding on horse, or in train. you must hearken
 to the voice inside you, then you will notice it is i, that i am in
 you. do you understand? and one other thing: mother eve said that if
 ever you were ill i was to give you kiss from her, which she gave
 me.... close your eyes, sinclair!”
 
i obediently closed my eyes. i felt light kiss on my lips, on which
 there was trace of blood, which never seemed to stop flowing. and
 then i fell asleep.
 
in the morning i was awakened to have my wounds dressed. when at last
 i was properly awake, i turned quickly to the mattress by my side. a
 stranger lay upon it, man on whom i had never before set eyes.
 
the bandaging hurt me. all that has happened to since hurt me. but
 my soul is like mysterious, locked house. and when i find the key
 and step right down into myself, to where the pictures painted by my
 destiny seem reflected on the dark mirror of my soul, then i need
 only stoop towards the black mirror and see my own picture, which now
 completely resembles him, my guide and friend.
 

the end
 



transcriber’s notes
 

perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.
 
inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.
 




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook demian ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 

