the project gutenberg ebook of hung lou meng, or, the dream of the red chamber, chinese novel, book i
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: hung lou meng, or, the dream of the red chamber, chinese novel, book i
 
author: xueqin cao
 
translator: h. bencraft joly
 
release date: january 1, 2006 [ebook #9603]
 most recently updated: january 2, 2021
 
language: english
 
credits: produced by juliet sutherland and project gutenberg distributed proofreaders
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook hung lou meng, or, the dream of the red chamber, chinese novel, book i ***
 



produced by juliet sutherland and project gutenberg
 distributed proofreaders
 











hung lou meng, book i
 
or, the dream of the red chamber, chinese novel in two books
 
by
 
cao xueqin
 
translated by h. bencraft joly
 






book i.
 




preface.
 
this translation was suggested not by any pretensions to range myself
 among the ranks of the body of sinologues, but by the perplexities and
 difficulties experienced by as student in peking, when, at the
 completion of the tzu erh chi, i had to plunge in the maze of the hung
 lou meng.
 
shortcomings are, i feel sure, to be discovered, both in the prose, as
 well as among the doggerel and uncouth rhymes, in which the text has
 been more adhered to than rhythm; but i shall feel satisfied with the
 result, if i succeed, even in the least degree, in affording helping
 hand to present and future students of the chinese language.
 
h. bencraft joly, h.b.m. vice-consulate, macao, 1st september, 1891.
 





the dream of the red chamber.
 



chapter i.
 
chen shih-yin, in vision, apprehends perception and spirituality.
 chia yü-ts'un, in the (windy and dusty) world, cherishes fond thoughts
 of beautiful maiden.
 

this is the opening section; this the first chapter. subsequent to the
 visions of dream which had, on some previous occasion, experienced,
 the writer personally relates, designedly concealed the true
 circumstances, and borrowed the attributes of perception and
 spirituality to relate this story of the record of the stone. with this
 purpose, made use of such designations as chen shih-yin (truth under
 the garb of fiction) and the like. what are, however, the events
 recorded in this work? who are the dramatis personae?
 
wearied with the drudgery experienced of late in the world, the author
 speaking for himself, goes on to explain, with the lack of success which
 attended every single concern, i suddenly bethought myself of the
 womankind of past ages. passing one by one under minute scrutiny, i
 felt that in action and in lore, one and all were far above me; that in
 spite of the majesty of my manliness, i could not, in point of fact,
 compare with these characters of the gentle sex. and my shame forsooth
 then knew bounds; while regret, on the other hand, was of avail,
 as there was not even remote possibility of day of remedy.
 
on this very day it was that i became desirous to compile, in a
 connected form, for publication throughout the world, with view to
 (universal) information, how that i bear inexorable and manifold
 retribution; inasmuch as what time, by the sustenance of the benevolence
 of heaven, and the virtue of my ancestors, my apparel was rich and fine,
 and as what days my fare was savory and sumptuous, i disregarded the
 bounty of education and nurture of father and mother, and paid heed
 to the virtue of precept and injunction of teachers and friends, with
 the result that i incurred the punishment, of failure recently in the
 least trifle, and the reckless waste of half my lifetime. there have
 been meanwhile, generation after generation, those in the inner
 chambers, the whole mass of whom could not, on any account, be, through
 my influence, allowed to fall into extinction, in order that i, unfilial
 as i have been, may have the means to screen my own shortcomings.
 
hence it is that the thatched shed, with bamboo mat windows, the bed of
 tow and the stove of brick, which are at present my share, are not
 sufficient to deter from carrying out the fixed purpose of my mind.
 and could i, furthermore, confront the morning breeze, the evening moon,
 the willows by the steps and the flowers in the courtyard, methinks
 these would moisten to greater degree my mortal pen with ink; but
 though i lack culture and erudition, what harm is there, however, in
 employing fiction and unrecondite language to give utterance to the
 merits of these characters? and were i also able to induce the inmates
 of the inner chamber to understand and diffuse them, could i besides
 break the weariness of even so much as single moment, or could i open
 the eyes of my contemporaries, will it not forsooth prove boon?
 
this consideration has led to the usage of such names as chia yü-ts'un
 and other similar appellations.
 
more than any in these pages have been employed such words as dreams and
 visions; but these dreams constitute the main argument of this work, and
 combine, furthermore, the design of giving word of warning to my
 readers.
 
reader, can you suggest whence the story begins?
 
the narration may border on the limits of incoherency and triviality,
 but it possesses considerable zest. but to begin.
 
the empress nü wo, (the goddess of works,) in fashioning blocks of
 stones, for the repair of the heavens, prepared, at the ta huang hills
 and wu ch'i cave, 36,501 blocks of rough stone, each twelve chang in
 height, and twenty-four chang square. of these stones, the empress wo
 only used 36,500; so that one single block remained over and above,
 without being turned to any account. this was cast down the ch'ing keng
 peak. this stone, strange to say, after having undergone process of
 refinement, attained nature of efficiency, and could, by its innate
 powers, set itself into motion and was able to expand and to contract.
 
when it became aware that the whole number of blocks had been made use
 of to repair the heavens, that it alone had been destitute of the
 necessary properties and had been unfit to attain selection, it
 forthwith felt within itself vexation and shame, and day and night, it
 gave way to anguish and sorrow.
 
one day, while it lamented its lot, it suddenly caught sight, at great
 distance, of buddhist bonze and of taoist priest coming towards that
 direction. their appearance was uncommon, their easy manner remarkable.
 when they drew near this ch'ing keng peak, they sat on the ground to
 rest, and began to converse. but on noticing the block newly-polished
 and brilliantly clear, which had moreover contracted in dimensions, and
 become larger than the pendant of fan, they were greatly filled
 with admiration. the buddhist priest picked it up, and laid it in the
 palm of his hand.
 
"your appearance," said laughingly, "may well declare you to be a
 supernatural object, but as you lack any inherent quality it is
 necessary to inscribe few characters on you, so that every one who
 shall see you may at once recognise you to be remarkable thing. and
 subsequently, when you will be taken into country where honour and
 affluence will reign, into family cultured in mind and of official
 status, in land where flowers and trees shall flourish with
 luxuriance, in town of refinement, renown and glory; when you once
 will have been there..."
 
the stone listened with intense delight.
 
"what characters may i ask," it consequently inquired, "will you
 inscribe? and what place will i be taken to? pray, pray explain to in
 lucid terms." "you mustn't be inquisitive," the bonze replied, with a
 smile, "in days to come you'll certainly understand everything." having
 concluded these words, forthwith put the stone in his sleeve, and
 proceeded leisurely on his journey, in company with the taoist priest.
 whither, however, took the stone, is not divulged. nor can it be
 known how many centuries and ages elapsed, before taoist priest, k'ung
 k'ung by name, passed, during his researches after the eternal reason
 and his quest after immortality, by these ta huang hills, wu ch'i cave
 and ch'ing keng peak. suddenly perceiving large block of stone, on the
 surface of which the traces of characters giving, in connected form,
 the various incidents of its fate, could be clearly deciphered, k'ung
 k'ung examined them from first to last. they, in fact, explained how
 that this block of worthless stone had originally been devoid of the
 properties essential for the repairs to the heavens, how it would be
 transmuted into human form and introduced by mang mang the high lord,
 and miao miao, the divine, into the world of mortals, and how it would
 be led over the other bank (across the san sara). on the surface, the
 record of the spot where it would fall, the place of its birth, as well
 as various family trifles and trivial love affairs of young ladies,
 verses, odes, speeches and enigmas was still complete; but the name of
 the dynasty and the year of the reign were obliterated, and could not be
 ascertained.
 
on the obverse, were also the following enigmatical verses:
 
lacking in virtues meet the azure skies to mend,
 in vain the mortal world full many year i wend,
 of former and after life these facts that be,
 who will for tradition strange record for me?
 
k'ung k'ung, the taoist, having pondered over these lines for while,
 became aware that this stone had history of some kind.
 
"brother stone," forthwith said, addressing the stone, "the concerns
 of past days recorded on you possess, according to your own account, a
 considerable amount of interest, and have been for this reason
 inscribed, with the intent of soliciting generations to hand them down
 as remarkable occurrences. but in my own opinion, they lack, in the
 first place, any data by means of which to establish the name of the
 emperor and the year of his reign; and, in the second place, these
 constitute record of any excellent policy, adopted by any high
 worthies or high loyal statesmen, in the government of the state, or in
 the rule of public morals. the contents simply treat of certain number
 of maidens, of exceptional character; either of their love affairs or
 infatuations, or of their small deserts or insignificant talents; and
 were i to transcribe the whole collection of them, they would,
 nevertheless, not be estimated as book of any exceptional worth."
 
"sir priest," the stone replied with assurance, "why are you so
 excessively dull? the dynasties recorded in the rustic histories, which
 have been written from age to age, have, i am fain to think, invariably
 assumed, under false pretences, the mere nomenclature of the and
 t'ang dynasties. they differ from the events inscribed on my block,
 which do not borrow this customary practice, but, being based on my own
 experiences and natural feelings, present, on the contrary, novel and
 unique character. besides, in the pages of these rustic histories,
 either the aspersions upon sovereigns and statesmen, or the strictures
 upon individuals, their wives, and their daughters, or the deeds of
 licentiousness and violence are too numerous to be computed. indeed,
 there is one more kind of loose literature, the wantonness and pollution
 in which work most easy havoc upon youth.
 
"as regards the works, in which the characters of scholars and beauties
 is delineated their allusions are again repeatedly of wen chün, their
 theme in every page of tzu chien; thousand volumes present no
 diversity; and thousand characters are but counterpart of each
 other. what is more, these works, throughout all their pages, cannot
 help bordering on extreme licence. the authors, however, had other
 object in view than to give utterance to few sentimental odes and
 elegant ballads of their own, and for this reason they have fictitiously
 invented the names and surnames of both men and women, and necessarily
 introduced, in addition, some low characters, who should, like buffoon
 in play, create some excitement in the plot.
 
"still more loathsome is kind of pedantic and profligate literature,
 perfectly devoid of all natural sentiment, full of self-contradictions;
 and, in fact, the contrast to those maidens in my work, whom i have,
 during half my lifetime, seen with my own eyes and heard with my own
 ears. and though i will not presume to estimate them as superior to the
 heroes and heroines in the works of former ages, yet the perusal of the
 motives and issues of their experiences, may likewise afford matter
 sufficient to banish dulness, and to break the spell of melancholy.
 
"as regards the several stanzas of doggerel verse, they may too evoke
 such laughter as to compel the reader to blurt out the rice, and to
 spurt out the wine.
 
"in these pages, the scenes depicting the anguish of separation, the
 bliss of reunion, and the fortunes of prosperity and of adversity are
 all, in every detail, true to human nature, and i have not taken upon
 myself to make the slightest addition, or alteration, which might lead
 to the perversion of the truth.
 
"my only object has been that men may, after drinking bout, or after
 they wake from sleep or when in need of relaxation from the pressure of
 business, take up this light literature, and not only expunge the traces
 of antiquated books, and obtain new kind of distraction, but that they
 may also lay by long life as well as energy and strength; for it bears
 point of similarity to those works, whose designs are false, whose
 course is immoral. now, sir priest, what are your views on the subject?"
 
k'ung k'ung having pondered for while over the words, to which had
 listened intently, re-perused, throughout, this record of the stone; and
 finding that the general purport consisted of nought else than a
 treatise on love, and likewise of an accurate transcription of facts,
 without the least taint of profligacy injurious to the times, he
 thereupon copied the contents, from beginning to end, to the intent of
 charging the world to hand them down as strange story.
 
hence it was that k'ung k'ung, the taoist, in consequence of his
 perception, (in his state of) abstraction, of passion, the generation,
 from this passion, of voluptuousness, the transmission of this
 voluptuousness into passion, and the apprehension, by means of passion,
 of its unreality, forthwith altered his name for that of "ch'ing tseng"
 (the voluptuous bonze), and changed the title of "the memoir of stone"
 (shih-t'ou-chi,) for that of "ch'ing tseng lu," the record of the
 voluptuous bonze; while k'ung mei-chi of tung lu gave it the name of
 "feng yüeh pao chien," "the precious mirror of voluptuousness." in later
 years, owing to the devotion by tsao hsüeh-ch'in in the tao hung study,
 of ten years to the perusal and revision of the work, the additions and
 modifications effected by him five times, the affix of an index and the
 division into periods and chapters, the book was again entitled "chin
 ling shih erh ch'ai," "the twelve maidens of chin ling." stanza was
 furthermore composed for the purpose. this then, and other, is the
 origin of the record of the stone. the poet says appositely:--
 
pages full of silly litter,
 tears handful sour and bitter;
 all fool the author hold,
 but their zest who can unfold?
 
you have now understood the causes which brought about the record of the
 stone, but as you are not, as yet, aware what characters are depicted,
 and what circumstances are related on the surface of the block, reader,
 please lend an ear to the narrative on the stone, which runs as
 follows:--
 
in old days, the land in the south east lay low. in this south-east part
 of the world, was situated walled town, ku by name. within the
 walls locality, called the ch'ang men, was more than all others
 throughout the mortal world, the centre, which held the second, if not
 the first place for fashion and life. beyond this ch'ang men was a
 street called shih-li-chieh (ten _li_ street); in this street lane,
 the jen ch'ing lane (humanity and purity); and in this lane stood an old
 temple, which on account of its diminutive dimensions, was called, by
 general consent, the gourd temple. next door to this temple lived the
 family of district official, chen by surname, fei by name, and
 shih-yin by style. his wife, née feng, possessed worthy and virtuous
 disposition, and had clear perception of moral propriety and good
 conduct. this family, though not in actual possession of excessive
 affluence and honours, was, nevertheless, in their district, conceded to
 be clan of well-to-do standing. as this chen shih-yin was of a
 contented and unambitious frame of mind, and entertained hankering
 after any official distinction, but day after day of his life took
 delight in gazing at flowers, planting bamboos, sipping his wine and
 conning poetical works, was in fact, in the indulgence of these
 pursuits, as happy as supernatural being.
 
one thing alone marred his happiness. had lived over half century
 and had, as yet, male offspring around his knees. had one only
 child, daughter, whose infant name was ying lien. she was just three
 years of age. on long summer day, on which the heat had been intense,
 shih-yin sat leisurely in his library. feeling his hand tired, he
 dropped the book held, leant his head on teapoy, and fell asleep.
 
of sudden, while in this state of unconsciousness, it seemed as if he
 had betaken himself on foot to some spot or other whither could not
 discriminate. unexpectedly espied, in the opposite direction, two
 priests coming towards him: the one buddhist, the other taoist. as
 they advanced they kept up the conversation in which they were engaged.
 "whither do you purpose taking the object you have brought away?" he
 heard the taoist inquire. to this question the buddhist replied with a
 smile: "set your mind at ease," said; "there's now in maturity plot
 of general character involving mundane pleasures, which will presently
 come to denouement. the whole number of the votaries of voluptuousness
 have, as yet, not been quickened or entered the world, and i mean to
 avail myself of this occasion to introduce this object among their
 number, so as to give it chance to go through the span of human
 existence." "the votaries of voluptuousness of these days will naturally
 have again to endure the ills of life during their course through the
 mortal world," the taoist remarked; "but when, i wonder, will they
 spring into existence? and in what place will they descend?"
 
"the account of these circumstances," the bonze ventured to reply, "is
 enough to make you laugh! they amount to this: there existed in the
 west, on the bank of the ling (spiritual) river, by the side of the san
 sheng (thrice-born) stone, blade of the chiang chu (purple pearl)
 grass. at about the same time it was that the block of stone was,
 consequent upon its rejection by the goddess of works, also left to
 ramble and wander to its own gratification, and to roam about at
 pleasure to every and any place. one day it came within the precincts of
 the ching huan (monitory vision) fairy; and this fairy, cognizant of the
 fact that this stone had history, detained it, therefore, to reside at
 the ch'ih hsia (purple clouds) palace, and apportioned to it the duties
 of attendant on shen ying, fairy of the ch'ih hsia palace.
 
"this stone would, however, often stroll along the banks of the ling
 river, and having at the sight of the blade of spiritual grass been
 filled with admiration, it, day by day, moistened its roots with sweet
 dew. this purple pearl grass, at the outset, tarried for months and
 years; but being at later period imbued with the essence and
 luxuriance of heaven and earth, and having incessantly received the
 moisture and nurture of the sweet dew, divested itself, in course of
 time, of the form of grass; assuming, in lieu, human nature, which
 gradually became perfected into the person of girl.
 
"every day she was wont to wander beyond the confines of the li hen
 (divested animosities) heavens. when hungry she fed on the pi ch'ing
 (hidden love) fruit--when thirsty she drank the kuan ch'ou (discharged
 sorrows,) water. having, however, up to this time, not shewn her
 gratitude for the virtue of nurture lavished upon her, the result was
 but natural that she should resolve in her heart upon constant and
 incessant purpose to make suitable acknowledgment.
 
"i have been," she would often commune within herself, "the recipient of
 the gracious bounty of rain and dew, but i possess such water as was
 lavished upon to repay it! but should it ever descend into the world
 in the form of human being, i will also betake myself thither, along
 with it; and if i can only have the means of making restitution to it,
 with the tears of whole lifetime, i may be able to make adequate
 return."
 
"this resolution it is that will evolve the descent into the world of so
 many pleasure-bound spirits of retribution and the experience of
 fantastic destinies; and this crimson pearl blade will also be among the
 number. the stone still lies in its original place, and why should not
 you and i take it along before the tribunal of the monitory vision
 fairy, and place on its behalf its name on record, so that it should
 descend into the world, in company with these spirits of passion, and
 bring this plot to an issue?"
 
"it is indeed ridiculous," interposed the taoist. "never before have i
 heard even the very mention of restitution by means of tears! why should
 not you and i avail ourselves of this opportunity to likewise go down
 into the world? and if successful in effecting the salvation of few of
 them, will it not be work meritorious and virtuous?"
 
"this proposal," remarked the buddhist, "is quite in harmony with my own
 views. come along then with to the palace of the monitory vision
 fairy, and let us deliver up this good-for-nothing object, and have done
 with it! and when the company of pleasure-bound spirits of wrath descend
 into human existence, you and i can then enter the world. half of them
 have already fallen into the dusty universe, but the whole number of
 them have not, as yet, come together."
 
"such being the case," the taoist acquiesced, "i am ready to follow you,
 whenever you please to go."
 
but to return to chen shih-yin. having heard every one of these words
 distinctly, could not refrain from forthwith stepping forward and
 paying homage. "my spiritual lords," said, as smiled, "accept my
 obeisance." the buddhist and taoist priests lost time in responding
 to the compliment, and they exchanged the usual salutations. "my
 spiritual lords," shih-yin continued; "i have just heard the
 conversation that passed between you, on causes and effects, a
 conversation the like of which few mortals have forsooth listened to;
 but your younger brother is sluggish of intellect, and cannot lucidly
 fathom the import! yet could this dulness and simplicity be graciously
 dispelled, your younger brother may, by listening minutely, with
 undefiled ear and careful attention, to certain degree be aroused to a
 sense of understanding; and what is more, possibly find the means of
 escaping the anguish of sinking down into hades."
 
the two spirits smiled, "the conversation," they added, "refers to the
 primordial scheme and cannot be divulged before the proper season; but,
 when the time comes, mind do not forget us two, and you will readily be
 able to escape from the fiery furnace."
 
shih-yin, after this reply, felt it difficult to make any further
 inquiries. "the primordial scheme," however remarked smiling,
 "cannot, of course, be divulged; but what manner of thing, i wonder, is
 the good-for-nothing object you alluded to short while back? may i not
 be allowed to judge for myself?"
 
"this object about which you ask," the buddhist bonze responded, "is
 intended, i may tell you, by fate to be just glanced at by you." with
 these words produced it, and handed it over to shih-yin.
 
shih-yin received it. on scrutiny found it, in fact, to be a
 beautiful gem, so lustrous and so clear that the traces of characters on
 the surface were distinctly visible. the characters inscribed consisted
 of the four "t'ung ling pao yü," "precious gem of spiritual perception."
 on the obverse, were also several columns of minute words, which was
 just in the act of looking at intently, when the buddhist at once
 expostulated.
 
"we have already reached," exclaimed, "the confines of vision."
 snatching it violently out of his hands, walked away with the taoist,
 under lofty stone portal, on the face of which appeared in large type
 the four characters: "t'ai hsü huan ching," "the visionary limits of the
 great void." on each side was scroll with the lines:
 
when falsehood stands for truth, truth likewise becomes false,
 where naught be made to aught, aught changes into naught.
 
shih-yin meant also to follow them on the other side, but, as was
 about to make one step forward, suddenly heard crash, just as if
 the mountains had fallen into ruins, and the earth sunk into
 destruction. as shih-yin uttered loud shout, looked with strained
 eye; but all could see was the fiery sun shining, with glowing rays,
 while the banana leaves drooped their heads. by that time, half of the
 circumstances connected with the dream had had, had already slipped
 from his memory.
 
also noticed nurse coming towards him with ying lien in her arms.
 to shih-yin's eyes his daughter appeared even more beautiful, such a
 bright gem, so precious, and so lovable. forthwith stretching out his
 arms, took her over, and, as held her in his embrace, coaxed
 her to play with him for while; after which brought her up to the
 street to see the great stir occasioned by the procession that was going
 past.
 
was about to come in, when caught sight of two priests, one a
 taoist, the other buddhist, coming hither from the opposite direction.
 the buddhist had head covered with mange, and went barefooted. the
 taoist had limping foot, and his hair was all dishevelled.
 
like maniacs, they jostled along, chattering and laughing as they drew
 near.
 
as soon as they reached shih-yin's door, and they perceived him with
 ying lien in his arms, the bonze began to weep aloud.
 
turning towards shih-yin, said to him: "my good sir, why need you
 carry in your embrace this living but luckless thing, which will involve
 father and mother in trouble?"
 
these words did not escape shih-yin's ear; but persuaded that they
 amounted to raving talk, paid heed whatever to the bonze.
 
"part with her and give her to me," the buddhist still went on to say.
 
shih-yin could not restrain his annoyance; and hastily pressing his
 daughter closer to him, was intent upon going in, when the bonze
 pointed his hand at him, and burst out in loud fit of laughter.
 
then gave utterance to the four lines that follow:
 
you indulge your tender daughter and are laughed at as inane;
 vain you face the snow, oh mirror! for it will evanescent wane,
 when the festival of lanterns is gone by, guard 'gainst your doom,
 'tis what time the flames will kindle, and the fire will consume.
 
shih-yin understood distinctly the full import of what heard; but his
 heart was still full of conjectures. was about to inquire who and
 what they were, when heard the taoist remark,--"you and i cannot
 speed together; let us now part company, and each of us will be then
 able to go after his own business. after the lapse of three ages, i
 shall be at the pei mang mount, waiting for you; and we can, after our
 reunion, betake ourselves to the visionary confines of the great void,
 there to cancel the name of the stone from the records."
 
"excellent! first rate!" exclaimed the bonze. and at the conclusion of
 these words, the two men parted, each going his own way, and trace
 was again seen of them.
 
"these two men," shih-yin then pondered within his heart, "must have had
 many experiences, and i ought really to have made more inquiries of
 them; but at this juncture to indulge in regret is anyhow too late."
 
while shih-yin gave way to these foolish reflections, suddenly
 noticed the arrival of penniless scholar, chia by surname, hua by
 name, shih-fei by style and yü-ts'un by nickname, who had taken up his
 quarters in the gourd temple next door. this chia yü-ts'un was
 originally denizen of hu-chow, and was also of literary and official
 parentage, but as was born of the youngest stock, and the possessions
 of his paternal and maternal ancestors were completely exhausted, and
 his parents and relatives were dead, remained the sole and only
 survivor; and, as found his residence in his native place of no
 avail, therefore entered the capital in search of that reputation,
 which would enable him to put the family estate on proper standing. he
 had arrived at this place since the year before last, and had, what is
 more, lived all along in very straitened circumstances. had made the
 temple his temporary quarters, and earned living by daily occupying
 himself in composing documents and writing letters for customers. thus
 it was that shih-yin had been in constant relations with him.
 
as soon as yü-ts'un perceived shih-yin, lost time in saluting him.
 "my worthy sir," observed with forced smile; "how is it you are
 leaning against the door and looking out? is there perchance any news
 astir in the streets, or in the public places?"
 
"none whatever," replied shih-yin, as returned the smile. "just a
 while back, my young daughter was in sobs, and i coaxed her out here to
 amuse her. i am just now without anything whatever to attend to, so
 that, dear brother chia, you come just in the nick of time. please walk
 into my mean abode, and let us endeavour, in each other's company, to
 while away this long summer day."
 
after had made this remark, bade servant take his daughter in,
 while he, hand-in-hand with yü-ts'un, walked into the library, where a
 young page served tea. they had hardly exchanged few sentences, when
 one of the household came in, in flying haste, to announce that mr. yen
 had come to pay visit.
 
shih-yin at once stood up. "pray excuse my rudeness," remarked
 apologetically, "but do sit down; i shall shortly rejoin you, and enjoy
 the pleasure of your society." "my dear sir," answered yü-ts'un, as he
 got up, also in conceding way, "suit your own convenience. i've often
 had the honour of being your guest, and what will it matter if i wait a
 little?" while these apologies were yet being spoken, shih-yin had
 already walked out into the front parlour. during his absence, yü-ts'un
 occupied himself in turning over the pages of some poetical work to
 dispel ennui, when suddenly heard, outside the window, woman's
 cough. yü-ts'un hurriedly got up and looked out. saw at glance that
 it was servant girl engaged in picking flowers. her deportment was out
 of the common; her eyes so bright, her eyebrows so well defined. though
 not perfect beauty, she possessed nevertheless charms sufficient to
 arouse the feelings. yü-ts'un unwittingly gazed at her with fixed eye.
 this waiting-maid, belonging to the chen family, had done picking
 flowers, and was on the point of going in, when she of sudden raised
 her eyes and became aware of the presence of some person inside the
 window, whose head-gear consisted of turban in tatters, while his
 clothes were the worse for wear. but in spite of his poverty, was
 naturally endowed with round waist, broad back, fat face, square
 mouth; added to this, his eyebrows were swordlike, his eyes resembled
 stars, his nose was straight, his cheeks square.
 
this servant girl turned away in hurry and made her escape.
 
"this man so burly and strong," she communed within herself, "yet at the
 same time got up in such poor attire, must, i expect, be one else
 than the man, whose name is chia yü-ts'un or such like, time after time
 referred to by my master, and to whom has repeatedly wished to give a
 helping hand, but has failed to find favourable opportunity. and as
 related to our family there is connexion or friend in such straits, i
 feel certain it cannot be any other person than he. strange to say, my
 master has further remarked that this man will, for certainty, not
 always continue in such state of destitution."
 
as she indulged in this train of thought, she could not restrain herself
 from turning her head round once or twice.
 
when yü-ts'un perceived that she had looked back, readily interpreted
 it as sign that in her heart her thoughts had been of him, and was
 frantic with irrepressible joy.
 
"this girl," mused, "is, doubt, keen-eyed and eminently shrewd,
 and one in this world who has seen through me."
 
the servant youth, after short time, came into the room; and when
 yü-ts'un made inquiries and found out from him that the guests in the
 front parlour had been detained to dinner, could not very well wait
 any longer, and promptly walked away down side passage and out of a
 back door.
 
when the guests had taken their leave, shih-yin did not go back to
 rejoin yü-ts'un, as had come to know that had already left.
 
in time the mid-autumn festivities drew near; and shih-yin, after the
 family banquet was over, had separate table laid in the library, and
 crossed over, in the moonlight, as far as the temple and invited
 yü-ts'un to come round.
 
the fact is that yü-ts'un, ever since the day on which had seen the
 girl of the chen family turn twice round to glance at him, flattered
 himself that she was friendly disposed towards him, and incessantly
 fostered fond thoughts of her in his heart. and on this day, which
 happened to be the mid-autumn feast, could not, as gazed at the
 moon, refrain from cherishing her remembrance. hence it was that gave
 vent to these pentameter verses:
 
alas! not yet divined my lifelong wish,
 and anguish ceaseless comes upon anguish
 i came, and sad at heart, my brow i frowned;
 she went, and oft her head to look turned round.
 facing the breeze, her shadow she doth watch,
 who's meet this moonlight night with her to match?
 the lustrous rays if they my wish but read
 would soon alight upon her beauteous head!
 
yü-ts'un having, after this recitation, recalled again to mind how that
 throughout his lifetime his literary attainments had had an adverse fate
 and not met with an opportunity (of reaping distinction), went on to rub
 his brow, and as raised his eyes to the skies, heaved deep sigh
 and once more intoned couplet aloud:
 
the gem in the cask high price it seeks,
 the pin in the case to take wing it waits.
 
as luck would have it, shih-yin was at the moment approaching, and upon
 hearing the lines, said with smile: "my dear yü-ts'un, really your
 attainments are of ordinary capacity."
 
yü-ts'un lost time in smiling and replying. "it would be presumption
 in my part to think so," observed. "i was simply at random humming a
 few verses composed by former writers, and what reason is there to laud
 to such an excessive degree? to what, my dear sir, do i owe the
 pleasure of your visit?" went on to inquire. "tonight," replied
 shih-yin, "is the mid-autumn feast, generally known as the full-moon
 festival; and as i could not help thinking that living, as you my worthy
 brother are, as mere stranger in this buddhist temple, you could not
 but experience the feeling of loneliness. i have, for the express
 purpose, prepared small entertainment, and will be pleased if you will
 come to my mean abode to have glass of wine. but i wonder whether you
 will entertain favourably my modest invitation?" yü-ts'un, after
 listening to the proposal, put forward refusal of any sort; but
 remarked complacently: "being the recipient of such marked attention,
 how can i presume to repel your generous consideration?"
 
as gave expression to these words, walked off there and then, in
 company with shih-yin, and came over once again into the court in front
 of the library. in few minutes, tea was over.
 
the cups and dishes had been laid from an early hour, and needless to
 say the wines were luscious; the fare sumptuous.
 
the two friends took their seats. at first they leisurely replenished
 their glasses, and quietly sipped their wine; but as, little by little,
 they entered into conversation, their good cheer grew more genial, and
 unawares the glasses began to fly round, and the cups to be exchanged.
 
at this very hour, in every house of the neighbourhood, sounded the fife
 and lute, while the inmates indulged in music and singing. above head,
 the orb of the radiant moon shone with an all-pervading splendour, and
 with steady lustrous light, while the two friends, as their exuberance
 increased, drained their cups dry so soon as they reached their lips.
 
yü-ts'un, at this stage of the collation, was considerably under the
 influence of wine, and the vehemence of his high spirits was
 irrepressible. as gazed at the moon, fostered thoughts, to which
 gave vent by the recital of double couplet.
 
'tis what time three meets five, selene is globe!
 her pure rays fill the court, the jadelike rails enrobe!
 lo! in the heavens her disk to view doth now arise,
 and in the earth below to gaze men lift their eyes.
 
"excellent!" cried shih-yin with loud voice, after had heard these
 lines; "i have repeatedly maintained that it was impossible for you to
 remain long inferior to any, and now the verses you have recited are a
 prognostic of your rapid advancement. already it is evident that, before
 long, you will extend your footsteps far above the clouds! i must
 congratulate you! i must congratulate you! let me, with my own hands,
 pour glass of wine to pay you my compliments."
 
yü-ts'un drained the cup. "what i am about to say," explained as he
 suddenly heaved sigh, "is not the maudlin talk of man under the
 effects of wine. as far as the subjects at present set in the
 examinations go, i could, perchance, also have well been able to enter
 the list, and to send in my name as candidate; but i have, just now,
 means whatever to make provision for luggage and for travelling
 expenses. the distance too to shen ching is long one, and i could not
 depend upon the sale of papers or the composition of essays to find the
 means of getting there."
 
shih-yin gave him time to conclude. "why did you not speak about this
 sooner?" interposed with haste. "i have long entertained this
 suspicion; but as, whenever i met you, this conversation was never
 broached, i did not presume to make myself officious. but if such be the
 state of affairs just now, i lack, i admit, literary qualification, but
 on the two subjects of friendly spirit and pecuniary means, i have,
 nevertheless, some experience. moreover, i rejoice that next year is
 just the season for the triennial examinations, and you should start for
 the capital with all despatch; and in the tripos next spring, you will,
 by carrying the prize, be able to do justice to the proficiency you can
 boast of. as regards the travelling expenses and the other items, the
 provision of everything necessary for you by my own self will again not
 render nugatory your mean acquaintance with me."
 
forthwith, directed servant lad to go and pack up at once fifty
 taels of pure silver and two suits of winter clothes.
 
"the nineteenth," continued, "is propitious day, and you should
 lose time in hiring boat and starting on your journey westwards.
 and when, by your eminent talents, you shall have soared high to lofty
 position, and we meet again next winter, will not the occasion be
 extremely felicitous?"
 
yü-ts'un accepted the money and clothes with but scanty expression of
 gratitude. in fact, paid thought whatever to the gifts, but went
 on, again drinking his wine, as chattered and laughed.
 
it was only when the third watch of that day had already struck that the
 two friends parted company; and shih-yin, after seeing yü-ts'un off,
 retired to his room and slept, with one sleep all through, never waking
 until the sun was well up in the skies.
 
remembering the occurrence of the previous night, meant to write a
 couple of letters of recommendation for yü-ts'un to take along with him
 to the capital, to enable him, after handing them over at the mansions
 of certain officials, to find some place as temporary home. he
 accordingly despatched servant to ask him to come round, but the man
 returned and reported that from what the bonze said, "mr. chia had
 started on his journey to the capital, at the fifth watch of that very
 morning, that had also left message with the bonze to deliver to
 you, sir, to the effect that men of letters paid heed to lucky or
 unlucky days, that the sole consideration with them was the nature of
 the matter in hand, and that could find time to come round in
 person and bid good-bye."
 
shih-yin after hearing this message had alternative but to banish the
 subject from his thoughts.
 
in comfortable circumstances, time indeed goes by with easy stride. soon
 drew near also the happy festival of the 15th of the 1st moon, and
 shih-yin told servant huo ch'i to take ying lien to see the
 sacrificial fires and flowery lanterns.
 
about the middle of the night, huo ch'i was hard pressed, and he
 forthwith set ying lien down on the doorstep of certain house. when he
 felt relieved, came back to take her up, but failed to find anywhere
 any trace of ying lien. in terrible plight, huo ch'i prosecuted his
 search throughout half the night; but even by the dawn of day, had
 not discovered any clue of her whereabouts. huo ch'i, lacking, on the
 other hand, the courage to go back and face his master, promptly made
 his escape to his native village.
 
shih-yin--in fact, the husband as well as the wife--seeing that their
 child had not come home during the whole night, readily concluded that
 some mishap must have befallen her. hastily they despatched several
 servants to go in search of her, but one and all returned to report that
 there was neither vestige nor tidings of her.
 
this couple had only had this child, and this at the meridian of their
 life, so that her sudden disappearance plunged them in such great
 distress that day and night they mourned her loss to such point as to
 well nigh pay heed to their very lives.
 
month in time went by. shih-yin was the first to fall ill, and his
 wife, dame feng, likewise, by dint of fretting for her daughter, was
 also prostrated with sickness. the doctor was, day after day, sent for,
 and the oracle consulted by means of divination.
 
little did any one think that on this day, being the 15th of the 3rd
 moon, while the sacrificial oblations were being prepared in the hu lu
 temple, pan with oil would have caught fire, through the want of care
 on the part of the bonze, and that in short time the flames would have
 consumed the paper pasted on the windows.
 
among the natives of this district bamboo fences and wooden partitions
 were in general use, and these too proved source of calamity so
 ordained by fate (to consummate this decree).
 
with promptness (the fire) extended to two buildings, then enveloped
 three, then dragged four (into ruin), and then spread to five houses,
 until the whole street was in blaze, resembling the flames of a
 volcano. though both the military and the people at once ran to the
 rescue, the fire had already assumed serious hold, so that it was
 impossible for them to afford any effective assistance for its
 suppression.
 
it blazed away straight through the night, before it was extinguished,
 and consumed, there is in fact saying how many dwelling houses.
 anyhow, pitiful to relate, the chen house, situated as it was next door
 to the temple, was, at an early part of the evening, reduced to heap
 of tiles and bricks; and nothing but the lives of that couple and
 several inmates of the family did not sustain any injuries.
 
shih-yin was in despair, but all could do was to stamp his feet and
 heave deep sighs. after consulting with his wife, they betook themselves
 to farm of theirs, where they took up their quarters temporarily. but
 as it happened that water had of late years been scarce, and crops
 been reaped, robbers and thieves had sprung up like bees, and though the
 government troops were bent upon their capture, it was anyhow difficult
 to settle down quietly on the farm. therefore had other resource
 than to convert, at loss, the whole of his property into money, and to
 take his wife and two servant girls and come over for shelter to the
 house of his father-in-law.
 
his father-in-law, feng su, by name, was native of ta ju chou.
 although only labourer, was nevertheless in easy circumstances at
 home. when on this occasion saw his son-in-law come to him in such
 distress, forthwith felt at heart considerable displeasure.
 fortunately shih-yin had still in his possession the money derived from
 the unprofitable realization of his property, so that produced and
 handed it to his father-in-law, commissioning him to purchase, whenever
 suitable opportunity presented itself, house and land as provision
 for food and raiment against days to come. this feng su, however, only
 expended the half of the sum, and pocketed the other half, merely
 acquiring for him some fallow land and dilapidated house.
 
shih-yin being, on the other hand, man of books and with experience
 in matters connected with business and with sowing and reaping,
 subsisted, by hook and by crook, for about year or two, when became
 more impoverished.
 
in his presence, feng would readily give vent to specious utterances,
 while, with others, and behind his back, on the contrary expressed
 his indignation against his improvidence in his mode of living, and
 against his sole delight of eating and playing the lazy.
 
shih-yin, aware of the want of harmony with his father-in-law, could not
 help giving way, in his own heart, to feelings of regret and pain. in
 addition to this, the fright and vexation which had undergone the
 year before, the anguish and suffering (he had had to endure), had
 already worked havoc (on his constitution); and being man advanced in
 years, and assailed by the joint attack of poverty and disease, at
 length gradually began to display symptoms of decline.
 
strange coincidence, as he, on this day, came leaning on his staff and
 with considerable strain, as far as the street for little relaxation,
 suddenly caught sight, approaching from the off side, of taoist
 priest with crippled foot; his maniac appearance so repulsive, his
 shoes of straw, his dress all in tatters, muttering several sentiments
 to this effect:
 
all men spiritual life know to be good,
 but fame to disregard they ne'er succeed!
 from old till now the statesmen where are they?
 waste lie their graves, heap of grass, extinct.
 all men spiritual life know to be good,
 but to forget gold, silver, ill succeed!
 through life they grudge their hoardings to be scant,
 and when plenty has come, their eyelids close.
 all men spiritual life hold to be good,
 yet to forget wives, maids, they ne'er succeed!
 who speak of grateful love while lives their lord,
 and dead their lord, another they pursue.
 all men spiritual life know to be good,
 but sons and grandsons to forget never succeed!
 from old till now of parents soft many,
 but filial sons and grandsons who have seen?
 
shih-yin upon hearing these words, hastily came up to the priest, "what
 were you so glibly holding forth?" inquired. "all i could hear were a
 lot of hao liao (excellent, finality.")
 
"you may well have heard the two words 'hao liao,'" answered the taoist
 with smile, "but can you be said to have fathomed their meaning? you
 should know that all things in this world are excellent, when they have
 attained finality; when they have attained finality, they are excellent;
 but when they have not attained finality, they are not excellent; if
 they would be excellent, they should attain finality. my song is
 entitled excellent-finality (hao liao)."
 
shih-yin was gifted with natural perspicacity that enabled him, as
 soon as heard these remarks, to grasp their spirit.
 
"wait while," therefore said smilingly; "let unravel this
 excellent-finality song of yours; do you mind?"
 
"please by all means go on with the interpretation," urged the taoist;
 whereupon shih-yin proceeded in this strain:
 
sordid rooms and vacant courts,
 replete in years gone by with beds where statesmen lay;
 parched grass and withered banian trees,
 where once were halls for song and dance!
 spiders' webs the carved pillars intertwine,
 the green gauze now is also pasted on the straw windows!
 what about the cosmetic fresh concocted or the powder just scented;
 why has the hair too on each temple become white like hoarfrost!
 yesterday the tumulus of yellow earth buried the bleached bones,
 to-night under the red silk curtain reclines the couple!
 gold fills the coffers, silver fills the boxes,
 but in twinkle, the beggars will all abuse you!
 while you deplore that the life of others is not long,
 you forget that you yourself are approaching death!
 you educate your sons with all propriety,
 but they may some day, 'tis hard to say become thieves;
 though you choose (your fare and home) the fatted beam,
 you may, who can say, fall into some place of easy virtue!
 through your dislike of the gauze hat as mean,
 you have come to be locked in cangue;
 yesterday, poor fellow, you felt cold in tattered coat,
 to-day, you despise the purple embroidered dress as long!
 confusion reigns far and wide! you have just sung your part, i come on
 the boards,
 instead of yours, you recognise another as your native land;
 what utter perversion!
 in one word, it comes to this we make wedding clothes for others!
 (we sow for others to reap.)
 
the crazy limping taoist clapped his hands. "your interpretation is
 explicit," remarked with hearty laugh, "your interpretation is
 explicit!"
 
shih-yin promptly said nothing more than,--"walk on;" and seizing the
 stole from the taoist's shoulder, flung it over his own. did not,
 however, return home, but leisurely walked away, in company with the
 eccentric priest.
 
the report of his disappearance was at once bruited abroad, and plunged
 the whole neighbourhood in commotion; and converted into piece of
 news, it was circulated from mouth to mouth.
 
dame feng, shih-yin's wife, upon hearing the tidings, had such fit of
 weeping that she hung between life and death; but her only alternative
 was to consult with her father, and to despatch servants on all sides to
 institute inquiries. news was however received of him, and she had
 nothing else to do but to practise resignation, and to remain dependent
 upon the support of her parents for her subsistence. she had fortunately
 still by her side, to wait upon her, two servant girls, who had been
 with her in days gone by; and the three of them, mistress as well as
 servants, occupied themselves day and night with needlework, to assist
 her father in his daily expenses.
 
this feng had after all, in spite of his daily murmurings against his
 bad luck, help but to submit to the inevitable.
 
on certain day, the elder servant girl of the chen family was at the
 door purchasing thread, and while there, she of sudden heard in the
 street shouts of runners clearing the way, and every one explain that
 the new magistrate had come to take up his office.
 
the girl, as she peeped out from inside the door, perceived the lictors
 and policemen go by two by two; and when unexpectedly in state chair,
 was carried past an official, in black hat and red coat, she was indeed
 quite taken aback.
 
"the face of this officer would seem familiar," she argued within
 herself; "just as if i had seen him somewhere or other ere this."
 
shortly she entered the house, and banishing at once the occurrence from
 her mind, she did not give it second thought. at night, however, while
 she was waiting to go to bed, she suddenly heard sound like rap at
 the door. band of men boisterously cried out: "we are messengers,
 deputed by the worthy magistrate of this district, and come to summon
 one of you to an enquiry."
 
feng su, upon hearing these words, fell into such terrible
 consternation that his eyes stared wide and his mouth gaped.
 
what calamity was impending is not as yet ascertained, but, reader,
 listen to the explanation contained in the next chapter.
 



chapter ii.
 
the spirit of mrs. chia shih-yin departs from the town of yang chou.
 leng tzu-hsing dilates upon the jung kuo mansion.
 

to continue. feng su, upon hearing the shouts of the public messengers,
 came out in flurry and forcing smile, asked them to explain
 (their errand); but all these people did was to continue bawling out:
 "be quick, and ask mr. chen to come out."
 
"my surname is feng," said feng su, as promptly forced himself to
 smile; "it is'nt chen at all: i had once son-in-law whose surname was
 chen, but has left home, it is now already year or two back. is it
 perchance about him that you are inquiring?"
 
to which the public servants remarked: "we know nothing about chen or
 chia (true or false); but as is your son-in-law, we'll take you at
 once along with us to make verbal answer to our master and have done
 with it."
 
and forthwith the whole bevy of public servants hustled feng on, as
 they went on their way back; while every one in the feng family was
 seized with consternation, and could not imagine what it was all about.
 
it was earlier than the second watch, when feng returned home; and
 they, one and all, pressed him with questions as to what had happened.
 
"the fact is," explained, "the newly-appointed magistrate, whose
 surname is chia, whose name is huo and who is native of hu-chow, has
 been on intimate terms, in years gone by, with our son-in-law; that at
 the sight of the girl chiao hsing, standing at the door, in the act of
 buying thread, concluded that must have shifted his quarters over
 here, and hence it was that his messengers came to fetch him. i gave him
 clear account of the various circumstances (of his misfortunes), and
 the magistrate was for time much distressed and expressed his regret.
 then went on to make inquiries about my grand-daughter, and i
 explained that she had been lost, while looking at the illuminations.
 'no matter,' put in the magistrate, 'i will by and by order my men to
 make search, and i feel certain that they will find her and bring her
 back.' then ensued short conversation, after which i was about to go,
 when presented with the sum of two taels."
 
the mistress of the chen family (mrs. chen shih-yin) could not but feel
 very much affected by what she heard, and the whole evening she uttered
 not word.
 
the next day, at an early hour, yü-ts'un sent some of his men to bring
 over to chen's wife presents, consisting of two packets of silver, and
 four pieces of brocaded silk, as token of gratitude, and to feng su
 also confidential letter, requesting him to ask of mrs. chen her maid
 chiao hsing to become his second wife.
 
feng was so intensely delighted that his eyebrows expanded, his eyes
 smiled, and felt eager to toady to the magistrate (by presenting the
 girl to him). hastened to employ all his persuasive powers with his
 daughter (to further his purpose), and on the same evening forthwith
 escorted chiao hsing in small chair to the yamên.
 
the joy experienced by yü-ts'un need not be dilated upon. also
 presented feng with packet containing one hundred ounces of gold;
 and sent numerous valuable presents to mrs. chen, enjoining her "to live
 cheerfully in the anticipation of finding out the whereabouts of her
 daughter."
 
it must be explained, however, that the maid chi'ao hsing was the very
 person, who, few years ago, had looked round at yü-ts'un and who, by
 one simple, unpremeditated glance, evolved, in fact, this extraordinary
 destiny which was indeed an event beyond conception.
 
who would ever have foreseen that fate and fortune would both have so
 favoured her that she should, contrary to all anticipation, give birth
 to son, after living with yü-ts'un barely year, that in addition to
 this, after the lapse of another half year, yü-ts'un's wife should have
 contracted sudden illness and departed this life, and that yü-ts'un
 should have at once raised her to the rank of first wife. her destiny is
 adequately expressed by the lines:
 
through but one single, casual look
 soon an exalted place she took.
 
the fact is that after yü-ts'un had been presented with the money by
 shih-yin, promptly started on the 16th day for the capital, and at
 the triennial great tripos, his wishes were gratified to the full.
 having successfully carried off his degree of graduate of the third
 rank, his name was put by selection on the list for provincial
 appointments. by this time, had been raised to the rank of magistrate
 in this district; but, in spite of the excellence and sufficiency of his
 accomplishments and abilities, could not escape being ambitious and
 overbearing. failed besides, confident as was in his own merits,
 in respect toward his superiors, with the result that these officials
 looked upon him scornfully with the corner of the eye.
 
year had hardly elapsed, when was readily denounced in memorial
 to the throne by the high provincial authorities, who represented that
 was of haughty disposition, that had taken upon himself to
 introduce innovations in the rites and ceremonies, that overtly, while
 endeavoured to enjoy the reputation of probity and uprightness, he,
 secretly, combined the nature of the tiger and wolf; with the
 consequence that had been the cause of much trouble in the district,
 and that had made life intolerable for the people, &c. &c.
 
the dragon countenance of the emperor was considerably incensed. his
 majesty lost time in issuing commands, in reply to the memorial, that
 should be deprived of his official status.
 
on the arrival of the despatch from the board, great was the joy felt by
 every officer, without exception, of the prefecture in which had held
 office. yü-ts'un, though at heart intensely mortified and incensed,
 betrayed not the least outward symptom of annoyance, but still
 preserved, as of old, smiling and cheerful countenance.
 
handed over charge of all official business and removed the savings
 which had accumulated during the several years had been in office,
 his family and all his chattels to his original home; where, after
 having put everything in proper order, himself travelled (carried the
 winds and sleeved the moon) far and wide, visiting every relic of note
 in the whole empire.
 
as luck would have it, on certain day while making second journey
 through the wei yang district, heard the news that the salt
 commissioner appointed this year was lin ju-hai. this lin ju-hai's
 family name was lin, his name hai and his style ju-hai. had obtained
 the third place in the previous triennial examination, and had, by this
 time, already risen to the rank of director of the court of censors. he
 was native of kú su. had been recently named by imperial
 appointment censor attached to the salt inspectorate, and had arrived
 at his post only short while back.
 
in fact, the ancestors of lin ju-hai had, from years back, successively
 inherited the title of marquis, which rank, by its present descent to
 ju-hai, had already been enjoyed by five generations. when first
 conferred, the hereditary right to the title had been limited to three
 generations; but of late years, by an act of magnanimous favour and
 generous beneficence, extraordinary bounty had been superadded; and on
 the arrival of the succession to the father of ju-hai, the right had
 been extended to another degree. it had now descended to ju-hai, who
 had, besides this title of nobility, begun his career as successful
 graduate. but though his family had been through uninterrupted ages the
 recipient of imperial bounties, his kindred had all been anyhow men of
 culture.
 
the only misfortune had been that the several branches of the lin family
 had not been prolific, so that the numbers of its members continued
 limited; and though there existed several households, they were all
 however to ju-hai closer relatives than first cousins. neither were
 there any connections of the same lineage, or of the same parentage.
 
ju-hai was at this date past forty; and had only had son, who had died
 the previous year, in the third year of his age. though had several
 handmaids, had not had the good fortune of having another son; but
 this was too matter that could not be remedied.
 
by his wife, née chia, had daughter, to whom the infant name of tai
 yü was given. she was, at this time, in her fifth year. upon her the
 parents doated as much as if she were brilliant pearl in the palm of
 their hand. seeing that she was endowed with natural gifts of
 intelligence and good looks, they also felt solicitous to bestow upon
 her certain knowledge of books, with other purpose than that of
 satisfying, by this illusory way, their wishes of having to
 nurture and of dispelling the anguish felt by them, on account of the
 desolation and void in their family circle (round their knees).
 
but to proceed. yü-ts'un, while sojourning at an inn, was unexpectedly
 laid up with violent chill. finding on his recovery, that his funds
 were not sufficient to pay his expenses, was thinking of looking out
 for some house where could find resting place when suddenly came
 across two friends acquainted with the new salt commissioner. knowing
 that this official was desirous to find tutor to instruct his
 daughter, they lost time in recommending yü-ts'un, who moved into the
 yamên.
 
his female pupil was youthful in years and delicate in physique, so that
 her lessons were irregular. besides herself, there were only two waiting
 girls, who remained in attendance during the hours of study, so that
 yü-ts'un was spared considerable trouble and had suitable opportunity
 to attend to the improvement of his health.
 
in twinkle, another year and more slipped by, and when least expected,
 the mother of his ward, née chia, was carried away after short
 illness. his pupil (during her mother's sickness) was dutiful in her
 attendance, and prepared the medicines for her use. (and after her
 death,) she went into the deepest mourning prescribed by the rites, and
 gave way to such excess of grief that, naturally delicate as she was,
 her old complaint, on this account, broke out anew.
 
being unable for considerable time to prosecute her studies, yü-ts'un
 lived at leisure and had duties to attend to. whenever therefore the
 wind was genial and the sun mild, was wont to stroll at random, after
 had done with his meals.
 
on this particular day, he, by some accident, extended his walk beyond
 the suburbs, and desirous to contemplate the nature of the rustic
 scenery, he, with listless step, came up to spot encircled by hills
 and streaming pools, by luxuriant clumps of trees and thick groves of
 bamboos. nestling in the dense foliage stood temple. the doors and
 courts were in ruins. the walls, inner and outer, in disrepair. an
 inscription on tablet testified that this was the temple of spiritual
 perception. on the sides of the door was also pair of old and
 dilapidated scrolls with the following enigmatical verses.
 
behind ample there is, yet to retract the hand, the mind heeds not,
 until.
 before the mortal vision lies path, when comes to turn the will.
 
"these two sentences," yü-ts'un pondered after perusal, "although simple
 in language, are profound in signification. i have previous to this
 visited many spacious temple, located on hills of note, but never have
 i beheld an inscription referring to anything of the kind. the meaning
 contained in these words must, i feel certain, owe their origin to the
 experiences of some person or other; but there's saying. but why
 should i not go in and inquire for myself?"
 
upon walking in, at glance caught sight of one else, but of a
 very aged bonze, of unkempt appearance, cooking his rice. when yü-ts'un
 perceived that paid notice, went up to him and asked him one or
 two questions, but as the old priest was dull of hearing and dotard,
 and as had lost his teeth, and his tongue was blunt, made most
 irrelevant replies.
 
yü-ts'un lost all patience with him, and withdrew again from the
 compound with the intention of going as far as the village public house
 to have drink or two, so as to enhance the enjoyment of the rustic
 scenery. with easy stride, accordingly walked up to the place.
 scarcely had passed the threshold of the public house, when he
 perceived some one or other among the visitors who had been sitting
 sipping their wine on the divan, jump up and come up to greet him, with
 face beaming with laughter.
 
"what strange meeting! what strange meeting!" exclaimed aloud.
 
yü-ts'un speedily looked at him, (and remembered) that this person had,
 in past days, carried on business in curio establishment in the
 capital, and that his surname was leng and his style tzu-hsing.
 
mutual friendship had existed between them during their sojourn, in
 days of yore, in the capital; and as yü-ts'un had entertained the
 highest opinion of leng tzu-hsing, as being man of action and of great
 abilities, while this leng tzu-hsing, on the other hand, borrowed of the
 reputation of refinement enjoyed by yü-ts'un, the two had consequently
 all along lived in perfect harmony and companionship.
 
"when did you get here?" yü-ts'un eagerly inquired also smilingly. "i
 wasn't in the least aware of your arrival. this unexpected meeting is
 positively strange piece of good fortune."
 
"i went home," tzu-hsing replied, "about the close of last year, but now
 as i am again bound to the capital, i passed through here on my way to
 look up friend of mine and talk some matters over. had the kindness
 to press to stay with him for couple of days longer, and as i after
 all have urgent business to attend to, i am tarrying few days, but
 purpose starting about the middle of the moon. my friend is busy to-day,
 so i roamed listlessly as far as here, never dreaming of such a
 fortunate meeting."
 
while speaking, made yü-ts'un sit down at the same table, and ordered
 fresh supply of wine and eatables; and as the two friends chatted of
 one thing and another, they slowly sipped their wine.
 
the conversation ran on what had occurred after the separation, and
 yü-ts'un inquired, "is there any news of any kind in the capital?"
 
"there's nothing new whatever," answered tzu-hsing. "there is one thing
 however: in the family of one of your worthy kinsmen, of the same name
 as yourself, trifling, but yet remarkable, occurrence has taken
 place."
 
"none of my kindred reside in the capital," rejoined yü-ts'un with a
 smile. "to what can you be alluding?"
 
"how can it be that you people who have the same surname do not belong
 to one clan?" remarked tzu-hsing, sarcastically.
 
"in whose family?" inquired yü-ts'un.
 
"the chia family," replied tzu-hsing smiling, "whose quarters are in the
 jung kuo mansion, does not after all reflect discredit upon the lintel
 of your door, my venerable friend."
 
"what!" exclaimed yü-ts'un, "did this affair take place in that family?
 were we to begin reckoning, we would find the members of my clan to be
 anything but limited in number. since the time of our ancestor chia fu,
 who lived while the eastern dynasty occupied the throne, the
 branches of our family have been numerous and flourishing; they are now
 to be found in every single province, and who could, with any accuracy,
 ascertain their whereabouts? as regards the jung-kuo branch in
 particular, their names are in fact inscribed on the same register as
 our own, but rich and exalted as they are, we have never presumed to
 claim them as our relatives, so that we have become more and more
 estranged."
 
"don't make any such assertions," tzu-hsing remarked with sigh, "the
 present two mansions of jung and ning have both alike also suffered
 reverses, and they cannot come up to their state of days of yore."
 
"up to this day, these two households of ning and of jung," yü-ts'un
 suggested, "still maintain very large retinue of people, and how can
 it be that they have met with reverses?"
 
"to explain this would be indeed long story," said leng tzu-hsing.
 "last year," continued yü-ts'un, "i arrived at chin ling, as i
 entertained wish to visit the remains of interest of the six
 dynasties, and as i on that day entered the walled town of shih t'ou, i
 passed by the entrance of that old residence. on the east side of the
 street, stood the ning kuo mansion; on the west the jung kuo mansion;
 and these two, adjoining each other as they do, cover in fact well-nigh
 half of the whole length of the street. outside the front gate
 everything was, it is true, lonely and deserted; but at glance into
 the interior over the enclosing wall, i perceived that the halls,
 pavilions, two-storied structures and porches presented still majestic
 and lofty appearance. even the flower garden, which extends over the
 whole area of the back grounds, with its trees and rockeries, also
 possessed to that day an air of luxuriance and freshness, which betrayed
 signs of ruined or decrepid establishment."
 
"you have had the good fortune of starting in life as graduate,"
 explained tzu-tsing as smiled, "and yet are not aware of the saying
 uttered by some one of old: that centipede even when dead does not lie
 stiff. (these families) may, according to your version, not be up to the
 prosperity of former years, but, compared with the family of an ordinary
 official, their condition anyhow presents difference. of late the
 number of the inmates has, day by day, been on the increase; their
 affairs have become daily more numerous; of masters and servants, high
 and low, who live in ease and respectability very many there are; but of
 those who exercise any forethought, or make any provision, there is not
 even one. in their daily wants, their extravagances, and their
 expenditure, they are also unable to adapt themselves to circumstances
 and practise economy; (so that though) the present external framework
 may not have suffered any considerable collapse, their purses have
 anyhow begun to feel an exhausting process! but this is mere trifle.
 there is another more serious matter. would any one ever believe that in
 such families of official status, in clan of education and culture,
 the sons and grandsons of the present age would after all be each
 (succeeding) generation below the standard of the former?"
 
yü-ts'un, having listened to these remarks, observed: "how ever can it
 be possible that families of such education and refinement can observe
 any system of training and nurture which is not excellent? concerning
 the other branches, i am not in position to say anything; but
 restricting myself to the two mansions of jung and ning, they are those
 in which, above all others, the education of their children is
 methodical."
 
"i was just now alluding to none other than these two establishments,"
 tzu-hsing observed with sigh; "but let tell you all. in days of
 yore, the duke of ning kuo and the duke of jung kuo were two uterine
 brothers. the ning duke was the elder; had four sons. after the death
 of the duke of ning kuo, his eldest son, chia tai-hua, came into the
 title. also had two sons; but the eldest, whose name was hu, died at
 the age of eight or nine; and the only survivor, the second son, chia
 ching, inherited the title. his whole mind is at this time set upon
 taoist doctrines; his sole delight is to burn the pill and refine the
 dual powers; while every other thought finds place in his mind.
 happily, had, at an early age, left son, chia chen, behind in the
 lay world, and his father, engrossed as his whole heart was with the
 idea of attaining spiritual life, ceded the succession of the official
 title to him. his parent is, besides, not willing to return to the
 original family seat, but lives outside the walls of the capital,
 foolishly hobnobbing with all the taoist priests. this mr. chen had also
 son, chia jung, who is, at this period, just in his sixteenth year.
 mr. ching gives at present attention to anything at all, so that mr.
 chen naturally devotes time to his studies, but being bent upon
 nought else but incessant high pleasure, has subversed the order of
 things in the ning kuo mansion, and yet one can summon the courage to
 come and hold him in check. but i'll now tell you about the jung mansion
 for your edification. the strange occurrence, to which i alluded just
 now, came about in this manner. after the demise of the jung duke, the
 eldest son, chia tai-shan, inherited the rank. took to himself as
 wife, the daughter of marquis shih, noble family of chin ling, by whom
 had two sons; the elder being chia she, the younger chia cheng. this
 tai shan is now dead long ago; but his wife is still alive, and the
 elder son, chia she, succeeded to the degree. is man of amiable and
 genial disposition, but likewise gives thought to the direction of
 any domestic concern. the second chia cheng displayed, from his
 early childhood, great liking for books, and grew up to be correct and
 upright in character. his grandfather doated upon him, and would have
 had him start in life through the arena of public examinations, but,
 when least expected, tai-shan, being on the point of death, bequeathed a
 petition, which was laid before the emperor. his majesty, out of regard
 for his former minister, issued immediate commands that the elder son
 should inherit the estate, and further inquired how many sons there were
 besides him, all of whom at once expressed wish to be introduced in
 his imperial presence. his majesty, moreover, displayed exceptional
 favour, and conferred upon mr. cheng the brevet rank of second class
 assistant secretary (of board), and commanded him to enter the board
 to acquire the necessary experience. has already now been promoted to
 the office of second class secretary. this mr. cheng's wife, nèe wang,
 first gave birth to called chia chu, who became licentiate in
 his fourteenth year. at barely twenty, married, but fell ill and died
 soon after the birth of son. her (mrs. cheng's) second child was a
 daughter, who came into the world, by strange coincidence, on the
 first day of the year. she had an unexpected (pleasure) in the birth,
 the succeeding year, of another son, who, still more remarkable to say,
 had, at the time of his birth, piece of variegated and crystal-like
 brilliant jade in his mouth, on which were yet visible the outlines of
 several characters. now, tell me, was not this novel and strange
 occurrence? eh?"
 
"strange indeed!" exclaimed yü-ts'un with smile; "but i presume the
 coming experiences of this being will not be mean."
 
tzu-hsing gave faint smile. "one and all," remarked, "entertain the
 same idea. hence it is that his mother doats upon him like upon a
 precious jewel. on the day of his first birthday, mr. cheng readily
 entertained wish to put the bent of his inclinations to the test, and
 placed before the child all kinds of things, without number, for him to
 grasp from. contrary to every expectation, scorned every other
 object, and, stretching forth his hand, simply took hold of rouge,
 powder and few hair-pins, with which began to play. mr. cheng
 experienced at once displeasure, as maintained that this youth would,
 by and bye, grow up into sybarite, devoted to wine and women, and for
 this reason it is, that soon began to feel not much attachment for
 him. but his grandmother is the one who, in spite of everything, prizes
 him like the breath of her own life. the very mention of what happened
 is even strange! is now grown up to be seven or eight years old, and,
 although exceptionally wilful, in intelligence and precocity, however,
 not one in hundred could come up to him! and as for the utterances of
 this child, they are less remarkable. the bones and flesh of woman,
 argues, are made of water, while those of man of mud. 'women to my
 eyes are pure and pleasing,' says, 'while at the sight of man, i
 readily feel how corrupt, foul and repelling they are!' now tell me, are
 not these words ridiculous? there can be doubt whatever that will
 by and bye turn out to be licentious roué."
 
yü-ts'un, whose countenance suddenly assumed stern air, promptly
 interrupted the conversation. "it doesn't quite follow," suggested.
 "you people don't, i regret to say, understand the destiny of this
 child. the fact is that even the old hanlin scholar mr. cheng was
 erroneously looked upon as loose rake and dissolute debauchee! but
 unless person, through much study of books and knowledge of letters,
 so increases (in lore) as to attain the talent of discerning the nature
 of things, and the vigour of mind to fathom the taoist reason as well as
 to comprehend the first principle, is not in position to form any
 judgment."
 
tzu-hsing upon perceiving the weighty import of what propounded,
 "please explain," asked hastily, "the drift (of your argument)." to
 which yü-ts'un responded: "of the human beings created by the operation
 of heaven and earth, if we exclude those who are gifted with extreme
 benevolence and extreme viciousness, the rest, for the most part,
 present striking diversity. if they be extremely benevolent, they
 fall in, at the time of their birth, with an of propitious fortune;
 while those extremely vicious correspond, at the time of their
 existence, with an of calamity. when those who coexist with
 propitious fortune come into life, the world is in order; when those who
 coexist with unpropitious fortune come into life, the world is in
 danger. yao, shun, yü, ch'eng t'ang, wen wang, wu wang, chou kung, chao
 kung, confucius, mencius, t'ung hu, hsin, chou tzu, ch'eng tzu, chu
 tzu and chang tzu were ordained to see light in an auspicious era.
 whereas ch'i yu, kung kung, chieh wang, chou wang, shih huang, wang
 mang, tsao ts'ao, wen wen, an hu-shan, ch'in kuei and others were one
 and all destined to come into the world during calamitous age. those
 endowed with extreme benevolence set the world in order; those possessed
 of extreme maliciousness turn the world into disorder. purity,
 intelligence, spirituality and subtlety constitute the vital spirit of
 right which pervades heaven and earth, and the persons gifted with
 benevolence are its natural fruit. malignity and perversity constitute
 the spirit of evil, which permeates heaven and earth, and malicious
 persons are affected by its influence. the days of perpetual happiness
 and eminent good fortune, and the of perfect peace and tranquility,
 which now prevail, are the offspring of the pure, intelligent, divine
 and subtle spirit which ascends above, to the very emperor, and below
 reaches the rustic and uncultured classes. every one is without
 exception under its influence. the superfluity of the subtle spirit
 expands far and wide, and finding nowhere to betake itself to, becomes,
 in due course, transformed into dew, or gentle breeze; and, by process
 of diffusion, it pervades the whole world.
 
"the spirit of malignity and perversity, unable to expand under the
 brilliant sky and transmuting sun, eventually coagulates, pervades and
 stops up the deep gutters and extensive caverns; and when of sudden
 the wind agitates it or it be impelled by the clouds, and any slight
 disposition, on its part, supervenes to set itself in motion, or to
 break its bounds, and so little as even the minutest fraction does
 unexpectedly find an outlet, and happens to come across any spirit of
 perception and subtlety which may be at the time passing by, the spirit
 of right does not yield to the spirit of evil, and the spirit of evil is
 again envious of the spirit of right, so that the two do not harmonize.
 just like wind, water, thunder and lightning, which, when they meet in
 the bowels of the earth, must necessarily, as they are both to dissolve
 and are likewise unable to yield, clash and explode to the end that they
 may at length exhaust themselves. hence it is that these spirits have
 also forcibly to diffuse themselves into the human race to find an
 outlet, so that they may then completely disperse, with the result that
 men and women are suddenly imbued with these spirits and spring into
 existence. at best, (these human beings) cannot be generated into
 philanthropists or perfect men; at worst, they cannot also embody
 extreme perversity or extreme wickedness. yet placed among one million
 beings, the spirit of intelligence, refinement, perception and subtlety
 will be above these one million beings; while, on the other hand, the
 perverse, depraved and inhuman embodiment will likewise be below the
 million of men. born in noble and wealthy family, these men will be a
 salacious, lustful lot; born of literary, virtuous or poor parentage,
 they will turn out retired scholars or men of mark; though they may by
 some accident be born in destitute and poverty-stricken home, they
 cannot possibly, in fact, ever sink so low as to become runners or
 menials, or contentedly brook to be of the common herd or to be driven
 and curbed like horse in harness. they will become, for certainty,
 either actors of note or courtesans of notoriety; as instanced in former
 years by hsü yu, t'ao ch'ien, yuan chi, chi kang, liu ling, the two
 families of wang and hsieh, ku hu-t'ou, ch'en hou-chu, t'ang ming-huang,
 sung hui-tsung, liu t'ing-chih, wen fei-ching, mei nan-kung, shih
 man-ch'ing, lui c'hih-ch'ing and chin shao-yu, and exemplified
 now-a-days by yün-lin, t'ang po-hu, chu chih-shan, and also by li
 kuei-men, huang p'an-cho, ching hsin-mo, cho wen-chün; and the women
 hung fu, hsieh t'ao, ch'ü ying, ch'ao yün and others; all of whom were
 and are of the same stamp, though placed in different scenes of action."
 
"from what you say," observed tzu-hsing, "success makes (a man) duke
 or marquis; ruin, thief!"
 
"quite so; that's just my idea!" replied yü-ts'un; "i've not as yet let
 you know that after my degradation from office, i spent the last couple
 of years in travelling for pleasure all over each province, and that i
 also myself came across two extraordinary youths. this is why, when a
 short while back you alluded to this pao-yü, i at once conjectured, with
 good deal of certainty, that must be human being of the same
 stamp. there's need for to speak of any farther than the walled
 city of chin ling. this mr. chen was, by imperial appointment, named
 principal of the government public college of the chin ling province. do
 you perhaps know him?"
 
"who doesn't know him?" remarked tzu-hsing. "this chen family is an old
 connection of the chia family. these two families were on terms of great
 intimacy, and i myself likewise enjoyed the pleasure of their friendship
 for many day."
 
"last year, when at chin ling," yü-ts'un continued with smile, "some
 one recommended as resident tutor to the school in the chen mansion;
 and when i moved into it i saw for myself the state of things. who would
 ever think that that household was grand and luxurious to such degree!
 but they are an affluent family, and withal full of propriety, so that a
 school like this was of course not one easy to obtain. the pupil,
 however, was, it is true, young tyro, but far more troublesome to
 teach than candidate for the examination of graduate of the second
 degree. were i to enter into details, you would indeed have laugh. 'i
 must needs,' explained, 'have the company of two girls in my studies
 to enable to read at all, and to keep likewise my brain clear.
 otherwise, if left to myself, my head gets all in muddle.' time after
 time, further expounded to his young attendants, how extremely
 honourable and extremely pure were the two words representing woman,
 that they are more valuable and precious than the auspicious animal, the
 felicitous bird, rare flowers and uncommon plants. 'you may not' (he was
 wont to say), 'on any account heedlessly utter them, you set of foul
 mouths and filthy tongues! these two words are of the utmost import!
 whenever you have occasion to allude to them, you must, before you can
 do so with impunity, take pure water and scented tea and rinse your
 mouths. in the event of any slip of the tongue, i shall at once have
 your teeth extracted, and your eyes gouged out.' his obstinacy and
 waywardness are, in every respect, out of the common. after was
 allowed to leave school, and to return home, became, at the sight of
 the young ladies, so tractable, gentle, sharp, and polite, transformed,
 in fact, like one of them. and though, for this reason, his father has
 punished him on more than one occasion, by giving him sound thrashing,
 such as brought him to the verge of death, cannot however change.
 whenever was being beaten, and could more endure the pain, was
 wont to promptly break forth in promiscuous loud shouts, 'girls! girls!'
 the young ladies, who heard him from the inner chambers, subsequently
 made fun of him. 'why,' they said, 'when you are being thrashed, and you
 are in pain, your only thought is to bawl out girls! is it perchance
 that you expect us young ladies to go and intercede for you? how is that
 you have sense of shame?' to their taunts gave most plausible
 explanation. 'once,' replied, 'when in the agony of pain, i gave vent
 to shouting girls, in the hope, perchance, i did not then know, of its
 being able to alleviate the soreness. after i had, with this purpose,
 given one cry, i really felt the pain considerably better; and now that
 i have obtained this secret spell, i have recourse, at once, when i am
 in the height of anguish, to shouts of girls, one shout after another.
 now what do you say to this? isn't this absurd, eh?"
 
"the grandmother is so infatuated by her extreme tenderness for this
 youth, that, time after time, she has, on her grandson's account, found
 fault with the tutor, and called her to task, with the result that i
 resigned my post and took my leave. youth, with disposition such as
 his, cannot assuredly either perpetuate intact the estate of his father
 and grandfather, or follow the injunctions of teacher or advice of
 friends. the pity is, however, that there are, in that family, several
 excellent female cousins, the like of all of whom it would be difficult
 to discover."
 
"quite so!" remarked tzu-hsing; "there are now three young ladies in the
 chia family who are simply perfection itself. the eldest is daughter
 of mr. cheng, yuan ch'un by name, who, on account of her excellence,
 filial piety, talents, and virtue, has been selected as governess in
 the palace. the second is the daughter of mr. she's handmaid, and is
 called ying ch'un; the third is t'an ch'un, the child of mr. cheng's
 handmaid; while the fourth is the uterine sister of mr. chen of the ning
 mansion. her name is hsi ch'un. as dowager lady shih is so fondly
 attached to her granddaughters, they come, for the most part, over to
 their grandmother's place to prosecute their studies together, and each
 one of these girls is, i hear, without fault."
 
"more admirable," observed yü-ts'un, "is the régime (adhered to) in the
 chen family, where the names of the female children have all been
 selected from the list of male names, and are unlike all those
 out-of-the-way names, such as spring blossom, scented gem, and the like
 flowery terms in vogue in other families. but how is it that the chia
 family have likewise fallen into this common practice?"
 
"not so!" ventured tzu-h'sing. "it is simply because the eldest daughter
 was born on the first of the first moon, that the name of yuan ch'un was
 given to her; while with the rest this character ch'un (spring) was then
 followed. the names of the senior generation are, in like manner,
 adopted from those of their brothers; and there is at present an
 instance in support of this. the wife of your present worthy master, mr.
 lin, is the uterine sister of mr. chia. she and mr. chia cheng, and she
 went, while at home, under the name of chia min. should you question the
 truth of what i say, you are at liberty, on your return, to make minute
 inquiries and you'll be convinced."
 
yü-ts'un clapped his hands and said smiling, "it's so, i know! for this
 female pupil of mine, whose name is tai-yü, invariably pronounces the
 character _min_ as _mi_, whenever she comes across it in the
 course of her reading; while, in writing, when she comes to the
 character 'min,' she likewise reduces the strokes by one, sometimes by
 two. often have i speculated in my mind (as to the cause), but the
 remarks i've heard you mention, convince me, without doubt, that it is
 other reason (than that of reverence to her mother's name). strange
 enough, this pupil of mine is unique in her speech and deportment, and
 in way like any ordinary young lady. but considering that her mother
 was commonplace woman herself, it is natural that she should have
 given birth to such child. besides, knowing, as i do now, that she is
 the granddaughter of the jung family, it is matter of surprise to me
 that she is what she is. poor girl, her mother, after all, died in the
 course of the last month."
 
tzu-hsing heaved sigh. "of three elderly sisters," explained, "this
 one was the youngest, and she too is gone! of the sisters of the senior
 generation not one even survives! but now we'll see what the husbands of
 this younger generation will be like by and bye!"
 
"yes," replied yü-ts'un. "but some while back you mentioned that mr.
 cheng has had son, born with piece of jade in his mouth, and that he
 has besides tender-aged grandson left by his eldest son; but is it
 likely that this mr. she has not, himself, as yet, had any male issue?"
 
"after mr. cheng had this with the jade," tzu-hsing added, "his
 handmaid gave birth to another son, who whether be good or bad, i
 don't at all know. at all events, has by his side two sons and a
 grandson, but what these will grow up to be by and bye, i cannot tell.
 as regards mr. chia she, too has had two sons; the second of whom,
 chia lien, is by this time about twenty. took to wife relative of
 his, niece of mr. cheng's wife, miss wang, and has now been married
 for the last two years. this mr. lien has lately obtained by purchase
 the rank of sub-prefect. too takes little pleasure in books, but as
 far as worldly affairs go, is so versatile and glib of tongue, that
 has recently taken up his quarters with his uncle mr. cheng, to whom
 gives helping hand in the management of domestic matters. who would
 have thought it, however, ever since his marriage with his worthy wife,
 not single person, whether high or low, has there been who has not
 looked up to her with regard: with the result that mr. lien himself has,
 in fact, had to take back seat (_lit_. withdrew 35 li). in looks,
 she is also so extremely beautiful, in speech so extremely quick and
 fluent, in ingenuity so deep and astute, that even man could, in no
 way, come up to her mark."
 
after hearing these remarks yü-ts'un smiled. "you now perceive," he
 said, "that my argument is fallacy, and that the several persons
 about whom you and i have just been talking are, we may presume, human
 beings, who, one and all, have been generated by the spirit of right,
 and the spirit of evil, and come to life by the same royal road; but of
 course there's saying."
 
"enough," cried tzu-hsing, "of right and enough of evil; we've been
 doing nothing but settling other people's accounts; come now, have
 another glass, and you'll be the better for it!"
 
"while bent upon talking," yü-ts'un explained, "i've had more glasses
 than is good for me."
 
"speaking of irrelevant matters about other people," tzu-hsing rejoined
 complacently, "is quite the thing to help us swallow our wine; so come
 now; what harm will happen, if we do have few glasses more."
 
yü-ts'un thereupon looked out of the window.
 
"the day is also far advanced," remarked, "and if we don't take care,
 the gates will be closing; let us leisurely enter the city, and as we go
 along, there will be nothing to prevent us from continuing our chat."
 
forthwith the two friends rose from their seats, settled and paid their
 wine bill, and were just going, when they unexpectedly heard some one
 from behind say with loud voice:
 
"accept my congratulations, brother yü-ts'un; i've now come, with the
 express purpose of giving you the welcome news!"
 
yü-ts'un lost time in turning his head round to look at the speaker.
 but reader, if you wish to learn who the man was, listen to the details
 given in the following chapter.
 



chapter iii.
 
lin ju-hai appeals to his brother-in-law, chia cheng, recommending
 yü-ts'un, his daughter's tutor, to his consideration.
 dowager lady chia sends to fetch her granddaughter, out of
 commiseration for her being motherless child.
 

but to proceed with our narrative.
 
yü-ts'un, on speedily turning round, perceived that the speaker was no
 other than certain chang ju-kuei, an old colleague of his, who had
 been denounced and deprived of office, on account of some case or other;
 native of that district, who had, since his degradation, resided in
 his family home.
 
having lately come to hear the news that memorial, presented in the
 capital, that the former officers (who had been cashiered) should be
 reinstated, had received the imperial consent, had promptly done all
 could, in every nook and corner, to obtain influence, and to find the
 means (of righting his position,) when he, unexpectedly, came across
 yü-ts'un, to whom therefore lost time in offering his
 congratulations. the two friends exchanged the conventional salutations,
 and chang ju-kuei forthwith communicated the tidings to yü-ts'un.
 
yü-ts'un was delighted, but after had made few remarks, in great
 hurry, each took his leave and sped on his own way homewards.
 
leng tzu-hsing, upon hearing this conversation, hastened at once to
 propose plan, advising yü-ts'un to request lin ju-hai, in his turn, to
 appeal in the capital to mr. chia cheng for support.
 
yü-ts'un accepted the suggestion, and parted from his companion.
 
on his return to his quarters, made all haste to lay his hand on the
 metropolitan gazette, and having ascertained that the news was
 authentic, had on the next day personal consultation with ju-hai.
 
"providence and good fortune are both alike propitious!" exclaimed
 ju-hai. "after the death of my wife, my mother-in-law, whose residence
 is in the capital, was so very solicitous on my daughter's account, for
 having one to depend upon, that she despatched, at an early period,
 boats with men and women servants to come and fetch her. but my child
 was at the time not quite over her illness, and that is why she has not
 yet started. i was, this very moment, cogitating to send my daughter to
 the capital. and in view of the obligation, under which i am to you for
 the instruction you have heretofore conferred upon her, remaining as yet
 unrequited, there is reason why, when such an opportunity as this
 presents itself, i should not do my utmost to find means to make proper
 acknowledgment. i have already, in anticipation, given the matter my
 attention, and written letter of recommendation to my brother-in-law,
 urging him to put everything right for you, in order that i may, to a
 certain extent, be able to give effect to my modest wishes. as for any
 outlay that may prove necessary, i have given proper explanation, in the
 letter to my brother-in-law, so that you, my brother, need not trouble
 yourself by giving way to much anxiety."
 
as yü-ts'un bowed and expressed his appreciation in most profuse
 language,--
 
"pray," asked, "where does your honoured brother-in-law reside? and
 what is his official capacity? but i fear i'm too coarse in my manner,
 and could not presume to obtrude myself in his presence."
 
ju-hai smiled. "and yet," remarked, "this brother-in-law of mine is
 after all of one and the same family as your worthy self, for is the
 grandson of the duke jung. my elder brother-in-law has now inherited the
 status of captain-general of the first grade. his name is she, his style
 ngen-hou. my second brother-in-law's name is cheng, his style is
 tzu-chou. his present post is that of second class secretary in the
 board of works. is modest and kindhearted, and has much in him of the
 habits of his grandfather; not one of that purse-proud and haughty kind
 of men. that is why i have written to him and made the request on your
 behalf. were different to what really is, not only would cast a
 slur upon your honest purpose, honourable brother, but i myself likewise
 would not have been as prompt in taking action."
 
when yü-ts'un heard these remarks, at length credited what had been
 told him by tzu-hsing the day before, and lost time in again
 expressing his sense of gratitude to lin ju-hai.
 
ju-hai resumed the conversation.
 
"i have fixed," (he explained,) "upon the second of next month, for my
 young daughter's departure for the capital, and, if you, brother mine,
 were to travel along with her, would it not be an advantage to herself,
 as well as to yourself?"
 
yü-ts'un signified his acquiescence as listened to his proposal;
 feeling in his inner self extremely elated.
 
ju-hai availed himself of the earliest opportunity to get ready the
 presents (for the capital) and all the requirements for the journey,
 which (when completed,) yü-ts'un took over one by one. his pupil could
 not, at first, brook the idea, of separation from her father, but the
 pressing wishes of her grandmother left her course (but to comply).
 
"your father," ju-hai furthermore argued with her, "is already fifty;
 and i entertain wish to marry again; and then you are always ailing;
 besides, with your extreme youth, you have, above, mother of your own
 to take care of you, and below, sisters to attend to you. if you now
 go and have your maternal grandmother, as well as your mother's brothers
 and your cousins to depend upon, you will be doing the best thing to
 reduce the anxiety which i feel in my heart on your behalf. why then
 should you not go?"
 
tai-yü, after listening to what her father had to say, parted from him
 in flood of tears and followed her nurse and several old matrons from
 the jung mansion on board her boat, and set out on her journey.
 
yü-ts'un had boat to himself, and with two youths to wait on him, he
 prosecuted his voyage in the wake of tai-yü.
 
by certain day, they reached ching tu; and yü-ts'un, after first
 adjusting his hat and clothes, came, attended by youth, to the door of
 the jung mansion, and sent in card, which showed his lineage.
 
chia cheng had, by this time, perused his brother-in-law's letter, and
 speedily asked him to walk in. when they met, found in yü-ts'un an
 imposing manner and polite address.
 
this chia cheng had, in fact, great penchant above all things for men
 of education, men courteous to the talented, respectful to the learned,
 ready to lend helping hand to the needy and to succour the distressed,
 and was, to great extent, like his grandfather. as it was besides a
 wish intimated by his brother-in-law, therefore treated yü-ts'un with
 consideration still more unusual, and readily strained all his
 resources to assist him.
 
on the very day on which the memorial was submitted to the throne, he
 obtained by his efforts, reinstatement to office, and before the
 expiry of two months, yü-t'sun was forthwith selected to fill the
 appointment of prefect of ying t'ien in chin ling. taking leave of chia
 cheng, chose propitious day, and proceeded to his post, where we
 will leave him without further notice for the present.
 
but to return to tai-yü. on the day on which she left the boat, and the
 moment she put her foot on shore, there were forthwith at her disposal
 chairs for her own use, and carts for the luggage, sent over from the
 jung mansion.
 
lin tai-yü had often heard her mother recount how different was her
 grandmother's house from that of other people's; and having seen for
 herself how above the common run were already the attendants of the
 three grades, (sent to wait upon her,) in attire, in their fare, in all
 their articles of use, "how much more," (she thought to herself) "now
 that i am going to her home, must i be careful at every step, and
 circumspect at every moment! nor must i utter one word too many, nor
 make one step more than is proper, for fear lest i should be ridiculed
 by any of them!"
 
from the moment she got into the chair, and they had entered within the
 city walls, she found, as she looked around, through the gauze window,
 at the bustle in the streets and public places and at the immense
 concourse of people, everything naturally so unlike what she had seen
 elsewhere.
 
after they had also been considerable time on the way, she suddenly
 caught sight, at the northern end of the street, of two huge squatting
 lions of marble and of three lofty gates with (knockers representing)
 the heads of animals. in front of these gates, sat, in row, about ten
 men in coloured hats and fine attire. the main gate was not open. it was
 only through the side gates, on the east and west, that people went in
 and came out. above the centre gate was tablet. on this tablet were
 inscribed in five large characters--"the ning kuo mansion erected by
 imperial command."
 
"this must be grandmother's eldest son's residence," reflected tai-yü.
 
towards the east, again, at great distance, were three more high
 gateways, likewise of the same kind as those she had just seen. this was
 the jung kuo mansion.
 
they did not however go in by the main gate; but simply made their
 entrance through the east side door.
 
with the sedans on their shoulders, (the bearers) proceeded about the
 distance of the throw of an arrow, when upon turning corner, they
 hastily put down the chairs. the matrons, who came behind, one and all
 also dismounted. (the bearers) were changed for four youths of seventeen
 or eighteen, with hats and clothes without blemish, and while they
 carried the chair, the whole bevy of matrons followed on foot.
 
when they reached creeper-laden gate, the sedan was put down, and all
 the youths stepped back and retired. the matrons came forward, raised
 the screen, and supported tai-yü to descend from the chair.
 
lin tai-yü entered the door with the creepers, resting on the hand of a
 matron.
 
on both sides was verandah, like two outstretched arms. an entrance
 hall stood in the centre, in the middle of which was door-screen of ta
 li marble, set in an ebony frame. on the other side of this screen were
 three very small halls. at the back of these came at once an extensive
 courtyard, belonging to the main building.
 
in the front part were five parlours, the frieze of the ceiling of which
 was all carved, and the pillars ornamented. on either side, were covered
 avenues, resembling passages through rock. in the side-rooms were
 suspended cages, full of parrots of every colour, thrushes, and birds of
 every description.
 
on the terrace-steps, sat several waiting maids, dressed in red and
 green, and the whole company of them advanced, with beaming faces, to
 greet them, when they saw the party approach. "her venerable ladyship,"
 they said, "was at this very moment thinking of you, miss, and, by a
 strange coincidence, here you are."
 
three or four of them forthwith vied with each other in raising the door
 curtain, while at the same time was heard some one announce: "miss lin
 has arrived."
 
sooner had she entered the room, than she espied two servants
 supporting venerable lady, with silver-white hair, coming forward to
 greet her. convinced that this lady must be her grandmother, she was
 about to prostrate herself and pay her obeisance, when she was quickly
 clasped in the arms of her grandmother, who held her close against her
 bosom; and as she called her "my liver! my flesh!" (my love! my
 darling!) she began to sob aloud.
 
the bystanders too, at once, without one exception, melted into tears;
 and tai-yü herself found some difficulty in restraining her sobs. little
 by little the whole party succeeded in consoling her, and tai-yü at
 length paid her obeisance to her grandmother. her ladyship thereupon
 pointed them out one by one to tai-yü. "this," she said, "is the wife of
 your uncle, your mother's elder brother; this is the wife of your uncle,
 her second brother; and this is your eldest sister-in-law chu, the wife
 of your senior cousin chu."
 
tai-yü bowed to each one of them (with folded arms).
 
"ask the young ladies in," dowager lady chia went on to say; "tell them
 guest from afar has just arrived, one who comes for the first time;
 and that they may not go to their lessons."
 
the servants with one voice signified their obedience, and two of them
 speedily went to carry out her orders.
 
not long after three nurses and five or six waiting-maids were seen
 ushering in three young ladies. the first was somewhat plump in figure
 and of medium height; her cheeks had congealed appearance, like a
 fresh lichee; her nose was glossy like goose fat. she was gracious,
 demure, and lovable to look at.
 
the second had sloping shoulders, and slim waist. tall and slender was
 she in stature, with face like the egg of goose. her eyes so
 beautiful, with their well-curved eyebrows, possessed in their gaze a
 bewitching flash. at the very sight of her refined and elegant manners
 all idea of vulgarity was forgotten.
 
the third was below the medium size, and her mien was, as yet,
 childlike.
 
in their head ornaments, jewelry, and dress, the get-up of the three
 young ladies was identical.
 
tai-yü speedily rose to greet them and to exchange salutations. after
 they had made each other's acquaintance, they all took seat, whereupon
 the servants brought the tea. their conversation was confined to
 tai-yü's mother,--how she had fallen ill, what doctors had attended her,
 what medicines had been given her, and how she had been buried and
 mourned; and dowager lady chia was naturally again in great anguish.
 
"of all my daughters," she remarked, "your mother was the one i loved
 best, and now in twinkle, she has passed away, before too, and i've
 not been able to so much as see her face. how can this not make my heart
 sore-stricken?"
 
and as she gave vent to these feelings, she took tai-yü's hand in hers,
 and again gave way to sobs; and it was only after the members of the
 family had quickly made use of much exhortation and coaxing, that they
 succeeded, little by little, in stopping her tears.
 
they all perceived that tai-yü, despite her youthful years and
 appearance, was lady-like in her deportment and address, and that though
 with her delicate figure and countenance, (she seemed as if) unable to
 bear the very weight of her clothes, she possessed, however, certain
 captivating air. and as they readily noticed the symptoms of weak
 constitution, they went on in consequence to make inquiries as to what
 medicines she ordinarily took, and how it was that her complaint had not
 been cured.
 
"i have," explained tai-yü, "been in this state ever since i was born;
 though i've taken medicines from the very time i was able to eat rice,
 up to the present, and have been treated by ever so many doctors of
 note, i've not derived any benefit. in the year when i was yet only
 three, i remember mangy-headed bonze coming to our house, and saying
 that would take along, and make nun of me; but my father and
 mother would, on account, give their consent. 'as you cannot bear to
 part from her and to give her up,' then remarked, 'her ailment will,
 i fear, never, throughout her life, be cured. if you wish to see her all
 right, it is only to be done by not letting her, from this day forward,
 on any account, listen to the sound of weeping, or see, with the
 exception of her parents, any relatives outside the family circle. then
 alone will she be able to go through this existence in peace and in
 quiet.' one heeded the nonsensical talk of this raving priest; but
 here am i, up to this very day, dosing myself with ginseng pills as a
 tonic."
 
"what lucky coincidence!" interposed dowager lady chia; "some of these
 pills are being compounded here, and i'll simply tell them to have an
 extra supply made; that's all."
 
hardly had she finished these words, when sound of laughter was heard
 from the back courtyard. "here i am too late!" the voice said, "and not
 in time to receive the distant visitor!"
 
"every one of all these people," reflected tai-yü, "holds her peace and
 suppresses the very breath of her mouth; and who, i wonder, is this
 coming in this reckless and rude manner?"
 
while, as yet, preoccupied with these thoughts, she caught sight of a
 crowd of married women and waiting-maids enter from the back room,
 pressing round regular beauty.
 
the attire of this person bore similarity to that of the young
 ladies. in all her splendour and lustre, she looked like fairy or a
 goddess. in her coiffure, she had band of gold filigree work,
 representing the eight precious things, inlaid with pearls; and wore
 pins, at the head of each of which were five phoenixes in rampant
 position, with pendants of pearls. on her neck, she had reddish gold
 necklet, like coiled dragons, with fringe of tassels. on her person,
 she wore tight-sleeved jacket, of dark red flowered satin, covered
 with hundreds of butterflies, embroidered in gold, interspersed with
 flowers. over all, she had variegated stiff-silk pelisse, lined with
 slate-blue ermine; while her nether garments consisted of jupe of
 kingfisher-colour foreign crepe, brocaded with flowers.
 
she had pair of eyes, triangular in shape like those of the red
 phoenix, two eyebrows, curved upwards at each temple, like willow
 leaves. her stature was elegant; her figure graceful; her powdered face
 like dawning spring, majestic, yet not haughty. her carnation lips, long
 before they parted, betrayed smile.
 
tai-yü eagerly rose and greeted her.
 
old lady chia then smiled. "you don't know her," she observed. "this is
 cunning vixen, who has made quite name in this establishment! in
 nanking, she went by the appellation of vixen, and if you simply call
 her feng vixen, it will do."
 
tai-yü was just at loss how to address her, when all her cousins
 informed tai-yü, that this was her sister-in-law lien.
 
tai-yü had not, it is true, made her acquaintance before, but she had
 heard her mother mention that her eldest maternal uncle chia she's son,
 chia lien, had married the niece of madame wang, her second brother's
 wife, girl who had, from her infancy, purposely been nurtured to
 supply the place of son, and to whom the school name of wang hsi-feng
 had been given.
 
tai-yü lost time in returning her smile and saluting her with all
 propriety, addressing her as my sister-in-law. this hsi-feng laid hold
 of tai-yü's hand, and minutely scrutinised her, for while, from head
 to foot; after which she led her back next to dowager lady chia, where
 they both took seat.
 
"if really there be being of such beauty in the world," she
 consequently observed with smile, "i may well consider as having set
 eyes upon it to-day! besides, in the air of her whole person, she
 doesn't in fact look like your granddaughter-in-law, our worthy
 ancestor, but in every way like your ladyship's own kindred-
 granddaughter! it's wonder then that your venerable ladyship
 should have, day after day, had her unforgotten, even for second, in
 your lips and heart. it's pity, however, that this cousin of mine
 should have such hard lot! how did it happen that our aunt died at
 such an early period?"
 
as she uttered these words, she hastily took her handkerchief and wiped
 the tears from her eyes.
 
"i've only just recovered from fit of crying," dowager lady chia
 observed, as she smiled, "and have you again come to start me? your
 cousin has only now arrived from distant journey, and she is so
 delicate to boot! besides, we have few minutes back succeeded in
 coaxing her to restrain her sobs, so drop at once making any allusion to
 your former remarks!"
 
this hsi-feng, upon hearing these words, lost time in converting her
 sorrow into joy.
 
"quite right," she remarked. "but at the sight of my cousin, my whole
 heart was absorbed in her, and i felt happy, and yet wounded at heart:
 but having disregarded my venerable ancestor's presence, i deserve to be
 beaten, i do indeed!"
 
and hastily taking once more tai-yü's hand in her own: "how old are you,
 cousin?" she inquired; "have you been to school? what medicines are you
 taking? while you live here, you mustn't feel homesick; and if there's
 anything you would like to eat, or to play with, mind you come and tell
 me! or should the waiting maids or the matrons fail in their duties,
 don't forget also to report them to me."
 
addressing at the same time the matrons, she went on to ask, "have miss
 lin's luggage and effects been brought in? how many servants has she
 brought along with her? go, as soon as you can, and sweep two lower
 rooms and ask them to go and rest."
 
as she spake, tea and refreshments had already been served, and hsi-feng
 herself handed round the cups and offered the fruits.
 
upon hearing the question further put by her maternal aunt secunda,
 "whether the issue of the monthly allowances of money had been finished
 or not yet?" hsi-feng replied: "the issue of the money has also been
 completed; but few moments back, when i went along with several
 servants to the back upper-loft, in search of the satins, we looked for
 ever so long, but we saw nothing of the kind of satins alluded to by
 you, madame, yesterday; so may it not be that your memory misgives you?"
 
"whether there be any or not, of that special kind, is of no
 consequence," observed madame wang. "you should take out," she therefore
 went on to add, "any two pieces which first come under your hand, for
 this cousin of yours to make herself dresses with; and in the evening,
 if i don't forget, i'll send some one to fetch them."
 
"i've in fact already made every provision," rejoined hsi-feng; "knowing
 very well that my cousin would be arriving within these two days, i have
 had everything got ready for her. and when you, madame, go back, if you
 will pass an eye over everything, i shall be able to send them round."
 
madame wang gave smile, nodded her head assentingly, but uttered not a
 word by way of reply.
 
the tea and fruit had by this time been cleared, and dowager lady chia
 directed two old nurses to take tai-yü to go and see her two maternal
 uncles; whereupon chia she's wife, madame hsing, hastily stood up and
 with smiling face suggested, "i'll take my niece over; for it will
 after all be considerably better if i go!"
 
"quite so!" answered dowager lady chia, smiling; "you can go home too,
 and there will be need for you to come over again!"
 
madame hsing expressed her assent, and forthwith led tai-yü to take
 leave of madame wang. the whole party escorted them as far as the door
 of the entrance hall, hung with creepers, where several youths had drawn
 carriage, painted light blue, with kingfisher-coloured hood.
 
madame hsing led tai-yü by the hand and they got up into their seats.
 the whole company of matrons put the curtain down, and then bade the
 youths raise the carriage; who dragged it along, until they came to an
 open space, where they at length put the mules into harness.
 
going out again by the eastern side gate, they proceeded in an easterly
 direction, passed the main entrance of the jung mansion, and entered a
 lofty doorway painted black. on the arrival in front of the ceremonial
 gate, they at once dismounted from the curricle, and madame hsing,
 hand-in-hand with tai-yü, walked into the court.
 
"these grounds," surmised tai-yü to herself, "must have been originally
 converted from piece partitioned from the garden of the jung mansion."
 
having entered three rows of ceremonial gates they actually caught sight
 of the main structure, with its vestibules and porches, all of which,
 though on small scale, were full of artistic and unique beauty. they
 were nothing like the lofty, imposing, massive and luxurious style of
 architecture on the other side, yet the avenues and rockeries, in the
 various places in the court, were all in perfect taste.
 
when they reached the interior of the principal pavilion, large
 concourse of handmaids and waiting maids, got up in gala dress, were
 already there to greet them. madame hsing pressed tai-yü into seat,
 while she bade some one go into the outer library and request mr. chia
 she to come over.
 
in few minutes the servant returned. "master," she explained, "says:
 'that has not felt quite well for several days, that as the meeting
 with miss lin will affect both her as well as himself, does not for
 the present feel equal to seeing each other, that advises miss lin
 not to feel despondent or homesick; that she ought to feel quite at home
 with her venerable ladyship, (her grandmother,) as well as her maternal
 aunts; that her cousins are, it is true, blunt, but that if all the
 young ladies associated together in one place, they may also perchance
 dispel some dulness; that if ever (miss lin) has any grievance, she
 should at once speak out, and on account feel stranger; and
 everything will then be right."
 
tai-yü lost time in respectfully standing up, resuming her seat after
 she had listened to every sentence of the message to her. after while,
 she said goodbye, and though madame hsing used every argument to induce
 her to stay for the repast and then leave, tai-yü smiled and said, "i
 shouldn't under ordinary circumstances refuse the invitation to dinner,
 which you, aunt, in your love kindly extend to me, but i have still to
 cross over and pay my respects to my maternal uncle secundus; if i went
 too late, it would, i fear, be lack of respect on my part; but i shall
 accept on another occasion. i hope therefore that you will, dear aunt,
 kindly excuse me."
 
"if such be the case," madame hsing replied, "it's all right." and
 presently directing two nurses to take her niece over, in the carriage,
 in which they had come while back, tai-yü thereupon took her leave;
 madame hsing escorting her as far as the ceremonial gate, where she gave
 some further directions to all the company of servants. she followed the
 curricle with her eyes so long as it remained in sight, and at length
 retraced her footsteps.
 
tai-yü shortly entered the jung mansion, descended from the carriage,
 and preceded by all the nurses, she at once proceeded towards the east,
 turned corner, passed through an entrance hall, running east and west,
 and walked in southern direction, at the back of the large hall. on
 the inner side of ceremonial gate, and at the upper end of spacious
 court, stood large main building, with five apartments, flanked on
 both sides by out-houses (stretching out) like the antlers on the head
 of deer; side-gates, resembling passages through hill, establishing a
 thorough communication all round; (a main building) lofty, majestic,
 solid and grand, and unlike those in the compound of dowager lady chia.
 
tai-yü readily concluded that this at last was the main inner suite of
 apartments. raised broad road led in straight line to the large
 gate. upon entering the hall, and raising her head, she first of all
 perceived before her large tablet with blue ground, upon which figured
 nine dragons of reddish gold. the inscription on this tablet consisted
 of three characters as large as peck-measure, and declared that this
 was the hall of glorious felicity.
 
at the end, was row of characters of minute size, denoting the year,
 month and day, upon which his majesty had been pleased to confer the
 tablet upon chia yuan, duke of jung kuo. besides this tablet, were
 numberless costly articles bearing the autograph of the emperor. on the
 large black ebony table, engraved with dragons, were placed three
 antique blue and green bronze tripods, about three feet in height. on
 the wall hung large picture representing black dragons, such as were
 seen in waiting chambers of the sui dynasty. on one side stood gold
 cup of chased work, while on the other, crystal casket. on the ground
 were placed, in two rows, sixteen chairs, made of hard-grained cedar.
 
there was also pair of scrolls consisting of black-wood antithetical
 tablets, inlaid with the strokes of words in chased gold. their burden
 was this:
 
on the platform shine resplendent pearls like sun or moon,
 and the sheen of the hall façade gleams like russet sky.
 
below, was row of small characters, denoting that the scroll had been
 written by the hand of mu shih, fellow-countryman and old friend of
 the family, who, for his meritorious services, had the hereditary title
 of prince of tung ngan conferred upon him.
 
the fact is that madame wang was also not in the habit of sitting and
 resting, in this main apartment, but in three side-rooms on the east, so
 that the nurses at once led tai-yü through the door of the eastern wing.
 
on stove-couch, near the window, was spread foreign red carpet. on
 the side of honour, were laid deep red reclining-cushions, with dragons,
 with gold cash (for scales), and an oblong brown-coloured
 sitting-cushion with gold-cash-spotted dragons. on the two sides, stood
 one of pair of small teapoys of foreign lacquer of peach-blossom
 pattern. on the teapoy on the left, were spread out wen wang tripods,
 spoons, chopsticks and scent-bottles. on the teapoy on the right, were
 vases from the ju kiln, painted with girls of great beauty, in which
 were placed seasonable flowers; (on it were) also teacups, tea service
 and the like articles.
 
on the floor on the west side of the room, were four chairs in row,
 all of which were covered with antimacassars, embroidered with
 silverish-red flowers, while below, at the feet of these chairs, stood
 four footstools. on either side, was also one of pair of high teapoys,
 and these teapoys were covered with teacups and flower vases.
 
the other nick-nacks need not be minutely described.
 
the old nurses pressed tai-yü to sit down on the stove-couch; but, on
 perceiving near the edge of the couch two embroidered cushions, placed
 one opposite the other, she thought of the gradation of seats, and did
 not therefore place herself on the couch, but on chair on the eastern
 side of the room; whereupon the waiting maids, in attendance in these
 quarters, hastened to serve the tea.
 
while tai-yü was sipping her tea, she observed the headgear, dress,
 deportment and manners of the several waiting maids, which she really
 found so unlike what she had seen in other households. she had hardly
 finished her tea, when she noticed waiting maid approach, dressed in a
 red satin jacket, and waistcoat of blue satin with scollops.
 
"my lady requests miss lin to come over and sit with her," she remarked
 as she put on smile.
 
the old nurses, upon hearing this message, speedily ushered tai-yü again
 out of this apartment, into the three-roomed small main building by the
 eastern porch.
 
on the stove-couch, situated at the principal part of the room, was
 placed, in transverse position, low couch-table, at the upper end of
 which were laid out, in heap, books and tea service. against the
 partition-wall, on the east side, facing the west, was reclining
 pillow, made of blue satin, neither old nor new.
 
madame wang, however, occupied the lower seat, on the west side, on
 which was likewise placed rather shabby blue satin sitting-rug, with a
 back-cushion; and upon perceiving tai-yü come in she urged her at once
 to sit on the east side.
 
tai-yü concluded, in her mind, that this seat must certainly belong to
 chia cheng, and espying, next to the couch, row of three chairs,
 covered with antimacassars, strewn with embroidered flowers, somewhat
 also the worse for use, tai-yü sat down on one of these chairs.
 
but as madame wang pressed her again and again to sit on the couch,
 tai-yü had at length to take seat next to her.
 
"your uncle," madame wang explained, "is gone to observe this day as a
 fast day, but you'll see him by and bye. there's, however, one thing i
 want to talk to you about. your three female cousins are all, it is
 true, everything that is nice; and you will, when later on you come
 together for study, or to learn how to do needlework, or whenever, at
 any time, you romp and laugh together, find them all most obliging; but
 there's one thing that causes very much concern. i have here one, who
 is the very root of retribution, the incarnation of all mischief, one
 who is ne'er-do-well, prince of malignant spirits in this family. he
 is gone to-day to pay his vows in the temple, and is not back yet, but
 you will see him in the evening, when you will readily be able to judge
 for yourself. one thing you must do, and that is, from this time forth,
 not to pay any notice to him. all these cousins of yours don't venture
 to bring any taint upon themselves by provoking him."
 
tai-yü had in days gone by heard her mother explain that she had a
 nephew, born into the world, holding piece of jade in his mouth, who
 was perverse beyond measure, who took pleasure in his books, and
 whose sole great delight was to play the giddy dog in the inner
 apartments; that her maternal grandmother, on the other hand, loved him
 so fondly that one ever presumed to call him to account, so that
 when, in this instance, she heard madame wang's advice, she at once felt
 certain that it must be this very cousin.
 
"isn't it to the cousin born with jade in his mouth, that you are
 alluding to, aunt?" she inquired as she returned her smile. "when i was
 at home, i remember my mother telling more than once of this very
 cousin, who (she said) was year older than i, and whose infant name
 was pao-yü. she added that his disposition was really wayward, but that
 treats all his cousins with the utmost consideration. besides, now
 that i have come here, i shall, of course, be always together with my
 female cousins, while the boys will have their own court, and separate
 quarters; and how ever will there be any cause of bringing any slur upon
 myself by provoking him?"
 
"you don't know the reasons (that prompt to warn you)," replied
 madame wang laughingly. "he is so unlike all the rest, all because he
 has, since his youth up, been doated upon by our old lady! the fact is
 that has been spoilt, through over-indulgence, by being always in the
 company of his female cousins! if his female cousins pay heed to him,
 is, at any rate, somewhat orderly, but the day his cousins say one
 word more to him than usual, much trouble forthwith arises, at the
 outburst of delight in his heart. that's why i enjoin upon you not to
 heed him. from his mouth, at one time, issue sugared words and
 mellifluous phrases; and at another, like the heavens devoid of the sun,
 becomes raving fool; so whatever you do, don't believe all he
 says."
 
tai-yü was assenting to every bit of advice as it was uttered, when
 unexpectedly she beheld waiting-maid walk in. "her venerable ladyship
 over there," she said, "has sent word about the evening meal."
 
madame wang hastily took tai-yü by the hand, and emerging by the door of
 the back-room, they went eastwards by the verandah at the back. past the
 side gate, was roadway, running north and south. on the southern side
 were pavilion with three divisions and reception hall with a
 colonnade. on the north, stood large screen wall, painted white;
 behind it was very small building, with door of half the ordinary
 size.
 
"these are your cousin feng's rooms," explained madame wang to tai-yü,
 as she pointed to them smiling. "you'll know in future your way to come
 and find her; and if you ever lack anything, mind you mention it to her,
 and she'll make it all right."
 
at the door of this court, were also several youths, who had recently
 had the tufts of their hair tied together, who all dropped their hands
 against their sides, and stood in respectful posture. madame wang then
 led tai-yü by the hand through corridor, running east and west, into
 what was dowager lady chia's back-court. forthwith they entered the door
 of the back suite of rooms, where stood, already in attendance, large
 number of servants, who, when they saw madame wang arrive, set to work
 setting the tables and chairs in order.
 
chia chu's wife, née li, served the eatables, while hsi-feng placed the
 chopsticks, and madame wang brought the soup in. dowager lady chia was
 seated all alone on the divan, in the main part of the apartment, on the
 two sides of which stood four vacant chairs.
 
hsi-feng at once drew tai-yü, meaning to make her sit in the foremost
 chair on the left side, but tai-yü steadily and concedingly declined.
 
"your aunts and sisters-in-law, standing on the right and left," dowager
 lady chia smilingly explained, "won't have their repast in here, and as
 you're guest, it's but proper that you should take that seat."
 
then alone it was that tai-yü asked for permission to sit down, seating
 herself on the chair.
 
madame wang likewise took seat at old lady chia's instance; and the
 three cousins, ying ch'un and the others, having craved for leave to sit
 down, at length came forward, and ying ch'un took the first chair on the
 right, t'an ch'un the second, and hsi ch'un the second on the left.
 waiting maids stood by holding in their hands, flips and finger-bowls
 and napkins, while mrs. li and lady feng, the two of them, kept near the
 table advising them what to eat, and pressing them to help themselves.
 
in the outer apartments, the married women and waiting-maids in
 attendance, were, it is true, very numerous; but not even so much as the
 sound of the cawing of crow could be heard.
 
the repast over, each one was presented by waiting-maid, with tea in a
 small tea tray; but the lin family had all along impressed upon the mind
 of their daughter that in order to show due regard to happiness, and to
 preserve good health, it was essential, after every meal, to wait a
 while, before drinking any tea, so that it should not do any harm to the
 intestines. when, therefore, tai-yü perceived how many habits there were
 in this establishment unlike those which prevailed in her home, she too
 had alternative but to conform herself to certain extent with them.
 upon taking over the cup of tea, servants came once more and presented
 finger-bowls for them to rinse their mouths, and tai-yü also rinsed
 hers; and after they had all again finished washing their hands, tea was
 eventually served second time, and this was, at length, the tea that
 was intended to be drunk.
 
"you can all go," observed dowager lady chia, "and let us alone to have
 chat."
 
madame wang rose as soon as she heard these words, and having made few
 irrelevant remarks, she led the way and left the room along with the two
 ladies, mrs. li and lady feng.
 
dowager lady chia, having inquired of tai-yü what books she was reading,
 "i have just begun reading the four books," tai-yü replied. "what books
 are my cousins reading?" tai-yü went on to ask.
 
"books, you say!" exclaimed dowager lady chia; "why all they know are a
 few characters, that's all."
 
the sentence was barely out of her lips, when continuous sounding of
 footsteps was heard outside, and waiting maid entered and announced
 that pao-yü was coming. tai-yü was speculating in her mind how it was
 that this pao-yü had turned out such good-for-nothing fellow, when he
 happened to walk in.
 
was, in fact, young man of tender years, wearing on his head, to
 hold his hair together, cap of gold of purplish tinge, inlaid with
 precious gems. parallel with his eyebrows was attached circlet,
 embroidered with gold, and representing two dragons snatching pearl.
 wore an archery-sleeved deep red jacket, with hundreds of butterflies
 worked in gold of two different shades, interspersed with flowers; and
 was girded with sash of variegated silk, with clusters of designs, to
 which was attached long tassels; kind of sash worn in the palace. over
 all, had slate-blue fringed coat of japanese brocaded satin, with
 eight bunches of flowers in relief; and wore pair of light blue satin
 white-soled, half-dress court-shoes.
 
his face was like the full moon at mid-autumn; his complexion, like
 morning flowers in spring; the hair along his temples, as if chiselled
 with knife; his eyebrows, as if pencilled with ink; his nose like a
 suspended gallbladder (a well-cut and shapely nose); his eyes like
 vernal waves; his angry look even resembled smile; his glance, even
 when stern, was full of sentiment.
 
round his neck had gold dragon necklet with fringe; also cord
 of variegated silk, to which was attached piece of beautiful jade.
 
as soon as tai-yü became conscious of his presence, she was quite taken
 aback. "how very strange!" she was reflecting in her mind; "it would
 seem as if i had seen him somewhere or other, for his face appears
 extremely familiar to my eyes;" when she noticed pao-yü face dowager
 lady chia and make his obeisance. "go and see your mother and then come
 back," remarked her venerable ladyship; and at once turned round and
 quitted the room.
 
on his return, had already changed his hat and suit. all round his
 head, had fringe of short hair, plaited into small queues, and
 bound with red silk. the queues were gathered up at the crown, and all
 the hair, which had been allowed to grow since his birth, was plaited
 into thick queue, which looked as black and as glossy as lacquer.
 between the crown of the head and the extremity of the queue, hung a
 string of four large pearls, with pendants of gold, representing the
 eight precious things. on his person, wore long silvery-red coat,
 more or less old, bestrewn with embroidery of flowers. had still
 round his neck the necklet, precious gem, amulet of recorded name,
 philacteries, and other ornaments. below were partly visible fir-cone
 coloured brocaded silk pair of trousers, socks spotted with black
 designs, with ornamented edges, and pair of deep red, thick-soled
 shoes.
 
(got up as was now,) his face displayed still whiter appearance, as
 if painted, and his eyes as if they were set off with carnation. as he
 rolled his eyes, they brimmed with love. when gave utterance to
 speech, seemed to smile. but the chief natural pleasing feature was
 mainly centred in the curve of his eyebrows. the ten thousand and one
 fond sentiments, fostered by him during the whole of his existence, were
 all amassed in the corner of his eyes.
 
his outward appearance may have been pleasing to the highest degree, but
 yet it was easy matter to fathom what lay beneath it.
 
there are couple of roundelays, composed by later poet, (after the
 excellent rhythm of the) hsi chiang yueh, which depict pao-yü in most
 adequate manner.
 
the roundelays run as follows:
 
to gloom and passion prone, without rhyme,
 inane and madlike was many time,
 his outer self, forsooth, fine may have been,
 but one wild, howling waste his mind within:
 addled his brain that nothing could see;
 dunce! to read essays so loth to be!
 perverse in bearing, in temper wayward;
 for human censure had regard.
 when rich, wealth to enjoy knew not how;
 when poor, to poverty could not bow.
 alas! what utter waste of lustrous grace!
 to state, to family what disgrace!
 of ne'er-do-wells below was the prime,
 unfilial like him none up to this time.
 ye lads, pampered with sumptuous fare and dress,
 beware! in this youth's footsteps do not press!
 
but to proceed with our story.
 
"you have gone and changed your clothes," observed dowager lady chia,
 "before being introduced to the distant guest. why don't you yet salute
 your cousin?"
 
pao-yü had long ago become aware of the presence of most beautiful
 young lady, who, readily concluded, must be other than the
 daughter of his aunt lin. hastened to advance up to her, and make his
 bow; and after their introduction, resumed his seat, whence he
 minutely scrutinised her features, (which thought) so unlike those of
 all other girls.
 
her two arched eyebrows, thick as clustered smoke, bore certain not
 very pronounced frowning wrinkle. she had pair of eyes, which
 possessed cheerful, and yet one would say, sad expression,
 overflowing with sentiment. her face showed the prints of sorrow stamped
 on her two dimpled cheeks. she was beautiful, but her whole frame was
 the prey of hereditary disease. the tears in her eyes glistened like
 small specks. her balmy breath was so gentle. she was as demure as a
 lovely flower reflected in the water. her gait resembled frail willow,
 agitated by the wind. her heart, compared with that of pi kan, had one
 more aperture of intelligence; while her ailment exceeded (in intensity)
 by three degrees the ailment of hsi-tzu.
 
pao-yü, having concluded his scrutiny of her, put on smile and said,
 "this cousin i have already seen in days gone by."
 
"there you are again with your nonsense," exclaimed lady chia,
 sneeringly; "how could you have seen her before?"
 
"though i may not have seen her, ere this," observed pao-yü with a
 smirk, "yet when i look at her face, it seems so familiar, and to my
 mind, it would appear as if we had been old acquaintances; just as if,
 in fact, we were now meeting after long separation."
 
"that will do! that will do!" remarked dowager lady chia; "such being
 the case, you will be the more intimate."
 
pao-yü, thereupon, went up to tai-yü, and taking seat next to her,
 continued to look at her again with all intentness for good long
 while.
 
"have you read any books, cousin?" asked.
 
"i haven't as yet," replied tai-yü, "read any books, as i have only been
 to school for year; all i know are simply few characters."
 
"what is your worthy name, cousin?" pao-yü went on to ask; whereupon
 tai-yü speedily told him her name.
 
"your style?" inquired pao-yü; to which question tai-yü replied, "i have
 style."
 
"i'll give you style," suggested pao-yü smilingly; "won't the double
 style 'p'in p'in,' 'knitting brows,' do very well?"
 
"from what part of the standard books does that come?" t'an ch'un
 hastily interposed.
 
"it is stated in the thorough research into the state of creation from
 remote ages to the present day," pao-yü went on to explain, "that, in
 the western quarter, there exists stone, called tai, (black,) which
 can be used, in lieu of ink, to blacken the eyebrows with. besides the
 eyebrows of this cousin taper in way, as if they were contracted, so
 that the selection of these two characters is most appropriate, isn't
 it?"
 
"this is just another plagiarism, i fear," observed t'an ch'un, with an
 ironic smirk.
 
"exclusive of the four books," pao-yü remarked smilingly, "the majority
 of works are plagiarised; and is it only i, perchance, who plagiarise?
 have you got any jade or not?" went on to inquire, addressing tai-yü,
 (to the discomfiture) of all who could not make out what meant.
 
"it's because has jade himself," tai-yü forthwith reasoned within
 her mind, "that asks whether i have one or not.--no; i haven't
 one," she replied. "that jade of yours is besides rare object, and how
 could every one have one?"
 
as soon as pao-yü heard this remark, at once burst out in fit of
 his raving complaint, and unclasping the gem, dashed it disdainfully
 on the floor. "rare object, indeed!" shouted, as heaped invective
 on it; "it has idea how to discriminate the excellent from the mean,
 among human beings; and do tell me, has it any perception or not? i too
 can do without this rubbish!"
 
all those, who stood below, were startled; and in body they pressed
 forward, vying with each other as to who should pick up the gem.
 
dowager lady chia was so distressed that she clasped pao-yü in her
 embrace. "you child of wrath," she exclaimed. "when you get into a
 passion, it's easy enough for you to beat and abuse people; but what
 makes you fling away that stem of life?"
 
pao-yü's face was covered with the traces of tears. "all my cousins
 here, senior as well as junior," rejoined, as sobbed, "have no
 gem, and if it's only i to have one, there's fun in it, i maintain!
 and now comes this angelic sort of cousin, and she too has none, so that
 it's clear enough that it is profitable thing."
 
dowager lady chia hastened to coax him. "this cousin of yours," she
 explained, "would, under former circumstances, have come here with a
 jade; and it's because your aunt felt unable, as she lay on her
 death-bed, to reconcile herself to the separation from your cousin, that
 in the absence of any remedy, she forthwith took the gem belonging to
 her (daughter), along with her (in the grave); so that, in the first
 place, by the fulfilment of the rites of burying the living with the
 dead might be accomplished the filial piety of your cousin; and in the
 second place, that the spirit of your aunt might also, for the time
 being, use it to gratify the wish of gazing on your cousin. that's why
 she simply told you that she had jade; for she couldn't very well
 have had any desire to give vent to self-praise. now, how can you ever
 compare yourself with her? and don't you yet carefully and circumspectly
 put it on? mind, your mother may come to know what you have done!"
 
as she uttered these words, she speedily took the jade over from the
 hand of the waiting-maid, and she herself fastened it on for him.
 
when pao-yü heard this explanation, indulged in reflection, but could
 not even then advance any further arguments.
 
nurse came at the moment and inquired about tai-yü's quarters, and
 dowager lady chia at once added, "shift pao-yü along with me, into the
 warm room of my suite of apartments, and put your mistress, miss lin,
 temporarily in the green gauze house; and when the rest of the winter is
 over, and repairs are taken in hand in spring in their rooms, an
 additional wing can be put up for her to take up her quarters in."
 
"my dear ancestor," ventured pao-yü; "the bed i occupy outside the green
 gauze house is very comfortable; and what need is there again for to
 leave it and come and disturb your old ladyship's peace and quiet?"
 
"well, all right," observed dowager lady chia, after some consideration;
 "but let each one of you have nurse, as well as waiting-maid to
 attend on you; the other servants can remain in the outside rooms and
 keep night watch and be ready to answer any call."
 
at an early hour, besides, hsi-feng had sent servant round with grey
 flowered curtain, embroidered coverlets and satin quilts and other such
 articles.
 
tai-yü had brought along with her only two servants; the one was her own
 nurse, dame wang, and the other was young waiting-maid of sixteen,
 whose name was called hsüeh yen. dowager lady chia, perceiving that
 hsüeh yen was too youthful and quite child in her manner, while nurse
 wang was, on the other hand, too aged, conjectured that tai-yü would, in
 all her wants, not have things as she liked, so she detached two
 waiting-maids, who were her own personal attendants, named tzu chüan and
 ying ko, and attached them to tai-yü's service. just as had ying ch'un
 and the other girls, each one of whom had besides the wet nurses of
 their youth, four other nurses to advise and direct them, and exclusive
 of two personal maids to look after their dress and toilette, four or
 five additional young maids to do the washing and sweeping of the rooms
 and the running about backwards and forwards on errands.
 
nurse wang, tzu chüan and other girls entered at once upon their
 attendance on tai-yü in the green gauze rooms, while pao-yü's wet-nurse,
 dame li, together with an elderly waiting-maid, called hsi jen, were on
 duty in the room with the large bed.
 
this hsi jen had also been, originally, one of dowager lady chia's
 servant-girls. her name was in days gone by, chen chu. as her venerable
 ladyship, in her tender love for pao-yü, had feared that pao-yü's
 servant girls were not equal to their duties, she readily handed her to
 pao-yü, as she had hitherto had experience of how sincere and
 considerate she was at heart.
 
pao-yü, knowing that her surname was at one time hua, and having once
 seen in some verses of an ancient poet, the line "the fragrance of
 flowers wafts itself into man," lost time in explaining the fact to
 dowager lady chia, who at once changed her name into hsi jen.
 
this hsi jen had several simple traits. while in attendance upon dowager
 lady chia, in her heart and her eyes there was one but her venerable
 ladyship, and her alone; and now in her attendance upon pao-yü, her
 heart and her eyes were again full of pao-yü, and him alone. but as
 pao-yü was of perverse temperament and did not heed her repeated
 injunctions, she felt at heart exceedingly grieved.
 
at night, after nurse li had fallen asleep, seeing that in the inner
 chambers, tai-yü, ying ko and the others had not as yet retired to rest,
 she disrobed herself, and with gentle step walked in.
 
"how is it, miss," she inquired smiling, "that you have not turned in as
 yet?"
 
tai-yü at once put on smile. "sit down, sister," she rejoined,
 pressing her to take seat. hsi jen sat on the edge of the bed.
 
"miss lin," interposed ying ko smirkingly, "has been here in an awful
 state of mind! she has cried so to herself, that her eyes were flooded,
 as soon as she dried her tears. 'it's only to-day that i've come,' she
 said, 'and i've already been the cause of the outbreak of your young
 master's failing. now had broken that jade, as hurled it on the
 ground, wouldn't it have been my fault? hence it was that she was so
 wounded at heart, that i had all the trouble in the world, before i
 could appease her."
 
"desist at once, miss! don't go on like this," hsi jen advised her;
 "there will, i fear, in the future, happen things far more strange and
 ridiculous than this; and if you allow yourself to be wounded and
 affected to such degree by conduct such as his, you will, i
 apprehend, suffer endless wounds and anguish; so be quick and dispel
 this over-sensitive nature!"
 
"what you sisters advise me," replied tai-yü, "i shall bear in mind, and
 it will be all right."
 
they had another chat, which lasted for some time, before they at length
 retired to rest for the night.
 
the next day, (she and her cousins) got up at an early hour and went
 over to pay their respects to dowager lady chia, after which upon coming
 to madame wang's apartments, they happened to find madame wang and
 hsi-feng together, opening the letters which had arrived from chin ling.
 there were also in the room two married women, who had been sent from
 madame wang's elder brother's wife's house to deliver message.
 
tai-yü was, it is true, not aware of what was up, but t'an ch'un and the
 others knew that they were discussing the of her mother's sister,
 married in the hsüeh family, in the city of chin ling, cousin of
 theirs, hsüeh p'an, who relying upon his wealth and influence had, by
 assaulting man, committed homicide, and who was now to be tried in the
 court of the ying t'ien prefecture.
 
her maternal uncle, wang tzu-t'eng, had now, on the receipt of the
 tidings, despatched messengers to bring over the news to the chia
 family. but the next chapter will explain what was the ultimate issue of
 the wish entertained in this mansion to send for the hsüeh family to
 come to the capital.
 



chapter iv.
 
an ill-fated girl happens to meet an ill-fated young man.
 the hu lu bonze adjudicates the hu lu case.
 

tai-yü, for we shall now return to our story, having come, along with
 her cousin to madame wang's apartments, found madame wang discussing
 certain domestic occurrences with the messengers, who had arrived from
 her elder brother's wife's home, and conversing also about the case of
 homicide, in which the family of her mother's sister had become
 involved, and other such relevant topics. perceiving how pressing and
 perplexing were the matters in which madame wang was engaged, the young
 ladies promptly left her apartments, and came over to the rooms of their
 widow sister-in-law, mrs. li.
 
this mrs. li had originally been the spouse of chia chu. although chu
 had died at an early age, had the good fortune of leaving behind him
 son, to whom the name of chia lan was given. was, at this period,
 just in his fifth year, and had already entered school, and applied
 himself to books.
 
this mrs. li was also the daughter of an official of note in chin ling.
 her father's name was li shou-chung, who had, at one time, been imperial
 libationer. among his kindred, men as well as women had all devoted
 themselves to poetry and letters; but ever since li shou-chung continued
 the line of succession, readily asserted that the absence of literary
 attainments in his daughter was indeed virtue, so that it soon came
 about that she did not apply herself in real earnest to learning; with
 the result that all she studied were some parts of the "four books for
 women," and the "memoirs of excellent women," that all she read did not
 extend beyond limited number of characters, and that all she committed
 to memory were the examples of these few worthy female characters of
 dynasties of yore; while she attached special importance to spinning and
 female handiwork. to this reason is to be assigned the name selected for
 her, of li wan (li, the weaver), and the style of kung ts'ai (palace
 sempstress).
 
hence it was that, though this li wan still continued, after the loss of
 her mate, while she was as yet in the spring of her life, to live amidst
 affluence and luxury, she nevertheless resembled in every respect a
 block of rotten wood or dead ashes. she had inclination whatsoever to
 inquire after anything or to listen to anything; while her sole and
 exclusive thought was to wait upon her relatives and educate her son;
 and, in addition to this, to teach her young sisters-in-law to do
 needlework and to read aloud.
 
tai-yü was, it is true, at this period living as guest in the chia
 mansion, where she certainly had the several young ladies to associate
 with her, but, outside her aged father, (she thought) there was really
 need for her to extend affection to any of the rest.
 
but we will now speak of chia yü-ts'un. having obtained the appointment
 of prefect of ying t'ien, had sooner arrived at his post than a
 charge of manslaughter was laid before his court. this had arisen from
 some rivalry between two parties in the purchase of slave-girl, either
 of whom would not yield his right; with the result that serious
 assault occurred, which ended in homicide.
 
yü-ts'un had, with all promptitude, the servants of the plaintiffs
 brought before him, and subjected them to an examination.
 
"the victim of the assault," the plaintiffs deposed, "was your servants'
 master. having on certain day, purchased servant-girl, she
 unexpectedly turned out to be girl who had been carried away and sold
 by kidnapper. this kidnapper had, first of all, got hold of our
 family's money, and our master had given out that would on the third
 day, which was propitious day, take her over into the house, but
 this kidnapper stealthily sold her over again to the hsüeh family. when
 we came to know of this, we went in search of the seller to lay hold of
 him, and bring back the girl by force. but the hsüeh party has been all
 along _the_ bully of chin ling, full of confidence in his wealth,
 full of presumption on account of his prestige; and his arrogant menials
 in body seized our master and beat him to death. the murderous master
 and his crew have all long ago made good their escape, leaving trace
 behind them, while there only remain several parties not concerned in
 the affair. your servants have for whole year lodged complaints, but
 there has been one to do our cause justice, and we therefore implore
 your lordship to have the bloodstained criminals arrested, and thus
 conduce to the maintenance of humanity and benevolence; and the living,
 as well as the dead, will feel boundless gratitude for this heavenly
 bounty."
 
when yü-ts'un heard their appeal, flew into fiery rage. "what!" he
 exclaimed. "how could case of such gravity have taken place as the
 murder of man, and the culprits have been allowed to run away
 scot-free, without being arrested? issue warrants, and despatch
 constables to at once lay hold of the relatives of the bloodstained
 criminals and bring them to be examined by means of torture."
 
thereupon espied retainer, who was standing by the judgment-table,
 wink at him, signifying that should not issue the warrants. yü-t'sun
 gave way to secret suspicion, and felt compelled to desist.
 
withdrawing from the court-room, retired into private chamber, from
 whence dismissed his followers, only keeping this single retainer to
 wait upon him.
 
the retainer speedily advanced and paid his obeisance. "your worship,"
 said smiling, "has persistently been rising in official honours, and
 increasing in wealth so that, in the course of about eight or nine
 years, you have forgotten me."
 
"your face is, however, extremely familiar," observed yü-ts'un, "but i
 cannot, for the moment, recall who you are."
 
"honourable people forget many things," remarked the retainer, as he
 smiled. "what! have you even forgotten the place where you started in
 life? and do you not remember what occurred, in years gone by, in the hu
 lu temple?"
 
yü-ts'un was filled with extreme astonishment; and past events then
 began to dawn upon him.
 
the fact is that this retainer had been at one time young priest in
 the hu lu temple; but as, after its destruction by fire, had place
 to rest his frame, remembered how light and easy was, after all, this
 kind of occupation, and being unable to reconcile himself to the
 solitude and quiet of temple, accordingly availed himself of his
 years, which were as yet few, to let his hair grow, and become a
 retainer.
 
yü-ts'un had had idea that it was he. hastily taking his hand in his,
 smilingly observed, "you are, indeed, an old acquaintance!" and then
 pressed him to take seat, so as to have chat with more ease, but the
 retainer would not presume to sit down.
 
"friendships," yü-ts'un remarked, putting on smiling expression,
 "contracted in poor circumstances should not be forgotten! this is a
 private room; so that if you sat down, what would it matter?"
 
the retainer thereupon craved permission to take seat, and sat down
 gingerly, all awry.
 
"why did you, short while back," yü-ts'un inquired, "not allow to
 issue the warrants?"
 
"your illustrious office," replied the retainer, "has brought your
 worship here, and is it likely you have not transcribed some philactery
 of your post in this province!"
 
"what is an office-philactery?" asked yü-ts'un with alacrity.
 
"now-a-days," explained the retainer, "those who become local officers
 provide themselves invariably with secret list, in which are entered
 the names and surnames of the most influential and affluent gentry of
 note in the province. this is in vogue in every province. should
 inadvertently, at any moment, one give umbrage to persons of this
 status, why, not only office, but i fear even one's life, it would be
 difficult to preserve. that's why these lists are called
 office-philacteries. this hsüeh family, just while back spoken of, how
 could your worship presume to provoke? this case in question affords no
 difficulties whatever in the way of settlement; but the prefects, who
 have held office before you, have all, by doing violence to the feelings
 and good name of these people, come to the end they did."
 
as uttered these words, produced, from inside purse which had
 handy, transcribed office-philactery, which handed over to
 yü-ts'un; who upon perusal, found it full of trite and unpolished
 expressions of public opinion, with regard to the leading clans and
 notable official families in that particular district. they ran as
 follows:
 
the "chia" family is not "chia," myth; white jade form the halls; gold
 compose their horses! the "a fang" palace is three hundred li in extent,
 but is fit residence for "shih" of chin ling. the eastern seas lack
 white jade beds, and the "lung wang," king of the dragons, has come to
 ask for one of the chin ling wang, (mr. wang of chin ling.) in a
 plenteous year, snow, (hsüeh,) is very plentiful; their pearls and gems
 are like sand, their gold like iron.
 
scarcely had yü-ts'un done reading, when suddenly was heard the
 announcement, communicated by the beating of gong, that mr. wang had
 come to pay his respects.
 
yü-ts'un hastily adjusted his official clothes and hat, and went out of
 the room to greet and receive the visitor. returning after short while
 proceeded to question the retainer (about what had been perusing.)
 
"these four families," explained the retainer, "are all interlaced by
 ties of relationship, so that if you offend one, you offend all; if you
 honour one, you honour all. for support and protection, they all have
 those to take care of their interests! now this hsüeh, who is charged
 with homicide, is indeed the hsüeh implied by 'in plenteous year,
 (hsüeh,) snow, is very plentiful.' in fact, not only has these three
 families to rely upon, but his (father's) old friends, and his own
 relatives and friends are both to be found in the capital, as well as
 abroad in the provinces; and they are, what is more, not few in number.
 who is it then that your worship purposes having arrested?"
 
when yü-ts'un had heard these remarks, forthwith put on smile and
 inquired of the retainer, "if what you say be true, how is then this
 lawsuit to be settled? are you also perchance well aware of the place of
 retreat of this homicide?"
 
"i don't deceive your worship," the retainer ventured smiling, "when i
 say that not only do i know the hiding-place of this homicide, but that
 i also am acquainted with the man who kidnapped and sold the girl; i
 likewise knew full well the poor devil and buyer, now deceased. but
 wait, and i'll tell your worship all, with full details. this person,
 who succumbed to the assault, was the of minor gentry. his name
 was feng yüan. his father and mother are both deceased, and has
 likewise brothers. looked after some scanty property in order to
 eke out living. his age was eighteen or nineteen; and had strong
 penchant for men's, and not much for women's society. but this was too
 the retribution (for sins committed) in previous existence! for
 coming, by strange coincidence, in the way of this kidnapper, who was
 selling the maid, straightway at glance fell in love with this
 girl, and made up his mind to purchase her and make her his second wife;
 entering an oath not to associate with any male friends, nor even to
 marry another girl. and so much in earnest was in this matter that he
 had to wait until after the third day before she could enter his
 household (so as to make the necessary preparations for the marriage).
 but who would have foreseen the issue? this kidnapper quietly disposed
 of her again by sale to the hsüeh family; his intention being to pocket
 the price-money from both parties, and effect his escape. contrary to
 his calculations, couldn't after all run away in time, and the two
 buyers laid hold of him and beat him, till was half dead; but neither
 of them would take his coin back, each insisting upon the possession of
 the girl. but do you think that young gentleman, mr. hsüeh, would yield
 his claim to her person? why, at once summoned his servants and bade
 them have recourse to force; and, taking this young man feng, they
 assailed him till they made mincemeat of him. was then carried back
 to his home, where finally died after the expiry of three days. this
 young mr. hsüeh had previously chosen day, on which meant to set
 out for the capital, and though had beaten the young man feng to
 death, and carried off the girl, nevertheless behaved in the manner
 of man who had had concern in the affair. and all gave his mind
 to was to take his family and go along on his way; but not in any wise
 in order to evade (the consequences) of this (occurrence). this case of
 homicide, (he looked upon) as most trivial and insignificant matter,
 which, (he thought), his brother and servants, who were on the spot,
 would be enough to settle. but, however, enough of this person. now does
 your worship know who this girl is who was sold?"
 
"how could i possibly know?" answered yü-ts'un.
 
"and yet," remarked the retainer, as laughed coldly, "this is a
 person to whom you are indebted for great obligations; for she is one
 else than the daughter of mr. chen, who lived next door to the hu lu
 temple. her infant name is 'ying lien.'"
 
"what! is it really she?" exclaimed yü-ts'un full of surprise. "i heard
 that she had been kidnapped, ever since she was five years old; but has
 she only been sold recently?"
 
"kidnappers of this kind," continued the retainer, "only abduct infant
 girls, whom they bring up till they reach the age of twelve or thirteen,
 when they take them into strange districts and dispose of them through
 their agents. in days gone by, we used daily to coax this girl, ying
 lien, to romp with us, so that we got to be exceedingly friendly. hence
 it is that though, with the lapse of seven or eight years, her mien has
 assumed more surpassingly lovely appearance, her general features
 have, on the other hand, undergone change; and this is why i can
 recognise her. besides, in the centre of her two eyebrows, she had a
 spot, of the size of grain of rice, of carnation colour, which she has
 had ever since she was born into the world. this kidnapper, it also
 happened, rented my house to live in; and on certain day, on which the
 kidnapper was not at home, i even set her few questions. she said,
 'that the kidnapper had so beaten her, that she felt intimidated, and
 couldn't on any account, venture to speak out; simply averring that the
 kidnapper was her own father, and that, as had funds to repay his
 debts, had consequently disposed of her by sale!' i tried time after
 time to induce her to answer me, but she again gave way to tears and
 added more than: 'i don't really remember anything of my youth.' of
 this, anyhow, there can be doubt; on certain day the young man feng
 and the kidnapper met, said the money was paid down; but as the
 kidnapper happened to be intoxicated, ying lien exclaimed, as she
 sighed: 'my punishment has this day been consummated!' later on again,
 when she heard that young feng would, after three days, have her taken
 over to his house, she once more underwent change and put on such a
 sorrowful look that, unable to brook the sight of it, i waited till the
 kidnapper went out, when i again told my wife to go and cheer her by
 representing to her that this mr. feng's fixed purpose to wait for a
 propitious day, on which to come and take her over, was ample proof that
 would not look upon her as servant-girl. 'furthermore,' (explained
 my wife to her), 'he is sort of person exceedingly given to fast
 habits, and has at home ample means to live upon, so that if, besides,
 with his extreme aversion to women, actually purchases you now, at a
 fancy price, you should be able to guess the issue, without any
 explanation. you have to bear suspense only for two or three days, and
 what need is there to be sorrowful and dejected?' after these
 assurances, she became somewhat composed, flattering herself that she
 would from henceforth have home of her own.
 
"but who would believe that the world is but full of disappointments! on
 the succeeding day, it came about that the kidnapper again sold her to
 the hsüeh family! had disposed of her to any other party, harm
 would anyhow have resulted; but this young gentleman hsüeh, who is
 nicknamed by all, 'the foolish and overbearing prince,' is the most
 perverse and passionate being in the whole world. what is more, he
 throws money away as if it were dust. the day on which gave the
 thrashing with blows like falling leaves and flowing water, dragged
 (_lit_. pull alive, drag dead) ying lien away more dead than alive,
 by sheer force, and one, even up to this date, is aware whether she
 be among the dead or the living. this young feng had spell of empty
 happiness; for (not only) was his wish not fulfilled, but on the
 contrary spent money and lost his life; and was not this lamentable
 case?"
 
when yü-ts'un heard this account also heaved sigh. "this was
 indeed," observed, "a retribution in store for them! their encounter
 was likewise not accidental; for had it been, how was it that this feng
 yüan took fancy to ying lien?
 
"this ying lien had, during all these years, to endure much harsh
 treatment from the hands of the kidnapper, and had, at length, obtained
 the means of escape; and being besides full of warm feeling, had he
 actually made her his wife, and had they come together, the event would
 certainly have been happy; but, as luck would have it, there occurred
 again this contretemps.
 
"this hsüeh is, it is true, more laden with riches and honours than feng
 was, but when we bear in mind what kind of man is certainly, with
 his large bevy of handmaids, and his licentious and inordinate habits,
 cannot ever be held equal to feng yüan, who had set his heart upon one
 person! this may appositely be termed fantastic sentimental destiny,
 which, by strange coincidence, befell couple consisting of an
 ill-fated young fellow and girl! but why discuss third parties? the only
 thing now is how to decide this case, so as to put things right."
 
"your worship," remarked the retainer smiling, "displayed, in years gone
 by, such great intelligence and decision, and how is it that today you,
 on the contrary, become person without any resources! your servant has
 heard that the promotion of your worship to fill up this office is due
 to the exertions of the chia and wang families; and as this hsüeh p'an
 is relative of the chia mansion, why doesn't your worship take your
 craft along with the stream, and bring, by the performance of a
 kindness, this case to an issue, so that you may again in days to come,
 be able to go and face the two dukes chia and wang?"
 
"what you suggest," replied yü-ts'un, "is, of course, right enough; but
 this case involves human life, and honoured as i have been, by his
 majesty the emperor, by restoration to office, and selection to an
 appointment, how can i at the very moment, when i may strain all my
 energies to show my gratitude, by reason of private consideration, set
 the laws at nought? this is thing which i really haven't the courage
 to do."
 
"what your worship says is naturally right and proper," remarked the
 retainer at these words, smiling sarcastically, "but at the present
 stage of the world, such things cannot be done. haven't you heard the
 saying of man of old to the effect that great men take action suitable
 to the times. 'he who presses,' adds, 'towards what is auspicious and
 avoids what is inauspicious is perfect man.' from what your worship
 says, not only you couldn't, by any display of zeal, repay your
 obligation to his majesty, but, what is more, your own life you will
 find it difficult to preserve. there are still three more considerations
 necessary to insure safe settlement."
 
yü-ts'un drooped his head for considerable time.
 
"what is there in your idea to be done?" at length inquired.
 
"your servant," responded the retainer, "has already devised most
 excellent plan. it's this: to-morrow, when your lordship sits in court,
 you should, merely for form's sake, make much ado, by despatching
 letters and issuing warrants for the arrest of the culprits. the
 murderer will naturally not be forthcoming; and as the plaintiffs will
 be strong in their displeasure, you will of course have some members of
 the clan of the hsüeh family, together with few servants and others,
 taken into custody, and examined under torture, when your servant will
 be behind the scenes to bring matters to settlement, by bidding them
 report that the victim had succumbed to sudden ailment, and by urging
 the whole number of the kindred, as well as the headmen of the place, to
 hand in declaration to that effect. your worship can aver that you
 understand perfectly how to write charms in dust, and conjure the
 spirit; having had an altar, covered with dust, placed in the court, you
 should bid the military and people to come and look on to their heart's
 content. your worship can give out that the divining spirit has
 declared: 'that the deceased, feng yüan, and hsüeh p'an had been enemies
 in former life, that having now met in the narrow road, their
 destinies were consummated; that hsüeh p'an has, by this time,
 contracted some indescribable disease and perished from the effects of
 the persecution of the spirit of feng.' that as the calamity had
 originated entirely from the action of the kidnapper, exclusive of
 dealing with the kidnapper according to law, the rest need not be
 interfered with, and so on. your servant will be in the background to
 speak to the kidnapper and urge him to make full confession; and when
 people find that the response of the divining spirit harmonizes with the
 statements of the kidnapper, they will, as matter of course, entertain
 suspicion.
 
"the hsüeh family have plenty of money, so that if your worship
 adjudicates that they should pay five hundred, they can afford it, or
 one thousand will also be within their means; and this sum can be handed
 to the feng family to meet the outlay of burning incense and burial
 expenses. the feng family are, besides, people of not much consequence,
 and (the fuss made by them) being simply for money, they too will, when
 they have got the cash in hand, have nothing more to say. but may it
 please your worship to consider carefully this plan and see what you
 think of it?"
 
"it isn't safe course! it isn't safe course!" yü-ts'un observed as
 smiled. "let further think and deliberate; and possibly by
 succeeding in suppressing public criticism, the matter might also be
 settled."
 
these two closed their consultation by fixed determination, and the
 next day, when sat in judgment, marked off whole company of the
 plaintiffs as well as of the accused, as were mentioned by name, and had
 them brought before him. yü-ts'un examined them with additional
 minuteness, and discovered in point of fact, that the inmates of the
 feng family were extremely few, that they merely relied upon this charge
 with the idea of obtaining some compensation for joss-sticks and
 burials; and that the hsüeh family, presuming on their prestige and
 confident of patronage, had been obstinate in the refusal to make any
 mutual concession, with the result that confusion had supervened, and
 that decision had been arrived at.
 
following readily the bent of his feelings, yü-ts'un disregarded the
 laws, and adjudicated this suit in random way; and as the feng family
 came in for considerable sum, with which to meet the expense for
 incense and the funeral, they had, after all, not very much to say (in
 the way of objections.)
 
with all despatch, yü-ts'un wrote and forwarded two letters, one to chia
 cheng, and the other to wang tzu-t'eng, at that time commander-in-chief
 of metropolitan division, simply informing them: that the case, in
 which their worthy nephew was concerned, had come to close, and that
 there was need for them to give way to any extreme solicitude.
 
this case had been settled through the exclusive action of the young
 priest of the hu lu temple, now an official retainer; and yü-ts'un,
 apprehending, on the other hand, lest might in the presence of
 others, divulge the circumstances connected with the days gone by, when
 was in state of penury, naturally felt very unhappy in his mind.
 but at later period, succeeded, by ultimately finding in him some
 shortcoming, and deporting him to far-away place, in setting his fears
 at rest.
 
but we will put yü-ts'un on one side, and refer to the young man hsüeh,
 who purchased ying lien, and assaulted feng yuan to death.
 
too was native of chin ling and belonged to family literary
 during successive generations; but this young hsüeh had recently, when
 of tender age, lost his father, and his widowed mother out of pity for
 his being the only male issue and fatherless child, could not help
 doating on him and indulging him to such degree, that when he, in
 course of time, grew up to years of manhood, was good for nothing.
 
in their home, furthermore, was the wealth of millionaire, and they
 were, at this time, in receipt of an income from his majesty's privy
 purse, for the purvey of various articles.
 
this young hsüeh went at school under the name of p'an. his style was
 wen ch'i. his natural habits were extravagant; his language haughty and
 supercilious. had, of course, also been to school, but all knew
 was limited number of characters, and those not well. the whole day
 long, his sole delight was in cock-fighting and horse-racing, rambling
 over hills and doing the sights.
 
though purveyor, by imperial appointment, had not the least idea of
 anything relating to matters of business or of the world. all was
 good for was: to take advantage of the friendships enjoyed by his
 grandfather in days of old, to present himself at the board of revenue
 to perfunctorily sign his name and to draw the allowance and rations;
 while the rest of his affairs he, needless to say, left his partners and
 old servants of the family to manage for him.
 
his widowed mother, miss wang, was the youngest sister of wang
 tzu-t'eng, whose present office was that of commander-in-chief of a
 metropolitan division; and was, with madame wang, the spouse of chia
 cheng, of the jung kuo mansion, sisters born of one mother. she was, in
 this year, more or less forty years of age and had only one son: this
 hsüeh p'an.
 
she also had daughter, who was two years younger than hsüeh p'an, and
 whose infant name was pao ch'ai. she was beautiful in appearance, and
 elegant and refined in deportment. in days gone by, when her father
 lived, was extremely fond of this girl, and had her read books and
 study characters, so that, as compared with her brother, she was
 actually hundred times his superior. having become aware, ever since
 her father's death, that her brother could not appease the anguish of
 her mother's heart, she at once dispelled all thoughts of books, and
 gave her sole mind to needlework, to the menage and other such concerns,
 so as to be able to participate in her mother's sorrow, and to bear the
 fatigue in lieu of her.
 
as of late the emperor on the throne held learning and propriety in high
 esteem, his majesty called together and singled out talent and ability,
 upon which deigned to display exceptional grace and favour. besides
 the number called forth from private life and chosen as imperial
 secondary wives, the daughters of families of hereditary official status
 and renown were without exception, reported by name to the authorities,
 and communicated to the board, in anticipation of the selection for
 maids in waiting to the imperial princesses and daughters of imperial
 princes in their studies, and for filling up the offices of persons of
 eminence, to urge them to become excellent.
 
ever since the death of hsüeh p'an's father, the various assistants,
 managers and partners, and other employes in the respective provinces,
 perceiving how youthful hsüeh p'an was in years, and how much lacked
 worldly experience, readily availed themselves of the time to begin
 swindling and defrauding. the business, carried on in various different
 places in the capital, gradually also began to fall off and to show a
 deficit.
 
hsüeh p'an had all along heard that the capital was the _one_ place
 for gaieties, and was just entertaining the idea of going on visit,
 when eagerly jumped at the opportunity (that presented itself,) first
 of all to escort his sister, who was going to wait for the selection, in
 the second place to see his relatives, and in the third to enter
 personally the capital, (professedly) to settle up long-standing
 accounts, and to make arrangements for new outlays, but, in reality,
 with the sole purpose of seeing the life and splendour of the
 metropolis.
 
therefore, had, at an early period, got ready his baggage and small
 luggage, as well as the presents for relatives and friends, things of
 every description of local production, presents in acknowledgment of
 favours received, and other such effects, and was about to choose a
 day to start on his journey when unexpectedly came in the way of the
 kidnapper who offered ying lien for sale. as soon as hsüeh p'an saw how
 _distinguée_ ying lien was in her appearance, formed the
 resolution of buying her; and when encountered feng yüan, come with
 the object of depriving him of her, in the assurance of superiority,
 called his sturdy menials together, who set upon feng yüan and beat him
 to death. forthwith collecting all the affairs of the household, and
 entrusting them one by one to the charge of some members of the clan and
 several elderly servants of the family, promptly took his mother,
 sister and others and after all started on his distant journey, while
 the charge of homicide he, however, treated as child's play, flattering
 himself that if spent few filthy pieces of money, there was no
 doubt as to its settlement.
 
had been on his journey how many days, had not reckoned, when, on
 certain day, as they were about to enter the capital, furthermore
 heard that his maternal uncle, wang tzu-t'eng, had been raised to the
 rank of supreme governor of nine provinces, and had been honoured with
 an imperial command to leave the capital and inspect the frontiers.
 
hsüeh p'an was at heart secretly elated. "i was just lamenting," he
 thought, "that on my visit to the capital, i would have my maternal
 uncle to exercise control over me, and that i wouldn't be able to gambol
 and frisk to my heart's content, but now that is leaving the capital,
 on promotion, it's evident that heaven accomplishes man's wishes."
 
as consequently held consultation with his mother; "though we have,"
 argued, "several houses of our own in the capital, yet for these last
 ten years or so, there has been one to live in them, and the people
 charged with the looking after them must unavoidably have stealthily
 rented them to some one or other. it's therefore needful to let servants
 go ahead to sweep and get the place in proper order, before we can very
 well go ourselves."
 
"what need is there to go to such trouble?" retorted his mother; "the
 main object of our present visit to the capital is first of all to pay
 our respects to our relatives and friends; and it is, either at your
 elder uncle's, my brother's place, or at your other uncle's, my sister's
 husband's home, both of which families' houses are extremely spacious,
 that we can put up provisionally, and by and bye, at our ease, we can
 send servants to make our house tidy. now won't this be considerable
 saving of trouble?"
 
"my uncle, your brother," suggested hsüeh p'an, "has just been raised to
 an appointment in an outside province, so that, of course, in his house,
 things must be topsy-turvey, on account of his departure; and should we
 betake ourselves, like hive of bees and long trail, to him for
 shelter; won't we appear very inconsiderate?"
 
"your uncle," remarked his mother, "is, it is true, going on promotion,
 but there's besides the house of your aunt, my sister. what is more,
 during these last few years from both your uncle's and aunt's have, time
 after time, been sent messages, and letters forwarded, asking us to come
 over; and now that we've come, is it likely, though your uncle is busy
 with his preparations to start on his journey, that your aunt of the
 chia family won't do all she can to press us to stay? besides, were we
 to have our house got ready in scramble, won't it make people think it
 strange? i however know your idea very well that were we kept to stay at
 your uncle's and aunt's, you won't escape being under strict restraint,
 unlike what would be the case were we to live in our own house, as you
 would be free then to act as you please! such being the case, go, on
 your own account, and choose some place to take up your quarters in,
 while i myself, who have been separated from your aunt and cousins for
 these several years, would however like to stay with them for few
 days; and i'll go along with your sister and look up your aunt at her
 home. what do you say; will this suit you or not?"
 
hsüeh p'an, upon hearing his mother speak in this strain, knew well
 enough that could not bring her round from her determination; and he
 had help but to issue the necessary directions to the servants to
 make straight for the jung kuo mansion. madame wang had by this time
 already come to know that in the lawsuit, in which hsüeh p'an was
 concerned, chia yü-ts'un had fortunately intervened and lent his good
 offices, and was at length more composed in her mind. but when she again
 saw that her eldest brother had been advanced to post on the frontier,
 she was just deploring that, deprived of the intercourse of the
 relatives of her mother's family, how doubly lonely she would feel;
 when, after the lapse of few days, some one of the household brought
 the unexpected announcement that "our lady, your sister, has, with the
 young gentleman, the young lady and her whole household, entered the
 capital and have dismounted from their vehicles outside the main
 entrance." this news so delighted madame wang that she rushed out, with
 few attendants, to greet them in the large entrance hall, and brought
 mrs. hsüeh and the others into her house.
 
the two sisters were now reunited, at an advanced period of their lives,
 so that mixed feelings of sorrow and joy thronged together, but on these
 it is, of course, needless to dilate.
 
after conversing for time on what had occurred, subsequent to their
 separation, madame wang took them to pay their obeisance to dowager lady
 chia. they then handed over the various kinds of presents and indigenous
 articles, and after the whole family had been introduced, banquet was
 also spread to greet the guests.
 
hsüeh p'an, having paid his respects to chia cheng and chia lien, was
 likewise taken to see chia she, chia chen and the other members.
 
chia cheng sent messenger to tell madame wang that "'aunt' hsüeh had
 already seen many springs and autumns, while their nephew was of tender
 age, with experience, so that there was every fear, were to live
 outside, that something would again take place. in the south-east corner
 of our compound," (he sent word,) "there are in the pear fragrance
 court, over ten apartments, all of which are vacant and lying idle; and
 were we to tell the servants to sweep them, and invite 'aunt' hsüeh and
 the young gentleman and lady to take up their quarters there, it would
 be an extremely wise thing."
 
madame wang had in fact been entertaining the wish to keep them to live
 with them, when dowager lady chia also sent some one to say that, "mrs.
 hsüeh should be asked to put up in the mansion in order that greater
 friendliness should exist between them all."
 
mrs. hsüeh herself had all along been desirous to live in one place with
 her relatives, so as to be able to keep certain check over her son,
 fearing that, if they lived in separate house outside, the natural
 bent of his habits would run riot, and that some calamity would be
 brought on; and she therefore, there and then, expressed her sense of
 appreciation, and accepted the invitation. she further privately told
 madame wang in clear terms, that every kind of daily expense and general
 contribution would have to be entirely avoided and withdrawn as that
 would be the only thing to justify her to make any protracted stay. and
 madame wang aware that she had, in her home, difficulty in this line,
 promptly in fact complied with her wishes.
 
from this date it was that "aunt" hsüeh and her children took up their
 quarters in the pear fragrance court.
 
this court of pear fragrance had, we must explain, been at one time used
 as place for the quiet retirement of the duke jung in his advanced
 years. it was on small scale, but ingeniously laid out. there were, at
 least, over ten structures. the front halls and the back houses were all
 in perfect style. there was separate door giving on to the street, and
 the people of the household of hsüeh p'an used this door to go in and
 out. at the south-west quarter, there was also side door, which
 communicated with narrow roadway. beyond this narrow road, was the
 eastern court of madame wang's principal apartment; so that every day,
 either after her repast, or in the evening, mrs. hsüeh would readily
 come over and converse, on one thing and another, with dowager lady
 chia, or have chat with madame wang; while pao-ch'ai came together,
 day after day, with tai yü, ying-ch'un, her sisters and the other girls,
 either to read, to play chess, or to do needlework, and the pleasure
 which they derived was indeed perfect.
 
hsüeh p'an however had all along from the first instance, been loth to
 live in the chia mansion, as dreaded that with the discipline
 enforced by his uncle, would not be able to be his own master; but
 his mother had made up her mind so positively to remain there, and what
 was more, every one in the chia mansion was most pressing in their
 efforts to keep them, that there was alternative for him but to take
 up his quarters temporarily there, while at the same time directed
 servants to go and sweep the apartments of their own house, with view
 that they should move into them when they were ready.
 
but, contrary to expectation, after they had been in their quarters for
 not over month, hsüeh p'an came to be on intimate relations with all
 the young men among the kindred of the chia mansion, the half of whom
 were extravagant in their habits, so that great was, of course, his
 delight to frequent them. to-day, they would come together to drink
 wine; the next day to look at flowers. they even assembled to gamble, to
 dissipate and to go everywhere and anywhere; leading, with all their
 enticements, hsüeh p'an so far astray, that became far worse, by a
 hundred times, than was hitherto.
 
although it must be conceded that chia cheng was in the education of his
 children quite correct, and in the control of his family quite
 systematic, yet in the first place, the clan was so large and the
 members so numerous, that was unable to attend to the entire
 supervision; and, in the second place, the head of the family, at this
 period, was chia chen, who, as the eldest grandchild of the ning
 mansion, had likewise now come into the inheritance of the official
 status, with the result that all matters connected with the clan
 devolved upon his sole and exclusive control. in the third place, public
 as well as private concerns were manifold and complex, and being man
 of negligent disposition, estimated ordinary affairs of so little
 consequence that any respite from his official duties devoted to no
 more than the study of books and the playing of chess.
 
furthermore, this pear fragrance court was separated by two rows of
 buildings from his quarters and was also provided with separate door
 opening into the street, so that, being able at their own heart's desire
 to go out and to come in, these several young fellows could well indulge
 their caprices, and gratify the bent of their minds.
 
hence it was that hsüeh p'an, in course of time gradually extinguished
 from his memory every idea of shifting their quarters.
 
but what transpired, on subsequent days, the following chapter will
 explain.
 



chapter v.
 
the spirit of chia pao-yü visits the confines of the great void.
 the monitory vision fairy expounds, in ballads, the dream of the red
 chamber.
 

having in the fourth chapter explained, to some degree, the
 circumstances attending the settlement of the mother and children of the
 hsüeh family in the jung mansion, and other incidental matters, we will
 now revert to lin tai-yü.
 
ever since her arrival in the jung mansion, dowager lady chia showed her
 the highest sympathy and affection, so that in everything connected with
 sleeping, eating, rising and accommodation she was on the same footing
 as pao-yü; with the result that ying ch'un, hsi ch'un and t'an ch'un,
 her three granddaughters, had after all to take back seat. in fact,
 the intimate and close friendliness and love which sprung up between the
 two persons pao-yü and tai-yü, was, in the same degree, of an
 exceptional kind, as compared with those existing between the others. by
 daylight they were wont to walk together, and to sit together. at night,
 they would desist together, and rest together. really it was case of
 harmony in language and concord in ideas, of the consistency of varnish
 or of glue, (a close friendship), when at this unexpected juncture there
 came this girl, hsüeh pao-ch'ai, who, though not very much older in
 years (than the others), was, nevertheless, in manner so correct, and in
 features so beautiful that the consensus of opinion was that tai-yü
 herself could not come up to her standard.
 
what is more, in her ways pao-ch'ai was so full of good tact, so
 considerate and accommodating, so unlike tai-yü, who was supercilious,
 self-confident, and without any regard for the world below, that the
 natural consequence was that she soon completely won the hearts of the
 lower classes. even the whole number of waiting-maids would also for the
 most part, play and joke with pao-ch'ai. hence it was that tai-yü
 fostered, in her heart, considerable feelings of resentment, but of this
 however pao-ch'ai had not the least inkling.
 
pao-yü was, likewise, in the prime of his boyhood, and was, besides, as
 far as the bent of his natural disposition was concerned, in every
 respect absurd and perverse; regarding his cousins, whether male or
 female, one and all with one common sentiment, and without any
 distinction whatever between the degrees of distant or close
 relationship. sitting and sleeping, as now was under the same roof
 with tai-yü in dowager lady chia's suite of rooms, naturally became
 comparatively more friendly with her than with his other cousins; and
 this friendliness led to greater intimacy and this intimacy once
 established, rendered unavoidable the occurrence of the blight of
 harmony from unforeseen slight pretexts.
 
these two had had on this very day, for some unknown reason, words
 between them more or less unfriendly, and tai-yü was again sitting all
 alone in her room, giving way to tears. pao-yü was once more within
 himself quite conscience-smitten for his ungraceful remarks, and coming
 forward, humbly made advances, until, at length, tai-yü little by
 little came round.
 
as the plum blossom, in the eastern part of the garden of the ning
 mansion, was in full bloom, chia chen's spouse, mrs. yu, made
 preparations for collation, (purposing) to send invitations to dowager
 lady chia, mesdames hsing, and wang, and the other members of the
 family, to come and admire the flowers; and when the day arrived the
 first thing she did was to take chia jung and his wife, the two of them,
 and come and ask them round in person. dowager lady chia and the other
 inmates crossed over after their early meal; and they at once promenaded
 the hui fang (concentrated fragrance) garden. first tea was served, and
 next wine; but the entertainment was more than family banquet of
 the kindred of the two mansions of ning and jung, so that there was a
 total lack of any novel or original recreation that could be put on
 record.
 
after little time, pao-yü felt tired and languid and inclined for his
 midday siesta. "take good care," dowager lady chia enjoined some of
 them, "and stay with him, while rests for while, when can come
 back;" whereupon chia jung's wife, mrs. ch'in, smiled and said with
 eagerness: "we got ready in here room for uncle pao, so let your
 venerable ladyship set your mind at ease. just hand him over to my
 charge, and will be quite safe. mothers and sisters," she continued,
 addressing herself to pao-yü's nurses and waiting maids, "invite uncle
 pao to follow in here."
 
dowager lady chia had always been aware of the fact that mrs. ch'in was
 most trustworthy person, naturally courteous and scrupulous, and in
 every action likewise so benign and gentle; indeed the most estimable
 among the whole number of her great grandsons' wives, so that when she
 saw her about to go and attend to pao-yü, she felt that, for a
 certainty, everything would be well.
 
mrs. ch'in, there and then, led away company of attendants, and came
 into the rooms inside the drawing room. pao-yü, upon raising his head,
 and catching sight of picture hung on the upper wall, representing a
 human figure, in perfect style, the subject of which was portrait of
 yen li, speedily felt his heart sink within him.
 
there was also pair of scrolls, the text of which was:
 
thorough insight into worldly matters arises from knowledge;
 clear perception of human nature emanates from literary lore.
 
on perusal of these two sentences, albeit the room was sumptuous and
 beautifully laid out, would on account remain in it. "let us go at
 once," hastened to observe, "let us go at once."
 
mrs. ch'in upon hearing his objections smiled. "if this," she said, "is
 really not nice, where are you going? if you won't remain here, well
 then come into my room."
 
pao-yü nodded his head and gave faint grin.
 
"where do you find the propriety," nurse thereupon interposed, "of an
 uncle going to sleep in the room of nephew's wife?"
 
"ai ya!" exclaimed mrs. ch'in laughing, "i don't mind whether gets
 angry or not (at what i say); but how old can be as to reverentially
 shun all these things? why my brother was with here last month;
 didn't you see him? he's, true enough, of the same age as uncle pao, but
 were the two of them to stand side by side, i suspect that would be
 much higher in stature."
 
"how is it," asked pao-yü, "that i didn't see him? bring him along and
 let have look at him!"
 
"he's separated," they all ventured as they laughed, "by distance of
 twenty or thirty li, and how can be brought along? but you'll see him
 some day."
 
as they were talking, they reached the interior of mrs. ch'in's
 apartments. as soon as they got in, very faint puff of sweet fragrance
 was wafted into their nostrils. pao-yü readily felt his eyes itch and
 his bones grow weak. "what fine smell!" exclaimed several
 consecutive times.
 
upon entering the apartments, and gazing at the partition wall, saw a
 picture the handiwork of t'ang po-hu, consisting of begonias drooping in
 the spring time; on either side of which was one of pair of scrolls,
 written by ch'in tai-hsü, literary chancellor of the sung era, running
 as follows:
 
gentle chill doth circumscribe the dreaming man, because the spring
 is cold.
 the fragrant whiff, which wafts itself into man's nose, is the perfume
 of wine!
 
on the table was mirror, one which had been placed, in days of yore,
 in the mirror palace of the emperor wu tse-t'ien. on one side stood a
 gold platter, in which fei yen, who lived in the ch'ao state, used to
 stand and dance. in this platter, was laid quince, which an lu-shan
 had flung at the empress t'ai chen, inflicting wound on her breast. in
 the upper part of the room, stood divan ornamented with gems, on which
 the emperor's daughter, shou ch'ang, was wont to sleep, in the chang
 palace hanging, were curtains embroidered with strings of pearls, by
 t'ung ch'ang, the imperial princess.
 
"it's nice in here, it's nice in here," exclaimed pao-yü with chuckle.
 
"this room of mine," observed mrs. ch'in smilingly, "is i think, good
 enough for even spirits to live in!" and, as she uttered these words,
 she with her own hands, opened gauze coverlet, which had been washed
 by hsi shih, and removed bridal pillow, which had been held in the
 arms of hung niang. instantly, the nurses attended to pao-yü, until he
 had laid down comfortably; when they quietly dispersed, leaving only the
 four waiting maids: hsi jen, ch'iu wen, ch'ing wen and she yueh to keep
 him company.
 
"mind be careful, as you sit under the eaves," mrs. ch'in recommended
 the young waiting maids, "that the cats do not start fight!"
 
pao-yü then closed his eyes, and, little by little, became drowsy, and
 fell asleep.
 
it seemed to him just as if mrs. ch'in was walking ahead of him.
 forthwith, with listless and unsettled step, followed mrs. ch'in to
 some spot or other, where saw carnation-like railings, jade-like
 steps, verdant trees and limpid pools--a spot where actually trace of
 any human being could be met with, where of the shifting mundane dust
 little had penetrated.
 
pao-yü felt, in his dream, quite delighted. "this place," mused, "is
 pleasant, and i may as well spend my whole lifetime in here! though i
 may have to lose my home, i'm quite ready for the sacrifice, for it's
 far better being here than being flogged, day after day, by father,
 mother, and teacher."
 
while pondered in this erratic strain, suddenly heard the voice of
 some human being at the back of the rocks, giving vent to this song:
 
like scattering clouds doth fleet vernal dream;
 the transient flowers pass like running stream;
 maidens and youths bear this, ye all, in mind;
 in useless grief what profit will ye find?
 
pao-yü perceived that the voice was that of girl. the song was barely
 at an end, when soon espied in the opposite direction, beautiful
 girl advancing with majestic and elastic step; girl quite unlike any
 ordinary mortal being. there is this poem, which gives an adequate
 description of her:
 
she just quits the willow bank; and sudden now she issues from the
 flower-bedecked house;
 as onward alone she speeds, she startles the birds perched in the
 trees, by the pavilion; to which as she draws nigh, her shadow
 flits by the verandah!
 her fairy clothes now flutter in the wind! fragrant perfume like
 unto musk or olea is wafted in the air; her apparel lotus-like is
 sudden wont to move; and the jingle of her ornaments strikes the
 ear.
 her dimpled cheeks resemble, as they smile, vernal peach; her
 kingfisher coiffure is like cumulus of clouds; her lips part
 cherry-like; her pomegranate-like teeth conceal fragrant
 breath.
 her slender waist, so beauteous to look at, is like the skipping snow
 wafted by gust of wind; the sheen of her pearls and kingfisher
 trinkets abounds with splendour, green as the feathers of duck,
 and yellow as the plumes of goose;
 now she issues to view, and now is hidden among the flowers; beautiful
 she is when displeased, beautiful when in high spirits; with
 lissome step, she treads along the pond, as if she soars on wings
 or sways in the air.
 her eyebrows are crescent moons, and knit under her smiles; she
 speaks, and yet she seems word to utter; her lotus-like feet
 with ease pursue their course; she stops, and yet she seems still
 to be in motion; the charms of her figure all vie with ice in
 purity, and in splendour with precious gems; lovely is her
 brilliant attire, so full of grandeur and refined grace.
 loveable her countenance, as if moulded from some fragrant substance,
 or carved from white jade; elegant is her person, like phoenix,
 dignified like dragon soaring high.
 what is her chastity like? like white plum in spring with snow
 nestling in its broken skin; her purity? like autumn orchids
 bedecked with dewdrops.
 her modesty? like fir-tree growing in barren plain; her
 comeliness? like russet clouds reflected in limpid pool.
 her gracefulness? like dragon in motion wriggling in stream;
 her refinement? like the rays of the moon shooting on to cool
 river.
 sure is she to put hsi tzu to shame! bound to put wang ch'iang to the
 blush! what remarkable person! where was she born? and whence
 does she come?
 one thing is true that in fairy-land there is second like her! that
 in the purple courts of heaven there is one fit to be her peer!
 forsooth, who can it be, so surpassingly beautiful!
 
pao-yü, upon realising that she was fairy, was much elated; and with
 eagerness advanced and made bow.
 
"my divine sister," ventured, as put on smile. "i don't know
 whence you come, and whither you are going. nor have i any idea what
 this place is, but i make bold to entreat that you would take my hand
 and lead on."
 
"my abode," replied the fairy, "is above the heavens of divested
 animosities, and in the ocean of discharged sorrows. i'm the fairy of
 monitory vision, of the cave of drooping fragrance, in the mount of
 emitted spring, within the confines of the great void. i preside over
 the voluptuous affections and sensual debts among the mortal race, and
 supervise in the dusty world, the envies of women and the lusts of man.
 it's because i've recently come to hear that the retribution for
 voluptuousness extends up to this place, that i betake myself here in
 order to find suitable opportunities of disseminating mutual affections.
 my encounter with you now is also not matter of accident! this spot is
 not distant from my confines. i have nothing much there besides cup of
 the tender buds of tea plucked by my own hands, and pitcher of
 luscious wine, fermented by as well as several spritelike singing and
 dancing maidens of great proficiency, and twelve ballads of spiritual
 song, recently completed, on the dream of the red chamber; but won't you
 come along with for stroll?"
 
pao-yü, at this proposal, felt elated to such an extraordinary degree
 that could skip from joy, and there and then discarding from his mind
 all idea of where mrs. ch'in was, readily followed the fairy.
 
they reached some spot, where there was stone tablet, put up in a
 horizontal position, on which were visible the four large characters:
 "the confines of the great void," on either side of which was one of a
 pair of scrolls, with the two antithetical sentences:
 
when falsehood stands for truth, truth likewise becomes false;
 when naught be made to aught, aught changes into naught!
 
past the portal stood the door of palace, and horizontally, above this
 door, were the four large characters: "the of retribution, the
 heaven of love." there were also pair of scrolls, with the inscription
 in large characters:
 
passion, alas! thick as the earth, and lofty as the skies, from ages
 past to the present hath held incessant sway;
 how pitiful your lot! ye lustful men and women envious, that your
 voluptuous debts should be so hard to pay!
 
pao-yü, after perusal, communed with his own heart. "is it really so!"
 thought, "but i wonder what implies the passion from old till now,
 and what are the voluptuous debts! henceforward, i must enlighten
 myself!"
 
pao-yü was bent upon this train of thoughts when unwittingly
 attracted several evil spirits into his heart, and with speedy step he
 followed in the track of the fairy, and entered two rows of doors when
 perceived that the lateral halls were, on both sides, full of tablets
 and scrolls, the number of which could not in one moment ascertain.
 however discriminated in numerous places the inscriptions: the board
 of lustful love; the board of contracted grudges; the board of matutinal
 sobs; the board of nocturnal tears; the board of vernal affections; and
 the board of autumnal anguish.
 
after had perused these inscriptions, felt impelled to turn round
 and address the fairy. "may i venture to trouble my fairy," said, "to
 take along for turn into the interior of each of these boards? may
 i be allowed, i wonder, to do so?"
 
"inside each of these boards," explained the fairy, "are accumulated the
 registers with the records of all women of the whole world; of those who
 have passed away, as well as of those who have not as yet come into it,
 and you, with your mortal eyes and human body, could not possibly be
 allowed to know anything in anticipation."
 
but would pao-yü, upon hearing these words, submit to this decree? he
 went on to implore her permission again and again, until the fairy
 casting her eye upon the tablet of the board in front of her observed,
 "well, all right! you may go into this board and reap some transient
 pleasure."
 
pao-yü was indescribably joyous, and, as raised his head, he
 perceived that the text on the tablet consisted of the three characters:
 the board of ill-fated lives; and that on each side was scroll with
 the inscription:
 
upon one's self are mainly brought regrets in spring and autumn gloom;
 face, flowerlike may be and moonlike too; but beauty all for whom?
 
upon perusal of the scroll pao-yü was, at once, the more stirred with
 admiration; and, as crossed the door, and reached the interior, the
 only things that struck his eye were about ten large presses, the whole
 number of which were sealed with paper slips; on every one of these
 slips, perceived that there were phrases peculiar to each province.
 
pao-yü was in his mind merely bent upon discerning, from the rest, the
 slip referring to his own native village, when espied, on the other
 side, slip with the large characters: "the principal record of the
 twelve maidens of chin ling."
 
"what is the meaning," therefore inquired pao-yü, "of the principal
 record of the twelve maidens of chin ling?"
 
"as this is the record," explained the fairy, "of the most excellent and
 prominent girls in your honourable province, it is, for this reason,
 called the principal record."
 
"i've often heard people say," observed pao-yü, "that chin ling is of
 vast extent; and how can there only be twelve maidens in it! why, at
 present, in our own family alone, there are more or less several
 hundreds of young girls!"
 
the fairy gave faint smile. "through there be," she rejoined, "so
 large number of girls in your honourable province, those only of any
 note have been selected and entered in this record. the two presses, on
 the two sides, contain those who are second best; while, for all who
 remain, as they are of the ordinary run, there are, consequently, no
 registers to make any entry of them in."
 
pao-yü upon looking at the press below, perceived the inscription:
 "secondary record of the twelve girls of chin ling;" while again in
 another press was inscribed: "supplementary secondary record of the
 twelve girls of chin ling." forthwith stretching out his hand, pao-yü
 opened first the doors of the press, containing the "supplementary
 secondary record," extracted volume of the registers, and opened it.
 when came to examine it, saw on the front page representation of
 something, which, though bearing resemblance to human being,
 presented, at the same time, similitude to scenery; consisting simply
 of huge blotches made with ink. the whole paper was full of nothing else
 but black clouds and turbid mists, after which appeared the traces of a
 few characters, explaining that--
 
cloudless moon is rare forsooth to see,
 and pretty clouds so soon scatter and flee!
 thy heart is deeper than the heavens are high,
 thy frame consists of base ignominy!
 thy looks and clever mind resentment will provoke,
 and thine untimely death vile slander will evoke!
 loving noble youth in vain for love will yearn.
 
after reading these lines, pao-yü looked below, where was pictured a
 bouquet of fresh flowers and bed covered with tattered matting. there
 were also several distiches running as follows:
 
thy self-esteem for kindly gentleness is but fancy vain!
 thy charms that they can match the olea or orchid, but thoughts inane!
 while an actor will, envious lot! with fortune's smiles be born,
 youth of noble birth will, strange to say, be luckless and forlorn.
 
pao-yü perused these sentences, but could not unfold their meaning, so,
 at once discarding this press, went over and opened the door of the
 press of the "secondary records" and took out book, in which, on
 examination, found representation of twig of olea fragrans.
 below, was pond, the water of which was parched up and the mud dry,
 the lotus flowers decayed, and even the roots dead. at the back were
 these lines:
 
the lotus root and flower but one fragrance will give;
 how deep alas! the wounds of thy life's span will be;
 what time desolate tree in two places will live,
 back to its native home the fragrant ghost will flee!
 
pao-yü read these lines, but failed to understand what they meant. he
 then went and fetched the "principal record," and set to looking it
 over. saw on the first page picture of two rotten trees, while on
 these trees was suspended jade girdle. there was also heap of snow,
 and under this snow was golden hair-pin. there were in addition these
 four lines in verse:
 
bitter thy cup will be, e'en were the virtue thine to stop the loom,
 thine though the gift the willow fluff to sing, pity who will thy
 doom?
 high in the trees doth hang the girdle of white jade,
 and lo! among the snow the golden pin is laid!
 
to pao-yü the meaning was again, though read the lines over, quite
 unintelligible. was, about to make inquiries, but felt convinced
 that the fairy would be both to divulge the decrees of heaven; and
 though intent upon discarding the book, could not however tear
 himself away from it. forthwith, therefore, prosecuted further
 perusal of what came next, when caught sight of picture of bow.
 on this bow hung citron. there was also this ode:
 
full twenty years right and wrong to expound will be thy fate!
 what place pomegranate blossoms come in bloom will face the palace
 gate!
 the third portion of spring, of the first spring in beauty short will
 fall!
 when tiger meets with hare thou wilt return to sleep perennial.
 
further on, was also sketch of two persons flying kite; broad
 expanse of sea, and large vessel; while in this vessel was girl, who
 screened her face bedewed with tears. these four lines were likewise
 visible:
 
pure and bright will be thy gifts, thy purpose very high;
 but born thou wilt be late in life and luck be passed by;
 at the tomb feast thou wilt repine tearful along the stream,
 east winds may blow, but home miles off will be, even in dream.
 
after this followed picture of several streaks of fleeting clouds, and
 of creek whose waters were exhausted, with the text:
 
riches and honours too what benefit are they?
 in swaddling clothes thou'lt be when parents pass away;
 the rays will slant, quick as the twinkle of an eye;
 the hsiang stream will recede, the ch'u clouds onward fly!
 
then came picture of beautiful gem, which had fallen into the mire,
 with the verse:
 
thine aim is chastity, but chaste thou wilt not be;
 abstraction is thy faith, but void thou may'st not see;
 thy precious, gemlike self will, pitiful to say,
 into the mundane mire collapse at length some day.
 
rough sketch followed of savage wolf, in pursuit of beautiful
 girl, trying to pounce upon her as wished to devour her. this was the
 burden of the distich:
 
thy mate is like savage wolf prowling among the hills;
 his wish once gratified haughty spirit his heart fills!
 though fair thy form like flowers or willows in the golden moon,
 upon the yellow beam to hang will shortly be its doom.
 
below, was an old temple, in the interior of which was beautiful
 person, just in the act of reading the religious manuals, as she sat all
 alone; with this inscription:
 
in light esteem thou hold'st the charms of the three springs for their
 short-liv'd fate;
 thine attire of past years to lay aside thou chang'st, taoist dress
 to don;
 how sad, alas! of reputed house and noble kindred the scion,
 alone, behold! she sleeps under glimmering light, an old idol for
 mate.
 
next in order came hill of ice, on which stood hen-phoenix, while
 under it was this motto:
 
when time ends, sure coincidence, the phoenix doth alight;
 the talents of this human form all know and living see,
 for first to yield she kens, then to control, and third genial to be;
 but sad to say, things in chin ling are in more sorry plight.
 
this was succeeded by representation of desolate village, and a
 dreary inn. pretty girl sat in there, spinning thread. these were the
 sentiments affixed below:
 
when riches will have flown will honours then avail?
 when ruin breaks your home, e'en relatives will fail!
 but sudden through the aid extended to dame liu,
 friend in need fortune will make to rise for you.
 
following these verses, was drawn pot of orchids, by the side of
 which, was beautiful maiden in phoenix-crown and cloudy mantle
 (bridal dress); and to this picture was appended this device:
 
what time spring wanes, then fades the bloom of peach as well as plum!
 who ever can like pot of the olea be winsome!
 with ice thy purity will vie, vain their envy will be!
 in vain laughing-stock people will try to make of thee.
 
at the end of this poetical device, came the representation of lofty
 edifice, on which was beauteous girl, suspending herself on beam to
 commit suicide; with this verse:
 
love high as heav'n, love ocean-wide, thy lovely form will don;
 what time love will encounter love, license must rise wanton;
 why hold that all impiety in jung doth find its spring,
 the source of trouble, verily, is centred most in ning.
 
pao-yü was still bent upon prosecuting his perusal, when the fairy
 perceiving that his intellect was eminent and bright, and his natural
 talents quickwitted, and apprehending lest the decrees of heaven should
 be divulged, hastily closed the book of record, and addressed herself to
 pao-yü. "come along with me," she said smiling, "and see some wonderful
 scenery. what's the need of staying here and beating this gourd of
 ennui?"
 
in dazed state, pao-yü listlessly discarded the record, and again
 followed in the footsteps of the fairy. on their arrival at the back, he
 saw carnation portières, and embroidered curtains, ornamented pillars,
 and carved eaves. but words can adequately give an idea of the
 vermilion apartments glistening with splendour, of the floors garnished
 with gold, of the snow reflecting lustrous windows, of the palatial
 mansions made of gems. also saw fairyland flowers, beautiful and
 fragrant, and extraordinary vegetation, full of perfume. the spot was
 indeed elysian.
 
again heard the fairy observe with smiling face: "come out all of
 you at once and greet the honoured guest!"
 
these words were scarcely completed, when espied fairies walk out of
 the mansion, all of whom were, with their dangling lotus sleeves, and
 their fluttering feather habiliments, as comely as spring flowers, and
 as winsome as the autumn moon. as soon as they caught sight of pao-yü,
 they all, with one voice, resentfully reproached the monitory vision
 fairy. "ignorant as to who the honoured guest could be," they argued,
 "we hastened to come out to offer our greetings simply because you,
 elder sister, had told us that, on this day, and at this very time,
 there would be sure to come on visit, the spirit of the younger sister
 of chiang chu. that's the reason why we've been waiting for ever so
 long; and now why do you, in lieu of her, introduce this vile object to
 contaminate the confines of pure and spotless maidens?"
 
as soon as pao-yü heard these remarks, was forthwith plunged in such
 state of consternation that would have retired, but found it
 impossible to do so. in fact, felt the consciousness of the foulness
 and corruption of his own nature quite intolerable. the monitory vision
 fairy promptly took pao-yü's hand in her own, and turning towards her
 younger sisters, smiled and explained: "you, and all of you, are not
 aware of the why and wherefore. to-day i did mean to have gone to the
 jung mansion to fetch chiang chu, but as i went by the ning mansion, i
 unexpectedly came across the ghosts of the two dukes of jung and ning,
 who addressed in this wise: 'our family has, since the dynasty
 established itself on the throne, enjoyed merit and fame, which pervaded
 many ages, and riches and honours transmitted from generation to
 generation. one hundred years have already elapsed, but this good
 fortune has now waned, and this propitious luck is exhausted; so much so
 that they could not be retrieved! our sons and grandsons may be many,
 but there is one among them who has the means to continue the family
 estate, with the exception of our kindred grandson, pao-yü alone, who,
 though perverse in disposition and wayward by nature, is nevertheless
 intelligent and quick-witted and qualified in measure to give effect
 to our hopes. but alas! the good fortune of our family is entirely
 decayed, so that we fear there is person to incite him to enter the
 right way! fortunately you worthy fairy come at an unexpected moment,
 and we venture to trust that you will, above all things, warn him
 against the foolish indulgence of inordinate desire, lascivious
 affections and other such things, in the hope that may, at your
 instigation, be able to escape the snares of those girls who will allure
 him with their blandishments, and to enter on the right track; and we
 two brothers will be ever grateful.'
 
"on language such as this being addressed to me, my feelings of
 commiseration naturally burst forth; and i brought him here, and bade
 him, first of all, carefully peruse the records of the whole lives of
 the maidens in his family, belonging to the three grades, the upper,
 middle and lower, but as has not yet fathomed the import, i have
 consequently led him into this place to experience the vision of
 drinking, eating, singing and licentious love, in the hope, there is no
 saying, of his at length attaining that perception."
 
having concluded these remarks, she led pao-yü by the hand into the
 apartment, where felt whiff of subtle fragrance, but what it was
 that reached his nostrils could not tell.
 
to pao-yü's eager and incessant inquiries, the fairy made reply with a
 sardonic smile. "this perfume," she said, "is not to be found in the
 world, and how could you discern what it is? this is made of the essence
 of the first sprouts of rare herbs, growing on all hills of fame and
 places of superior excellence, admixed with the oil of every species of
 splendid shrubs in precious groves, and is called the marrow of
 conglomerated fragrance."
 
at these words pao-yü was, of course, full of other feeling than
 wonder.
 
the whole party advanced and took their seats, and young maidservant
 presented tea, which pao-yü found of pure aroma, of excellent flavour
 and of ordinary kind. "what is the name of this tea?" therefore
 asked; upon which the fairy explained. "this tea," she added,
 "originates from the hills of emitted spring and the valley of drooping
 fragrance, and is, besides, brewed in the night dew, found on spiritual
 plants and divine leaves. the name of this tea is 'one thousand red in
 one hole.'"
 
at these words pao-yü nodded his head, and extolled its qualities.
 espying in the room lutes, with jasper mountings, and tripods, inlaid
 with gems, antique paintings, and new poetical works, which were to be
 seen everywhere, felt more than ever in high state of delight.
 below the windows, were also shreds of velvet sputtered about and a
 toilet case stained with the traces of time and smudged with cosmetic;
 while on the partition wall was likewise suspended pair of scrolls,
 with the inscription:
 
lonesome, small, ethereal, beauteous nook!
 what help is there, but heaven's will to brook?
 
pao-yü having completed his inspection felt full of admiration, and
 proceeded to ascertain the names and surnames of the fairies. one was
 called the fairy of lustful dreams; another "the high ruler of
 propagated passion;" the name of one was "the golden maiden of
 perpetuated sorrow;" of another the "intelligent maiden of transmitted
 hatred." (in fact,) the respective taoist appellations were not of one
 and the same kind.
 
in short while, young maid-servants came in and laid the table, put
 the chairs in their places, and spread out wines and eatables. there
 were actually crystal tankards overflowing with luscious wines, and
 amber glasses full to the brim with pearly strong liquors. but still
 less need is there to give any further details about the sumptuousness
 of the refreshments.
 
pao-yü found it difficult, on account of the unusual purity of the
 bouquet of the wine, to again restrain himself from making inquiries
 about it.
 
"this wine," observed the monitory dream fairy, "is made of the twigs of
 hundreds of flowers, and the juice of ten thousands of trees, with the
 addition of must composed of unicorn marrow, and yeast prepared with
 phoenix milk. hence the name of 'ten thousand beauties in one cup' was
 given to it."
 
pao-yü sang its incessant praise, and, while sipped his wine, twelve
 dancing girls came forward, and requested to be told what songs they
 were to sing.
 
"take," suggested the fairy, "the newly-composed twelve sections of the
 dream of the red chamber, and sing them."
 
the singing girls signified their obedience, and forthwith they lightly
 clapped the castagnettes and gently thrummed the virginals. these were
 the words which they were heard to sing:
 
at the time of the opening of the heavens and the laying out of the
 earth chaos prevailed.
 
they had just sung this one line when the fairy exclaimed: "this ballad
 is unlike the ballads written in the dusty world whose purport is to
 hand down remarkable events, in which the distinction of scholars,
 girls, old men and women, and fools is essential, and in which are
 furthermore introduced the lyrics of the southern and northern palaces.
 these fairy songs consist either of elegaic effusions on some person or
 impressions of some occurrence or other, and are impromptu songs readily
 set to the music of wind or string instruments, so that any one who is
 not cognisant of their gist cannot appreciate the beauties contained in
 them. so you are not likely, i fear, to understand this lyric with any
 clearness; and unless you first peruse the text and then listen to the
 ballad, you will, instead of pleasure, feel as if you were chewing wax
 (devoid of any zest)."
 
after these remarks, she turned her head round, and directed young
 maid-servant to fetch the text of the dream of the red chamber, which
 she handed to pao-yü, who took it over; and as followed the words
 with his eyes, with his ears listened to the strains of this song:
 
preface of the bream of the red chamber.--when the heavens were opened
 and earth was laid out chaos prevailed! what was the germ of love? it
 arises entirely from the strength of licentious love.
 
what day, by the will of heaven, i felt wounded at heart, and what time
 i was at leisure, i made an attempt to disburden my sad heart; and with
 this object in view i indited this dream of the bed chamber, on the
 subject of disconsolate gold trinket and an unfortunate piece of jade.
 
waste of whole lifetime. all maintain that the match between gold and
 jade will be happy. all i can think of is the solemn oath contracted in
 days gone by by the plant and stone! vain will i gaze upon the snow,
 hsüeh, [pao-ch'ai], pure as crystal and lustrous like gem of the
 eminent priest living among the hills! never will i forget the noiseless
 fairy grove, lin [tai-yü], beyond the confines of the mortal world!
 alas! now only have i come to believe that human happiness is
 incomplete; and that couple may be bound by the ties of wedlock for
 life, but that after all their hearts are not easy to lull into
 contentment.
 
vain knitting of the brows. the one is spirit flower of fairyland; the
 other is beautiful jade without blemish. do you maintain that their
 union will not be remarkable? why how then is it that has come to
 meet her again in this existence? if the union will you say, be strange,
 how is it then that their love affair will be but empty words? the one
 in her loneliness will give way to useless sighs. the other in vain will
 yearn and crave. the one will be like the reflection of the moon in
 water; the other like flower reflected in mirror. consider, how many
 drops of tears can there be in the eyes? and how could they continue to
 drop from autumn to winter and from spring to flow till summer time?
 
but to come to pao-yü. after had heard these ballads, so diffuse and
 vague, failed to see any point of beauty in them; but the plaintive
 melody of the sound was nevertheless sufficient to drive away his spirit
 and exhilarate his soul. hence it was that did not make any inquiries
 about the arguments, and that did not ask about the matter treated,
 but simply making these ballads the means for the time being of
 dispelling melancholy, therefore went on with the perusal of what
 came below.
 
despicable spirit of death! you will be rejoicing that glory is at its
 height when hateful death will come once again, and with eyes wide with
 horror, you will discard all things, and dimly and softly the fragrant
 spirit will waste and dissolve! you will yearn for native home, but
 distant will be the way, and lofty the mountains. hence it is that you
 will betake yourself in search of father and mother, while they lie
 under the influence of dream, and hold discourse with them. "your
 child," you will say, "has already trodden the path of death! oh my
 parents, it behoves you to speedily retrace your steps and make good
 your escape!"
 
separated from relatives. you will speed on journey of three thousand
 li at the mercy of wind and rain, and tear yourself from all your family
 ties and your native home! your fears will be lest anguish should do any
 harm to your parents in their failing years! "father and mother," you
 will bid them, "do not think with any anxiety of your child. from ages
 past poverty as well as success have both had fixed destiny; and is it
 likely that separation and reunion are not subject to predestination?
 though we may now be far apart in two different places, we must each of
 us try and preserve good cheer. your abject child has, it is true, gone
 from home, but abstain from distressing yourselves on her account!"
 
sorrow in the midst of joy. while wrapped as yet in swaddling clothes,
 father and mother, both alas! will depart, and dwell though you will in
 that mass of gauze, who is there who will know how to spoil you with any
 fond attention? born you will be fortunately with ample moral courage,
 and high-minded and boundless resources, for your parents will not have,
 in the least, their child's secret feelings at heart! you will be like a
 moon appearing to view when the rain holds up, shedding its rays upon
 the jade hall; or gentle breeze (wafting its breath upon it). wedded
 to husband, fairy like fair and accomplished, you will enjoy a
 happiness enduring as the earth and perennial as the heavens! and you
 will be the means of snapping asunder the bitter fate of your youth!
 but, after all, the clouds will scatter in kao t'ang and the waters of
 the hsiang river will get parched! this is the inevitable destiny of
 dissolution and continuance which prevails in the mortal world, and what
 need is there to indulge in useless grief?
 
intolerable to the world. your figure will be as winsome as an olea
 fragrans; your talents as ample as those of fairy! you will by nature
 be so haughty that of the whole human race few will be like you! you
 will look upon meat diet as one of dirt, and treat splendour as coarse
 and loathsome! and yet you will not be aware that your high notions will
 bring upon you the excessive hatred of man! you will be very eager in
 your desire after chastity, but the human race will despise you! alas,
 you will wax old in that antique temple hall under faint light, where
 you will waste ungrateful for beauty, looks and freshness! but after all
 you will still be worldly, corrupt and unmindful of your vows; just like
 spotless white jade you will be whose fate is to fall into the mire!
 and what need will there be for the grandson of prince or the of a
 duke to deplore that his will not be the good fortune (of winning your
 affections)?
 
the voluptuary. you will resemble wolf in the mountains! savage
 beast devoid of all human feeling! regardless in every way of the
 obligations of days gone by, your sole pleasure will be in the
 indulgence of haughtiness, extravagance, licentiousness and dissolute
 habits! you will be inordinate in your conjugal affections, and look
 down upon the beautiful charms of the child of marquis, as if they
 were cat-tail rush or willow; trampling upon the honourable daughter of
 ducal mansion, as if she were one of the common herd. pitiful to say,
 the fragrant spirit and beauteous ghost will in year softly and gently
 pass away!
 
the perception that all things are transient like flowers. you will look
 lightly upon the three springs and regard the blush of the peach and the
 green of the willow as of avail. you will beat out the fire of
 splendour, and treat solitary retirement as genial! what is it that you
 say about the delicate peaches in the heavens (marriage) being
 excellent, and the petals of the almond in the clouds being plentiful
 (children)? let him who has after all seen one of them, (really mortal
 being) go safely through the autumn, (wade safely through old age),
 behold the people in the white poplar village groan and sigh; and the
 spirits under the green maple whine and moan! still more wide in expanse
 than even the heavens is the dead vegetation which covers the graves!
 the moral is this, that the burden of man is poverty one day and
 affluence another; that bloom in spring, and decay in autumn, constitute
 the doom of vegetable life! in the same way, this calamity of birth and
 the visitation of death, who is able to escape? but i have heard it said
 that there grows in the western quarter tree called the p'o so
 (patient bearing) which bears the fruit of immortal life!
 
the bane of intelligence. yours will be the power to estimate, in a
 thorough manner, the real motives of all things, as yours will be
 intelligence of an excessive degree; but instead (of reaping any
 benefit) you will cast the die of your own existence! the heart of your
 previous life is already reduced to atoms, and when you shall have died,
 your nature will have been intelligent to purpose! your home will be
 in easy circumstances; your family will enjoy comforts; but your
 connexions will, at length, fall prey to death, and the inmates of
 your family scatter, each one of you speeding in different direction,
 making room for others! in vain, you will have harassed your mind with
 cankering thoughts for half lifetime; for it will be just as if you
 had gone through the confused mazes of dream on the third watch!
 sudden crash (will be heard) like the fall of spacious palace, and a
 dusky gloominess (will supervene) such as is caused by lamp about to
 spend itself! alas! spell of happiness will be suddenly (dispelled by)
 adversity! woe is man in the world! for his ultimate doom is difficult
 to determine!
 
leave behind residue of happiness! hand down an excess of happiness;
 hand down an excess of happiness! unexpectedly you will come across a
 benefactor! fortunate enough your mother, your own mother, will have
 laid by store of virtue and secret meritorious actions! my advice to
 you, mankind, is to relieve the destitute and succour the distressed! do
 not resemble those who will harp after lucre and show themselves
 unmindful of the ties of relationship: that wolflike maternal uncle of
 yours and that impostor of brother! true it is that addition and
 subtraction, increase and decrease, (reward and punishment,) rest in the
 hands of heaven above!
 
splendour at last. loving affection in mirror will be still more
 ephemeral than fame in dream. that fine splendour will fleet how soon!
 make further allusion to embroidered curtain, to bridal coverlet; for
 though you may come to wear on your head pearl-laden coronet, and, on
 your person, jacket ornamented with phoenixes, yours will not
 nevertheless be the means to atone for the short life (of your husband)!
 though the saying is that mankind should not have, in their old age, the
 burden of poverty to bear, yet it is also essential that store of
 benevolent deeds should be laid up for the benefit of sons and
 grandsons! (your son) may come to be dignified in appearance and wear on
 his head the official tassel, and on his chest may be suspended the gold
 seal resplendent in lustre; may be imposing in his majesty, and he
 may rise high in status and emoluments, but the dark and dreary way
 which leads to death is short! are the generals and ministers who have
 been from ages of old still in the flesh, forsooth? they exist only in a
 futile name handed down to posterity to reverence!
 
death ensues when things propitious reign! upon the ornamented beam will
 settle at the close of spring the fragrant dust! your reckless
 indulgence of licentious love and your naturally moonlike face will soon
 be the source of the ruin of family. the decadence of the family
 estate will emanate entirely from ching; while the wane of the family
 affairs will be entirely attributable to the fault of ning! licentious
 love will be the main reason of the long-standing grudge.
 
the flying birds each perch upon the trees! the family estates of those
 in official positions will fade! the gold and silver of the rich and
 honoured will be scattered! those who will have conferred benefit will,
 even in death, find the means of escape! those devoid of human feelings
 will reap manifest retribution! those indebted for life will make, in
 due time, payment with their lives; those indebted for tears have
 already (gone) to exhaust their tears! mutual injuries will be revenged
 in light manner! separation and reunion will both alike be determined
 by predestination! you wish to know why your life will be short; look
 into your previous existence! verily, riches and honours, which will
 come with old age, will likewise be question of chance! those who will
 hold the world in light esteem will retire within the gate of
 abstraction; while those who will be allured by enticement will have
 forfeited their lives (the chia family will fulfil its destiny) as
 surely as birds take to the trees after they have exhausted all they had
 to eat, and which as they drop down will pile up hoary, vast and lofty
 heap of dust, (leaving) indeed void behind!
 
when the maidens had finished the ballads, they went on to sing the
 "supplementary record;" but the monitory vision fairy, perceiving the
 total absence of any interest in pao-yü, heaved sigh. "you silly
 brat!" she exclaimed. "what! haven't you, even now, attained
 perception!"
 
"there's need for you to go on singing," speedily observed pao-yü, as
 interrupted the singing maidens; and feeling drowsy and dull, he
 pleaded being under the effects of wine, and begged to be allowed to lie
 down.
 
the fairy then gave orders to clear away the remains of the feast, and
 escorted pao-yü to suite of female apartments, where the splendour of
 such objects as were laid out was thing which had not hitherto
 seen. but what evoked in him wonder still more intense, was the sight,
 at an early period, of girl seated in the room, who, in the freshness
 of her beauty and winsomeness of her charms, bore some resemblance to
 pao-ch'ai, while, in elegance and comeliness, on the other hand, to
 tai-yu.
 
while was plunged in state of perplexity, the fairy suddenly
 remarked: "all those female apartments and ladies' chambers in so many
 wealthy and honourable families in the world are, without exception,
 polluted by voluptuous opulent puppets and by all that bevy of
 profligate girls. but still more despicable are those from old till now
 numberless dissolute roués, one and all of whom maintain that libidinous
 affections do not constitute lewdness; and who try, further, to prove
 that licentious love is not tantamount to lewdness. but all these
 arguments are mere apologies for their shortcomings, and screen for
 their pollutions; for if libidinous affection be lewdness, still more
 does the perception of licentious love constitute lewdness. hence it is
 that the indulgence of sensuality and the gratification of licentious
 affection originate entirely from relish of lust, as well as from a
 hankering after licentious love. you, who are the object of my love,
 are the most lewd being under the heavens from remote ages to the
 present time!"
 
pao-yü was quite dumbstruck by what heard, and hastily smiling, he
 said by way of reply: "my fairy labours under misapprehension. simply
 because of my reluctance to read my books my parents have, on repeated
 occasions, extended to injunction and reprimand, and would i have the
 courage to go so far as to rashly plunge in lewd habits? besides, i am
 still young in years, and have notion what is implied by lewdness!"
 
"not so!" exclaimed the fairy; "lewdness, although one thing in
 principle is, as far as meaning goes, subject to different
 constructions; as is exemplified by those in the world whose heart is
 set upon lewdness. some delight solely in faces and figures; others find
 insatiable pleasure in singing and dancing; some in dalliance and
 raillery; others in the incessant indulgence of their lusts; and these
 regret that all the beautiful maidens under the heavens cannot minister
 to their short-lived pleasure. these several kinds of persons are foul
 objects steeped skin and all in lewdness. the lustful love, for
 instance, which has sprung to life and taken root in your natural
 affections, i and such as myself extend to it the character of an
 abstract lewdness; but abstract lewdness can be grasped by the mind, but
 cannot be transmitted by the mouth; can be fathomed by the spirit, but
 cannot be divulged in words. as you now are imbued with this desire only
 in the abstract, you are certainly well fit to be trustworthy friend
 in (fairyland) inner apartments, but, on the path of the mortal world,
 you will inevitably be misconstrued and defamed; every mouth will
 ridicule you; every eye will look down upon you with contempt. after
 meeting recently your worthy ancestors, the two dukes of ning and jung,
 who opened their hearts and made their wishes known to with such
 fervour, (but i will not have you solely on account of the splendour of
 our inner apartments look down despisingly upon the path of the world),
 i consequently led you along, my son, and inebriated you with luscious
 wines, steeped you in spiritual tea, and admonished you with excellent
 songs, bringing also here young sister of mine, whose infant name is
 chien mei, and her style k'o ching, to be given to you as your wedded
 wife. to-night, the time will be propitious and suitable for the
 immediate consummation of the union, with the express object of letting
 you have certain insight into the fact that if the condition of the
 abode of spirits within the confines of fairyland be still so
 (imperfect), how much the more so should be the nature of the affections
 which prevail in the dusty world; with the intent that from this time
 forth you should positively break loose from bondage, perceive and amend
 your former disposition, devote your attention to the works of confucius
 and mencius, and set your steady purpose upon the principles of
 morality."
 
having ended these remarks, she initiated him into the mysteries of
 licentious love, and, pushing pao-yü into the room, she closed the door,
 and took her departure all alone. pao-yü in dazed state complied with
 the admonitions given him by the fairy, and the natural result was, of
 course, violent flirtation, the circumstances of which it would be
 impossible to recount.
 
when the next day came, was by that time so attached to her by ties
 of tender love and their conversation was so gentle and full of charm
 that could not brook to part from k'o ching. hand-in-hand, the two of
 them therefore, went out for stroll, when they unexpectedly reached a
 place, where nothing else met their gaze than thorns and brambles, which
 covered the ground, and wolf and tiger walking side by side. before
 them stretched the course of black stream, which obstructed their
 progress; and over this stream there was, what is more, bridge to
 enable one to cross it.
 
while they were exercising their minds with perplexity, they suddenly
 espied the fairy coming from the back in pursuit of them. "desist at
 once," she exclaimed, "from making any advance into the stream; it is
 urgent that you should, with all speed, turn your faces round!"
 
pao-yü lost time in standing still. "what is this place?" he
 inquired.
 
"this is the ford of enticement," explained the fairy. "its depth is ten
 thousand chang; its breadth is thousand li; in its stream there are no
 boats or paddles by means of which to effect passage. there is simply
 raft, of which mu chu-shih directs the rudder, and which hui shih chen
 punts with the poles. they receive compensation in the shape of gold
 or silver, but when they come across any one whose destiny it is to
 cross, they ferry him over. you now have by accident strolled as far as
 here, and had you fallen into the stream you would have rendered quite
 useless the advice and admonition which i previously gave you."
 
these words were scarcely concluded, when suddenly was heard from the
 midst of the ford of enticement, sound like unto peal of thunder,
 whereupon whole crowd of gobblins and sea-urchins laid hands upon
 pao-yü and dragged him down.
 
this so filled pao-yü with consternation that fell into a
 perspiration as profuse as rain, and simultaneously broke forth and
 shouted, "rescue me, k'o ching!"
 
these cries so terrified hsi jen and the other waiting-maids, that they
 rushed forward, and taking pao-yü in their arms, "don't be afraid,
 pao-yü," they said, "we are here."
 
but we must observe that mrs. ch'in was just inside the apartment in the
 act of recommending the young waiting-maids to be mindful that the cats
 and dogs did not start fight, when she unawares heard pao-yü, in his
 dream, call her by her infant name. in melancholy mood she therefore
 communed within herself, "as far as my infant name goes, there is, in
 this establishment, one who has any idea what it is, and how is it
 that has come to know it, and that utters it in his dream?" and
 she was at this period unable to fathom the reason. but, reader, listen
 to the explanations given in the chapter which follows.
 



chapter vi.
 
chia pao-yü reaps his first experience in licentious love.
 old goody liu pays visit to the jung kuo mansion.
 

mrs. ch'in, to resume our narrative, upon hearing pao-yü call her in his
 dream by her infant name, was at heart very exercised, but she did not
 however feel at liberty to make any minute inquiry.
 
pao-yü was, at this time, in such dazed state, as if had lost
 something, and the servants promptly gave him decoction of lungngan.
 after had taken few sips, forthwith rose and tidied his clothes.
 
hsi jen put out her hand to fasten the band of his garment, and as soon
 as she did so, and it came in contact with his person, it felt so icy
 cold to the touch, covered as it was all over with perspiration, that
 she speedily withdrew her hand in utter surprise.
 
"what's the matter with you?" she exclaimed.
 
blush suffused pao-yü's face, and took hsi jen's hand in tight
 grip. hsi jen was girl with all her wits about her; she was besides a
 couple of years older than pao-yü and had recently come to know
 something of the world, so that at the sight of his state, she to a
 great extent readily accounted for the reason in her heart. from modest
 shame, she unconsciously became purple in the face, and not venturing to
 ask another question she continued adjusting his clothes. this task
 accomplished, she followed him over to old lady chia's apartments; and
 after hurry-scurry meal, they came back to this side, and hsi jen
 availed herself of the absence of the nurses and waiting-maids to hand
 pao-yü another garment to change.
 
"please, dear hsi jen, don't tell any one," entreated pao-yü, with
 concealed shame.
 
"what did you dream of?" inquired hsi jen, smiling, as she tried to
 stifle her blushes, "and whence comes all this perspiration?"
 
"it's long story," said pao-yü, "which only few words will not
 suffice to explain."
 
accordingly recounted minutely, for her benefit, the subject of his
 dream. when came to where the fairy had explained to him the
 mysteries of love, hsi jen was overpowered with modesty and covered her
 face with her hands; and as she bent down, she gave way to fit of
 laughter. pao-yü had always been fond of hsi jen, on account of her
 gentleness, pretty looks and graceful and elegant manner, and he
 forthwith expounded to her all the mysteries had been taught by the
 fairy.
 
hsi jen was, of course, well aware that dowager lady chia had given her
 over to pao-yü, so that her present behaviour was likewise no
 transgression. and subsequently she secretly attempted with pao-yü a
 violent flirtation, and lucky enough one broke in upon them during
 their tête-à-tête. from this date, pao-yü treated hsi jen with special
 regard, far more than showed to the other girls, while hsi jen
 herself was still more demonstrative in her attentions to pao-yü. but
 for time we will make further remark about them.
 
as regards the household of the jung mansion, the inmates may, on adding
 up the total number, not have been found many; yet, counting the high as
 well as the low, there were three hundred persons and more. their
 affairs may not have been very numerous, still there were, every day,
 ten and twenty matters to settle; in fact, the household resembled, in
 every way, ravelled hemp, devoid even of clue-end, which could be used
 as an introduction.
 
just as we were considering what matter and what person it would be best
 to begin writing of, by lucky coincidence suddenly from distance of
 thousand li, person small and insignificant as grain of mustard
 seed happened, on account of her distant relationship with the jung
 family, to come on this very day to the jung mansion on visit. we
 shall therefore readily commence by speaking of this family, as it after
 all affords an excellent clue for beginning.
 
the surname of this mean and humble family was in point of fact wang.
 they were natives of this district. their ancestor had filled minor
 office in the capital, and had, in years gone by, been acquainted with
 lady feng's grandfather, that is madame wang's father. being covetous of
 the influence and affluence of the wang family, consequently joined
 ancestors with them, and was recognised by them as nephew.
 
at that time, there were only madame wang's eldest brother, that is lady
 feng's father, and madame wang herself, who knew anything of these
 distant relations, from the fact of having followed their parents to the
 capital. the rest of the family had one and all idea about them.
 
this ancestor had, at this date, been dead long ago, leaving only one
 called wang ch'eng. as the family estate was in state of ruin, he
 once more moved outside the city walls and settled down in his native
 village. wang ch'eng also died soon after his father, leaving son,
 known in his infancy as kou erh, who married miss liu, by whom had
 called by the infant name of pan erh, as well as daughter,
 ch'ing erh. his family consisted of four, and earned living from
 farming.
 
as kou erh was always busy with something or other during the day and
 his wife, dame liu, on the other hand, drew the water, pounded the rice
 and attended to all the other domestic concerns, the brother and sister,
 ch'ing erh and pan erh, the two of them, had one to look after them.
 (hence it was that) kou erh brought over his mother-in-law, old goody
 liu, to live with them.
 
this goody liu was an old widow, with good deal of experience. she had
 besides round her knees, so that she was dependent for her
 maintenance on couple of acres of poor land, with the result that when
 her son-in-law received her in his home, she naturally was ever willing
 to exert heart and mind to help her daughter and her son-in-law to earn
 their living.
 
this year, the autumn had come to an end, winter had commenced, and the
 weather had begun to be quite cold. provision had been made in the
 household for the winter months, and kou erh was, inevitably,
 exceedingly exercised in his heart. having had several cups of wine to
 dispel his distress, sat at home and tried to seize upon every trifle
 to give vent to his displeasure. his wife had not the courage to force
 herself in his way, and hence goody liu it was who encouraged him, as
 she could not bear to see the state of the domestic affairs.
 
"don't pull up for talking too much," she said; "but who of us
 country people isn't honest and open-hearted? as the size of the bowl we
 hold, so is the quantity of the rice we eat. in your young days, you
 were dependent on the support of your old father, so that eating and
 drinking became quite habit with you; that's how, at the present time,
 your resources are quite uncertain; when you had money, you looked
 ahead, and didn't mind behind; and now that you have money, you
 blindly fly into huffs. fine fellow and capital hero you have made!
 living though we now be away from the capital, we are after all at the
 feet of the emperor; this city of ch'ang ngan is strewn all over with
 money, but the pity is that there's one able to go and fetch it away;
 and it's use your staying at home and kicking your feet about."
 
"all you old lady know," rejoined kou erh, after had heard what she
 had to say, "is to sit on the couch and talk trash! is it likely you
 would have go and play the robber?"
 
"who tells you to become robber?" asked goody liu. "but it would be
 well, after all, that we should put our heads together and devise some
 means; for otherwise, is the money, pray, able of itself to run into our
 house?"
 
"had there been way," observed kou erh, smiling sarcastically, "would
 i have waited up to this moment? i have besides revenue collectors as
 relatives, or friends in official positions; and what way could we
 devise? 'but even had i any, they wouldn't be likely, i fear, to pay any
 heed to such as ourselves!"
 
"that, too, doesn't follow," remarked goody liu; "the planning of
 affairs rests with man, but the accomplishment of them rests with
 heaven. after we have laid our plans, we may, who can say, by relying on
 the sustenance of the gods, find some favourable occasion. leave it to
 me, i'll try and devise some lucky chance for you people! in years gone
 by, you joined ancestors with the wang family of chin ling, and twenty
 years back, they treated you with consideration; but of late, you've
 been so high and mighty, and not condescended to go and bow to them,
 that an estrangement has arisen. i remember how in years gone by, i and
 my daughter paid them visit. the second daughter of the family was
 really so pleasant and knew so well how to treat people with kindness,
 and without in fact any high airs! she's at present the wife of mr.
 chia, the second of the jung kuo mansion; and i hear people say that
 now that she's advanced in years, she's still more considerate to the
 poor, regardful of the old, and very fond of preparing vegetable food
 for the bonzes and performing charitable deeds. the head of the wang
 mansion has, it is true, been raised to some office on the frontier, but
 i hope that this lady secunda will anyhow notice us. how is it then that
 you don't find your way as far as there; for she may possibly remember
 old times, and some good may, one can say, come of it? i only wish
 that she would display some of her kind-heartedness, and pluck one hair
 from her person which would be, yea thicker than our waist."
 
"what you suggest, mother, is quite correct," interposed mrs. liu, kou
 erh's wife, who stood by and took up the conversation, "but with such
 mouth and phiz as yours and mine, how could we present ourselves before
 her door? why i fear that the man at her gate won't also like to go and
 announce us! and we'd better not go and have our mouths slapped in
 public!"
 
kou erh, who would have thought it, prized highly both affluence and
 fame, so that when heard these remarks, forthwith began to feel at
 heart little more at ease. when furthermore heard what his wife had
 to say, at once caught up the word as smiled.
 
"old mother," rejoined; "since that be your idea, and what's more,
 you have in days gone by seen this lady on one occasion, why shouldn't
 you, old lady, start to-morrow on visit to her and first ascertain how
 the wind blows!"
 
"ai ya!" exclaimed old goody, "it may very well be said that the
 marquis' door is like the wide ocean! what sort of thing am i? why the
 servants of that family wouldn't even recognise me! even were i to go,
 it would be on wild goose chase."
 
"no matter about that," observed kou erh; "i'll tell you good way; you
 just take along with you, your grandson, little pan erh, and go first
 and call upon chou jui, who is attached to that household; and when once
 you've seen him, there will be some little chance. this chou jui, at one
 time, was connected with my father in some affair or other, and we were
 on excellent terms with him."
 
"that i too know," replied goody liu, "but the thing is that you've had
 dealings with him for so long, that who knows how he's disposed
 towards us now? this would be hard to say. besides, you're man, and
 with mouth and phiz like that of yours, you couldn't, on any account,
 go on this errand. my daughter is young woman, and she too couldn't
 very well go and expose herself to public gaze. but by my sacrificing
 this old face of mine, and by going and knocking it (against the wall)
 there may, after all, be some benefit and all of us might reap profit."
 
that very same evening, they laid their plans, and the next morning
 before the break of day, old goody liu speedily got up, and having
 performed her toilette, she gave few useful hints to pan erh; who,
 being child of five or six years of age, was, when heard that he
 was to be taken into the city, at once so delighted that there was
 nothing that would not agree to.
 
without further delay, goody liu led off pan erh, and entered the city,
 and reaching the ning jung street, she came to the main entrance of the
 jung mansion, where, next to the marble lions, were to be seen crowd
 of chairs and horses. goody liu could not however muster the courage to
 go by, but having shaken her clothes, and said few more seasonable
 words to pan erh, she subsequently squatted in front of the side gate,
 whence she could see number of servants, swelling out their chests,
 pushing out their stomachs, gesticulating with their hands and kicking
 their feet about, while they were seated at the main entrance chattering
 about one thing and another.
 
goody liu felt constrained to edge herself forward. "gentlemen," she
 ventured, "may happiness betide you!"
 
the whole company of servants scrutinised her for time. "where do you
 come from?" they at length inquired.
 
"i've come to look up mr. chou, an attendant of my lady's," remarked
 goody liu, as she forced smile; "which of you, gentlemen, shall i
 trouble to do the favour of asking him to come out?"
 
the servants, after hearing what she had to say, paid, the whole number
 of them, heed to her; and it was after the lapse of considerable
 time that they suggested: "go and wait at distance, at the foot of
 that wall; and in short while, the visitors, who are in their house,
 will be coming out."
 
among the party of attendants was an old man, who interposed,
 
"don't baffle her object," expostulated; "why make fool of her?"
 and turning to goody liu: "this mr. chou," said, "is gone south: his
 house is at the back row; his wife is anyhow at home; so go round this
 way, until you reach the door, at the back street, where, if you will
 ask about her, you will be on the right track."
 
goody liu, having expressed her thanks, forthwith went, leading pan erh
 by the hand, round to the back door, where she saw several pedlars
 resting their burdens. there were also those who sold things to eat, and
 those who sold playthings and toys; and besides these, twenty or thirty
 boys bawled and shouted, making quite noise.
 
goody liu readily caught hold of one of them. "i'd like to ask you just
 word, my young friend," she observed; "there's mrs. chou here; is
 she at home?"
 
"which mrs. chou?" inquired the boy; "we here have three mrs. chous; and
 there are also two young married ladies of the name of chou. what are
 the duties of the one you want, i wonder ?"
 
"she's waiting-woman of my lady," replied goody liu.
 
"it's easy to get at her," added the boy; "just come along with me."
 
leading the way for goody liu into the backyard, they reached the wall
 of court, when pointed and said, "this is her house.--mother chou!"
 went on to shout with alacrity; "there's an old lady who wants to see
 you."
 
chou jui's wife was at home, and with all haste she came out to greet
 her visitor. "who is it?" she asked.
 
goody liu advanced up to her. "how are you," she inquired, "mrs. chou?"
 
mrs. chou looked at her for some time before she at length smiled and
 replied, "old goody liu, are you well? how many years is it since we've
 seen each other; tell me, for i forget just now; but please come in and
 sit."
 
"you're lady of rank," answered goody liu smiling, as she walked
 along, "and do forget many things. how could you remember such as
 ourselves?"
 
with these words still in her mouth, they had entered the house,
 whereupon mrs. chou ordered hired waiting-maid to pour the tea. while
 they were having their tea she remarked, "how pan erh has managed to
 grow!" and then went on to make inquiries on the subject of various
 matters, which had occurred after their separation.
 
"to-day," she also asked of goody liu, "were you simply passing by? or
 did you come with any express object?"
 
"i've come, the fact is, with an object!" promptly replied goody liu;
 "(first of all) to see you, my dear sister-in-law; and, in the second
 place also, to inquire after my lady's health. if you could introduce me
 to see her for while, it would be better; but if you can't, i must
 readily borrow your good offices, my sister-in-law, to convey my
 message."
 
mr. chou jui's wife, after listening to these words, at once became to a
 great extent aware of the object of her visit. her husband had, however,
 in years gone by in his attempt to purchase some land, obtained
 considerably the support of kou erh, so that when she, on this occasion,
 saw goody liu in such dilemma, she could not make up her mind to
 refuse her wish. being in the second place keen upon making display of
 her own respectability, she therefore said smilingly:
 
"old goody liu, pray compose your mind! you've come from far off with a
 pure heart and honest purpose, and how can i ever not show you the way
 how to see this living buddha? properly speaking, when people come and
 guests arrive, and verbal messages have to be given, these matters are
 not any of my business, as we all here have each one kind of duties to
 carry out. my husband has the special charge of the rents of land coming
 in, during the two seasons of spring and autumn, and when at leisure, he
 takes the young gentlemen out of doors, and then his business is done.
 as for myself, i have to accompany my lady and young married ladies on
 anything connected with out-of-doors; but as you are relative of my
 lady and have besides treated as high person and come to for
 help, i'll, after all, break this custom and deliver your message.
 there's only one thing, however, and which you, old lady, don't know. we
 here are not what we were five years before. my lady now doesn't much
 worry herself about anything; and it's entirely lady secunda who looks
 after the menage. but who do you presume is this lady secunda? she's the
 niece of my lady, and the daughter of my master, the eldest maternal
 uncle of by-gone days. her infant name was feng ko."
 
"is it really she?" inquired promptly goody liu, after this explanation.
 "isn't it strange? what i said about her years back has come out quite
 correct; but from all you say, shall i to-day be able to see her?"
 
"that goes without saying," replied chou jui's wife; "when any visitors
 come now-a-days, it's always lady feng who does the honours and
 entertains them, and it's better to-day that you should see her for a
 while, for then you will not have walked all this way to purpose."
 
"o to fu!" exclaimed old goody liu; "i leave it entirely to your
 convenience, sister-in-law."
 
"what's that you're saying?" observed chou jui's wife. "the proverb
 says: 'our convenience is the convenience of others.' all i have to do
 is to just utter one word, and what trouble will that be to me."
 
saying this, she bade the young waiting maid go to the side pavilion,
 and quietly ascertain whether, in her old ladyship's apartment, table
 had been laid.
 
the young waiting-maid went on this errand, and during this while, the
 two of them continued conversation on certain irrelevant matters.
 
"this lady feng," observed goody liu, "can this year be older than
 twenty, and yet so talented as to manage such household as this! the
 like of her is not easy to find!"
 
"hai! my dear old goody," said chou jui's wife, after listening to her,
 "it's not easy to explain; but this lady feng, though young in years, is
 nevertheless, in the management of affairs, superior to any man. she has
 now excelled the others and developed the very features of beautiful
 young woman. to say the least, she has ten thousand eyes in her heart,
 and were they willing to wager their mouths, why ten men gifted with
 eloquence couldn't even outdo her! but by and bye, when you've seen her,
 you'll know all about her! there's only this thing, she can't help being
 rather too severe in her treatment of those below her."
 
while yet she spake, the young waiting-maid returned. "in her venerable
 lady's apartment," she reported, "repast has been spread, and already
 finished; lady secunda is in madame wang's chamber."
 
as soon as chou jui's wife heard this news, she speedily got up and
 pressed goody liu to be off at once. "this is," she urged, "just the
 hour for her meal, and as she is free we had better first go and wait
 for her; for were we to be even one step too late, crowd of servants
 will come with their reports, and it will then be difficult to speak to
 her; and after her siesta, she'll have still less time to herself."
 
as she passed these remarks, they all descended the couch together.
 goody liu adjusted their dresses, and, having impressed few more words
 of advice on pan erh, they followed chou jui's wife through winding
 passages to chia lien's house. they came in the first instance into the
 side pavilion, where chou jui's wife placed old goody liu to wait a
 little, while she herself went ahead, past the screen-wall and into the
 entrance of the court.
 
hearing that lady feng had not come out, she went in search of an
 elderly waiting-maid of lady feng, p'ing erh by name, who enjoyed her
 confidence, to whom chou jui's wife first recounted from beginning to
 end the history of old goody liu.
 
"she has come to-day," she went on to explain, "from distance to pay
 her obeisance. in days gone by, our lady used often to meet her, so
 that, on this occasion, she can't but receive her; and this is why i've
 brought her in! i'll wait here for lady feng to come down, and explain
 everything to her; and i trust she'll not call to task for officious
 rudeness."
 
p'ing erh, after hearing what she had to say, speedily devised the plan
 of asking them to walk in, and to sit there pending (lady feng's
 arrival), when all would be right.
 
chou jui's wife thereupon went out and led them in. when they ascended
 the steps of the main apartment, young waiting-maid raised red
 woollen portière, and as soon as they entered the hall, they smelt a
 whiff of perfume as it came wafted into their faces: what the scent was
 they could not discriminate; but their persons felt as if they were
 among the clouds.
 
the articles of furniture and ornaments in the whole room were all so
 brilliant to the sight, and so vying in splendour that they made the
 head to swim and the eyes to blink, and old goody liu did nothing else
 the while than nod her head, smack her lips and invoke buddha. forthwith
 she was led to the eastern side into the suite of apartments, where was
 the bedroom of chia lien's eldest daughter. p'ing erh, who was standing
 by the edge of the stove-couch, cast couple of glances at old goody
 liu, and felt constrained to inquire how she was, and to press her to
 have seat.
 
goody liu, noticing that p'ing erh was entirely robed in silks, that she
 had gold pins fixed in her hair, and silver ornaments in her coiffure,
 and that her countenance resembled flower or the moon (in beauty),
 readily imagined her to be lady feng, and was about to address her as my
 lady; but when she heard mrs. chou speak to her as miss p'ing, and p'ing
 erh promptly address chou jui's wife as mrs. chou, she eventually became
 aware that she could be more than waiting-maid of certain
 respectability.
 
she at once pressed old goody liu and pan erh to take seat on the
 stove-couch. p'ing erh and chou jui's wife sat face to face, on the
 edges of the couch. the waiting-maids brought the tea. after they had
 partaken of it, old goody liu could hear nothing but "lo tang, lo
 tang" noise, resembling very much the sound of bolting frame winnowing
 flour, and she could not resist looking now to the east, and now to the
 west. suddenly in the great hall, she espied, suspended on pillar, a
 box at the bottom of which hung something like the weight of balance,
 which incessantly wagged to and fro.
 
"what can this thing be?" communed goody liu in her heart, "what can be
 its use?" while she was aghast, she unexpectedly heard sound of "tang"
 like the sound of golden bell or copper cymbal, which gave her quite a
 start. in twinkle of the eyes followed eight or nine consecutive
 strokes; and she was bent upon inquiring what it was, when she caught
 sight of several waiting-maids enter in confused crowd. "our lady has
 come down!" they announced.
 
p'ìng erh, together with chou jui's wife, rose with all haste. "old
 goody liu," they urged, "do sit down and wait till it's time, when we'll
 come and ask you in."
 
saying this, they went out to meet lady feng.
 
old goody liu, with suppressed voice and ear intent, waited in perfect
 silence. she heard at distance the voices of some people laughing,
 whereupon about ten or twenty women, with rustling clothes and
 petticoats, made their entrance, one by one, into the hall, and thence
 into the room on the other quarter. she also detected two or three
 women, with red-lacquered boxes in their hands, come over on this part
 and remain in waiting.
 
"get the repast ready!" she heard some one from the offside say.
 
the servants gradually dispersed and went out; and there only remained
 in attendance few of them to bring in the courses. for long time,
 not so much as the caw of crow could be heard, when she unexpectedly
 perceived two servants carry in couch-table, and lay it on this side
 of the divan. upon this table were placed bowls and plates, in proper
 order replete, as usual, with fish and meats; but of these only few
 kinds were slightly touched.
 
as soon as pan erh perceived (all these delicacies), set up such a
 noise, and would have some meat to eat, but goody liu administered to
 him such slap, that had to keep away.
 
suddenly, she saw mrs. chou approach, full of smiles, and as she waved
 her hand, she called her. goody liu understood her meaning, and at once
 pulling pan erh off the couch, she proceeded to the centre of the hall;
 and after mrs. chou had whispered to her again for while, they came at
 length with slow step into the room on this side, where they saw on the
 outside of the door, suspended by brass hooks, deep red flowered soft
 portière. below the window, on the southern side, was stove-couch, and
 on this couch was spread crimson carpet. leaning against the wooden
 partition wall, on the east side, stood chain-embroidered back-cushion
 and reclining pillow. there was also spread large watered satin
 sitting cushion with gold embroidered centre, and on the side stood
 cuspidores made of silver.
 
lady feng, when at home, usually wore on her head front-piece of dark
 martin à chao chün, surrounded with tassels of strung pearls. she had
 on robe of peach-red flowered satin, short pelisse of slate-blue
 stiff silk, lined with squirrel, and jupe of deep red foreign crepe,
 lined with ermine. resplendent with pearl-powder and with cosmetics, she
 sat in there, stately and majestic, with small brass poker in her
 hands, with which she was stirring the ashes of the hand-stove. p'ing
 erh stood by the side of the couch, holding very small lacquered
 tea-tray. in this tray was small tea-cup with cover. lady feng
 neither took any tea, nor did she raise her head, but was intent upon
 stirring the ashes of the hand-stove.
 
"how is it you haven't yet asked her to come in?" she slowly inquired;
 and as she spake, she turned herself round and was about to ask for some
 tea, when she perceived that mrs. chou had already introduced the two
 persons and that they were standing in front of her.
 
she forthwith pretended to rise, but did not actually get up, and with a
 face radiant with smiles, she ascertained about their health, after
 which she went in to chide chou jui's wife. "why didn't you tell they
 had come before?" she said.
 
old goody liu was already by this time prostrated on the ground, and
 after making several obeisances, "how are you, my lady?" she inquired.
 
"dear mrs. chou," lady feng immediately observed, "do pull her up, and
 don't let her prostrate herself! i'm yet young in years and don't know
 her much; what's more, i've idea what's the degree of the
 relationship between us, and i daren't speak directly to her."
 
"this is the old lady about whom i spoke short while back," speedily
 explained mrs. chou.
 
lady feng nodded her head assentingly.
 
by this time old goody liu had taken seat on the edge of the
 stove-couch. as for pan erh, had gone further, and taken refuge
 behind her back; and though she tried, by every means, to coax him to
 come forward and make bow, would not, for the life of him, consent.
 
"relatives though we be," remarked lady feng, as she smiled, "we haven't
 seen much of each other, so that our relations have been quite distant.
 but those who know how matters stand will assert that you all despise
 us, and won't often come to look us up; while those mean people, who
 don't know the truth, will imagine that we have eyes to look at any
 one."
 
old goody liu promptly invoked buddha. "we are at home in great
 straits," she pleaded, "and that's why it wasn't easy for us to manage
 to get away and come! even supposing we had come as far as this, had we
 not given your ladyship slap on the mouth, those gentlemen would also,
 in point of fact, have looked down upon us as mean lot."
 
"why, language such as this," exclaimed lady feng smilingly, "cannot
 help making one's heart full of displeasure! we simply rely upon the
 reputation of our grandfather to maintain the status of penniless
 official; that's all! why, in whose household is there anything
 substantial? we are merely the denuded skeleton of what we were in days
 of old, and more! as the proverb has it: the emperor himself has
 three families of poverty-stricken relatives; and how much more such as
 you and i?"
 
having passed these remarks, she inquired of mrs. chou, "have you let
 madame know, yes or no?"
 
"we are now waiting," replied mrs. chou, "for my lady's orders."
 
"go and have look," said lady feng; "but, should there be any one
 there, or should she be busy, then don't make any mention; but wait
 until she's free, when you can tell her about it and see what she says."
 
chou jui's wife, having expressed her compliance, went off on this
 errand. during her absence, lady feng gave orders to some servants to
 take few fruits and hand them to pan erh to eat; and she was inquiring
 about one thing and another, when there came large number of married
 women, who had the direction of affairs in the household, to make their
 several reports.
 
p'ing erh announced their arrival to lady feng, who said: "i'm now
 engaged in entertaining some guests, so let them come back again in the
 evening; but should there be anything pressing then bring it in and i'll
 settle it at once."
 
p'ing erh left the room, but she returned in short while. "i've asked
 them," she observed, "but as there's nothing of any urgency, i told them
 to disperse." lady feng nodded her head in token of approval, when she
 perceived chou jui's wife come back. "our lady," she reported, as she
 addressed lady feng, "says that she has leisure to-day, that if you,
 lady secunda, will entertain them, it will come to the same thing; that
 she's much obliged for their kind attention in going to the trouble of
 coming; that if they have come simply on stroll, then well and good,
 but that if they have aught to say, they should tell you, lady secunda,
 which will be tantamount to their telling her."
 
"i've nothing to say," interposed old goody liu. "i simply come to see
 our elder and our younger lady, which is duty on my part, relative
 as i am."
 
"well, if there's nothing particular that you've got to say, all right,"
 mrs. chou forthwith added, "but if you do have anything, don't hesitate
 telling lady secunda, and it will be just as if you had told our lady."
 
as she uttered these words, she winked at goody liu. goody liu
 understood what she meant, but before she could give vent to word, her
 face got scarlet, and though she would have liked not to make any
 mention of the object of her visit, she felt constrained to suppress her
 shame and to speak out.
 
"properly speaking," she observed, "this being the first time i see you,
 my lady, i shouldn't mention what i've to say, but as i come here from
 far off to seek your assistance, my old friend, i have help but to
 mention it."
 
she had barely spoken as much as this, when she heard the youths at the
 inner-door cry out: "the young gentleman from the eastern mansion has
 come."
 
lady feng promptly interrupted her. "old goody liu," she remarked, "you
 needn't add anything more." she, at the same time, inquired, "where's
 your master, mr. jung?" when became audible the sound of footsteps along
 the way, and in walked young man of seventeen or eighteen. his
 appearance was handsome, his person slender and graceful. had on
 light furs, girdle of value, costly clothes and beautiful cap.
 
at this stage, goody liu did not know whether it was best to sit down or
 to stand up, neither could she find anywhere to hide herself.
 
"pray sit down," urged lady feng, with laugh; "this is my nephew!' old
 goody liu then wriggled herself, now one way, and then another, on to
 the edge of the couch, where she took seat.
 
"my father," chia jung smilingly ventured, "has sent to ask favour
 of you, aunt. on some previous occasion, our grand aunt gave you, dear
 aunt, stove-couch glass screen, and as to-morrow father has invited
 some guests of high standing, wishes to borrow it to lay it out for a
 little show; after which purposes sending it back again."
 
"you're late by day," replied lady feng. "it was only yesterday that i
 gave it to some one."
 
chia jung, upon hearing this, forthwith, with giggles and smiles, made,
 near the edge of the couch, sort of genuflexion. "aunt," went on,
 "if you don't lend it, father will again say that i don't know how to
 speak, and i shall get another sound thrashing. you must have pity upon
 your nephew, aunt."
 
"i've never seen anything like this," observed lady feng sneeringly;
 "the things belonging to the wang family are all good, but where have
 you put all those things of yours? the only good way is that you
 shouldn't see anything of ours, for as soon as you catch sight of
 anything, you at once entertain wish to carry it off."
 
"pray, aunt," entreated chia jung with smile, "do show some
 compassion."
 
"mind your skin!" lady feng warned him, "if you do chip or spoil it in
 the least."
 
she then bade p'ing erh take the keys of the door of the upstairs room
 and send for several trustworthy persons to carry it away.
 
chia jung was so elated that his eyebrows dilated and his eyes smiled.
 "i've brought myself," added, with vehemence, "some men to take it
 away; i won't let them recklessly bump it about."
 
saying this, speedily got up and left the room.
 
lady feng suddenly bethought herself of something, and turning towards
 the window, she called out, "jung erh, come back." several servants who
 stood outside caught up her words: "mr. jung," they cried, "you're
 requested to go back;" whereupon chia jung turned round and retraced his
 steps; and with hands drooping respectfully against his sides, stood
 ready to listen to his aunt's wishes.
 
lady feng was however intent upon gently sipping her tea, and after a
 good long while of abstraction, she at last smiled: "never mind," she
 remarked; "you can go. but come after you've had your evening meal, and
 i'll then tell you about it. just now there are visitors here; and
 besides, i don't feel in the humour."
 
chia jung thereupon retired with gentle step.
 
old goody liu, by this time, felt more composed in body and heart. "i've
 to-day brought your nephew," she then explained, "not for anything else,
 but because his father and mother haven't at home so much as anything to
 eat; the weather besides is already cold, so that i had help but to
 take your nephew along and come to you, old friend, for assistance!"
 
as she uttered these words, she again pushed pan erh forward. "what did
 your father at home tell you to say?" she asked of him; "and what did he
 send us over here to do? was it only to give our minds to eating fruit?"
 
lady feng had long ago understood what she meant to convey, and finding
 that she had idea how to express herself in decent manner, she
 readily interrupted her with smile. "you needn't mention anything,"
 she observed, "i'm well aware of how things stand;" and addressing
 herself to mrs. chou, she inquired, "has this old lady had breakfast,
 yes or no?"
 
old goody liu hurried to explain. "as soon as it was daylight," she
 proceeded, "we started with all speed on our way here, and had we even
 so much as time to have any breakfast?"
 
lady feng promptly gave orders to send for something to eat. in short
 while chou jui's wife had called for table of viands for the guests,
 which was laid in the room on the eastern side, and then came to take
 goody liu and pan erh over to have their repast.
 
"my dear mrs. chou," enjoined lady feng, "give them all they want, as i
 can't attend to them myself;" which said, they hastily passed over into
 the room on the eastern side.
 
lady feng having again called mrs. chou, asked her: "when you first
 informed madame about them, what did she say?" "our lady observed,"
 replied chou jui's wife, "that they don't really belong to the same
 family; that, in former years, their grandfather was an official at the
 same place as our old master; that hence it came that they joined
 ancestors; that these few years there hasn't been much intercourse
 (between their family and ours); that some years back, whenever they
 came on visit, they were never permitted to go empty-handed, and that
 as their coming on this occasion to see us is also kind attention on
 their part, they shouldn't be slighted. if they've anything to say,"
 (our lady continued), "tell lady secunda to do the necessary, and that
 will be right."
 
"isn't it strange!" exclaimed lady feng, as soon as she had heard the
 message; "since we are all one family, how is it i'm not familiar even
 with so much as their shadow?"
 
while she was uttering these words, old goody liu had had her repast and
 come over, dragging pan erh; and, licking her lips and smacking her
 mouth, she expressed her thanks.
 
lady feng smiled. "do pray sit down," she said, "and listen to what i'm
 going to tell you. what you, old lady, meant little while back to
 convey, i'm already as much as yourself well acquainted with! relatives,
 as we are, we shouldn't in fact have waited until you came to the
 threshold of our doors, but ought, as is but right, to have attended to
 your needs. but the thing is that, of late, the household affairs are
 exceedingly numerous, and our lady, advanced in years as she is,
 couldn't at moment, it may possibly be, bethink herself of you all!
 what's more, when i took over charge of the management of the menage, i
 myself didn't know of all these family connections! besides, though to
 look at us from outside everything has grand and splendid aspect,
 people aren't aware that large establishments have such great hardships,
 which, were we to recount to others, they would hardly like to credit as
 true. but since you've now come from great distance, and this is the
 first occasion that you open your mouth to address me, how can i very
 well allow you to return to your home with empty hands! by lucky
 coincidence our lady gave, yesterday, to the waiting-maids, twenty taels
 to make clothes with, sum which they haven't as yet touched, and if
 you don't despise it as too little, you may take it home as first
 instalment, and employ it for your wants."
 
when old goody liu heard the mention made by lady feng of their
 hardships, she imagined that there was hope; but upon hearing her
 again speak of giving her twenty taels, she was exceedingly delighted,
 so much so that her eyebrows dilated and her eyes gleamed with smiles.
 
"we too know," she smilingly remarked, "all about difficulties! but the
 proverb says, 'a camel dying of leanness is even bigger by much than a
 horse!' matter what those distresses may be, were you yet to pluck
 one single hair from your body, my old friend, it would be stouter than
 our own waist."
 
chou jui's wife stood by, and on hearing her make these coarse
 utterances, she did all she could to give her hint by winking, and
 make her desist. lady feng laughed and paid heed; but calling p'ing
 erh, she bade her fetch the parcel of money, which had been given to
 them the previous day, and to also bring string of cash; and when
 these had been placed before goody liu's eyes: "this is," said lady
 feng, "silver to the amount of twenty taels, which was for the time
 given to these young girls to make winter clothes with; but some other
 day, when you've nothing to do, come again on stroll, in evidence of
 the good feeling which should exist between relatives. it's besides
 already late, and i don't wish to detain you longer and all for no
 purpose; but, on your return home, present my compliments to all those
 of yours to whom i should send them."
 
as she spake, she stood up. old goody liu gave utterance to thousand
 and ten thousand expressions of gratitude, and taking the silver and
 cash, she followed chou jui's wife on her way to the out-houses. "well,
 mother dear," inquired mrs. chou, "what did you think of my lady that
 you couldn't speak; and that whenever you opened your mouth it was all
 'your nephew.' i'll make just one remark, and i don't mind if you do get
 angry. had even been your kindred nephew, you should in fact have
 been somewhat milder in your language; for that gentleman, mr. jung, is
 her kith and kin nephew, and whence has appeared such another nephew of
 hers (as pan erh)?"
 
old goody liu smiled. "my dear sister-in-law," she replied, "as i gazed
 upon her, were my heart and eyes, pray, full of admiration or not? and
 how then could i speak as i should?"
 
as they were chatting, they reached chou jui's house. they had been
 sitting for while, when old goody liu produced piece of silver,
 which she was purposing to leave behind, to be given to the young
 servants in chou jui's house to purchase fruit to eat; but how could
 mrs. chou satiate her eye with such small piece of silver? she was
 determined in her refusal to accept it, so that old goody liu, after
 assuring her of her boundless gratitude, took her departure out of the
 back gate she had come in from.
 
reader, you do not know what happened after old goody liu left, but
 listen to the explanation which will be given in the next chapter.
 



chapter vii.
 
presentation of artificial flowers made in the palace.
 chia lien disports himself with hsi-feng.
 pao-yü meets ch'in chung at family party.
 

to resume our narrative. chou jui's wife having seen old goody liu off,
 speedily came to report the visit to madame wang; but, contrary to her
 expectation, she did not find madame wang in the drawing-room; and it
 was after inquiring of the waiting-maids that she eventually learnt that
 she had just gone over to have chat with "aunt" hsüeh. mrs. chou, upon
 hearing this, hastily went out by the eastern corner door, and through
 the yard on the east, into the pear fragrance court.
 
as soon as she reached the entrance, she caught sight of madame wang's
 waiting-maid, chin ch'uan-erh, playing about on the terrace steps, with
 young girl, who had just let her hair grow. when they saw chou jui's
 wife approach, they forthwith surmised that she must have some message
 to deliver, so they pursed up their lips and directed her to the
 inner-room. chou jui's wife gently raised the curtain-screen, and upon
 entering discovered madame wang, in voluble conversation with "aunt"
 hsüeh, about family questions and people in general.
 
mrs. chou did not venture to disturb them, and accordingly came into the
 inner room, where she found hsüeh pao-ch'ai in house dress, with her
 hair simply twisted into knot round the top of the head, sitting on
 the inner edge of the stove-couch, leaning on small divan table, in
 the act of copying pattern for embroidery, with the waiting-maid ying
 erh. when she saw her enter, pao ch'ai hastily put down her pencil, and
 turning round with face beaming with smiles, "sister chou," she said,
 "take seat."
 
chou jui's wife likewise promptly returned the smile.
 
"how is my young lady?" she inquired, as she sat down on the edge of the
 couch. "i haven't seen you come over on the other side for two or three
 days! has mr. pao-yü perhaps given you offence?"
 
"what an idea!" exclaimed pao ch'ai, with smile. "it's simply that
 i've had for the last couple of days my old complaint again, and that
 i've in consequence kept quiet all this time, and looked after myself."
 
"is that it?" asked chou jui's wife; "but after all, what rooted kind of
 complaint are you subject to, miss? you should lose really time in
 sending for doctor to diagnose it, and give you something to make you
 all right. with your tender years, to have an organic ailment is indeed
 trifle!"
 
pao ch'ai laughed when she heard these remarks.
 
"pray," she said, "don't allude to this again; for this ailment of mine
 i've seen, i can't tell you, how many doctors; taken end of medicine
 and spent i don't know how much money; but the more we did so, not the
 least little bit of relief did i see. lucky enough, we eventually came
 across bald-pated bonze, whose speciality was the cure of nameless
 illnesses. we therefore sent for him to see me, and said that i had
 brought this along with from the womb as sort of inflammatory
 virus, that luckily i had constitution strong and hale so that it
 didn't matter; and that it would be of avail if i took pills or any
 medicines. then told prescription from abroad, and gave also
 packet of certain powder as preparative, with peculiar smell and
 strange flavour. advised me, whenever my complaint broke out, to take
 pill, which would be sure to put right again. and this has, after
 all, strange to say, done great deal of good."
 
"what kind of prescription is this one from abroad, i wonder," remarked
 mrs. chou; "if you, miss, would only tell me, it would be worth our
 while bearing it in mind, and recommending it to others: and if ever we
 came across any one afflicted with this disease, we would also be doing
 charitable deed."
 
"you'd better not ask for the prescription," rejoined pao ch'ai smiling.
 "why, its enough to wear one out with perplexity! the necessaries and
 ingredients are few, and all easy to get, but it would be difficult to
 find the lucky moment! you want twelve ounces of the pollen of the white
 peone, which flowers in spring, twelve ounces of the pollen of the white
 summer lily, twelve ounces of the pollen of the autumn hibiscus flower,
 and twelve ounces of the white plum in bloom in the winter. you take the
 four kinds of pollen, and put them in the sun, on the very day of the
 vernal equinox of the succeeding year to get dry, and then you mix them
 with the powder and pound them well together. you again want twelve mace
 of water, fallen on 'rain water' day....."
 
"good gracious!" exclaimed mrs. chou promptly, as she laughed. "from all
 you say, why you want three years' time! and what if rain falls on
 'rain water' day! what would one then do?"
 
"quite so!" pao ch'ai remarked smilingly; "how can there be such an
 opportune rain on that very day! but to wait is also the best thing,
 there's nothing else to be done. besides, you want twelve mace of dew,
 collected on 'white dew' day, and twelve mace of the hoar frost,
 gathered on 'frost descent' day, and twelve mace of snow, fallen on
 'slight snow' day! you next take these four kinds of waters and mix them
 with the other ingredients, and make pills of the size of lungngan.
 you keep them in an old porcelain jar, and bury them under the roots of
 some flowers; and when the ailment betrays itself, you produce it and
 take pill, washing it down with two candareens of yellow cedar
 decoction."
 
"o-mi-to-fu!" cried mrs. chou, when she heard all this, bursting out
 laughing. "it's really enough to kill one! you might wait ten years and
 find such lucky moments!"
 
"fortunate for me, however," pursued pao ch'ai, "in the course of year
 or two, after the bonze had told about this prescription, we got all
 the ingredients; and, after much trouble, we compounded supply, which
 we have now brought along with us from the south to the north; and lies
 at present under the pear trees."
 
"has this medicine any name or other of its own?" further inquired mrs.
 chou.
 
"it has name," replied pao ch'ai; "the mangy-headed bonze also told it
 me; called it 'cold fragrance' pill."
 
chou jui's wife nodded her head, as she heard these words. "what do you
 feel like after all when this complaint manifests itself?" she went on
 to ask.
 
"nothing much," replied pao ch'ai; "i simply pant and cough bit; but
 after i've taken pill, i get over it, and it's all gone."
 
mrs. chou was bent upon making some further remark, when madame wang was
 suddenly heard to enquire, "who is in here?"
 
mrs. chou went out hurriedly and answered; and forthwith told her all
 about old goody liu's visit. having waited for while, and seeing that
 madame wang had nothing to say, she was on the point of retiring, when
 "aunt" hsueh unexpectedly remarked smiling: "wait bit! i've something
 to give you to take along with you."
 
and as she spoke, she called for hsiang ling. the sound of the
 screen-board against the sides of the door was heard, and in walked the
 waiting-maid, who had been playing with chin ch'uan-erh. "did my lady
 call?" she asked.
 
"bring that box of flowers," said mrs. hsueh.
 
hsiang ling assented, and brought from the other side small
 embroidered silk box.
 
"these," explained "aunt" hsüeh, "are new kind of flowers, made in the
 palace. they consist of twelve twigs of flowers of piled gauze. i
 thought of them yesterday, and as they will, the pity is, only get old,
 if uselessly put away, why not give them to the girls to wear them in
 their hair! i meant to have sent them over yesterday, but i forgot all
 about them. you come to-day most opportunely, and if you will take them
 with you, i shall have got them off my hands. to the three young ladies
 in your family give two twigs each, and of the six that will remain give
 couple to miss lin, and the other four to lady feng."
 
"better keep them and give them to your daughter pao ch'ai to wear,"
 observed madame wang, "and have done with it; why think of all the
 others?"
 
"you don't know, sister," replied "aunt" hsüeh, "what crotchety thing
 pao ch'ai is! she has liking for flower or powder."
 
with these words on her lips, chou jui's wife took the box and walked
 out of the door of the room. perceiving that chin ch'uan-erh was still
 sunning herself outside, chou jui's wife asked her: "isn't this hsiang
 ling, the waiting-maid that we've often heard of as having been
 purchased just before the departure of the hsüeh family for the capital,
 and on whose account there occurred some case of manslaughter or other?"
 
"of course it's she," replied chin ch'uan. but as they were talking,
 they saw hsiang ling draw near smirkingly, and chou jui's wife at once
 seized her by the hand, and after minutely scrutinizing her face for a
 time, she turned round to chin ch'uan-erh and smiled. "with these
 features she really resembles slightly the style of lady jung of our
 eastern mansion."
 
"so i too maintain!" said chin ch'uan-erh.
 
chou jui's wife then asked hsiang ling, "at what age did you enter this
 family? and where are your father and mother at present?" and also
 inquired, "in what year of your teens are you? and of what place are you
 native?"
 
but hsiang ling, after listening to all these questions, simply nodded
 her head and replied, "i can't remember."
 
when mrs. chou and chin ch'uan-erh heard these words, their spirits
 changed to grief, and for while they felt affected and wounded at
 heart; but in short time, mrs. chou brought the flowers into the room
 at the back of madame wang's principal apartment.
 
the fact is that dowager lady chia had explained that as her
 granddaughters were too numerous, it would not be convenient to crowd
 them together in one place, that pao-yü and tai-yü should only remain
 with her in this part to break her loneliness, but that ying ch'un, t'an
 ch'un, and hsi ch'un, the three of them, should move on this side in the
 three rooms within the antechamber, at the back of madame lady wang's
 quarters; and that li wan should be told off to be their attendant and
 to keep an eye over them.
 
chou jui's wife, therefore, on this occasion came first to these rooms
 as they were on her way, but she only found few waiting-maids
 assembled in the antechamber, waiting silently to obey call.
 
ying ch'un's waiting-maid, ssu chi, together with shih shu, t'an ch'un's
 waiting-maid, just at this moment raised the curtain, and made their
 egress, each holding in her hand tea-cup and saucer; and chou jui's
 wife readily concluding that the young ladies were sitting together also
 walked into the inner room, where she only saw ying ch'un and t'an ch'un
 seated near the window, in the act of playing chess. mrs. chou presented
 the flowers and explained whence they came, and what they were.
 
the girls forthwith interrupted their game, and both with curtsey,
 expressed their thanks, and directed the waiting-maids to put the
 flowers away.
 
mrs. chou complied with their wishes (and handing over the flowers);
 "miss hsi ch'un," she remarked, "is not at home; and possibly she's over
 there with our old lady."
 
"she's in that room, isn't she?" inquired the waiting-maids.
 
mrs. chou at these words readily came into the room on this side, where
 she found hsi ch'un, in company with certain chih neng, young nun of
 the "moon reflected on water" convent, talking and laughing together. on
 seeing chou jui's wife enter, hsi ch'un at once asked what she wanted,
 whereupon chou jui's wife opened the box of flowers, and explained who
 had sent them.
 
"i was just telling chih neng," remarked hsi ch'un laughing, "that i
 also purpose shortly shaving my head and becoming nun; and strange
 enough, here you again bring flowers; but supposing i shave my head,
 where can i wear them?"
 
they were all very much amused for time with this remark, and hsi
 ch'un told her waiting-maid, ju hua, to come and take over the flowers.
 
"what time did you come over?" then inquired mrs. chou of chih neng.
 "where is that bald-pated and crotchety superior of yours gone?"
 
"we came," explained chih neng, "as soon as it was day; after calling
 upon madame wang, my superior went over to pay visit in the mansion of
 mr. yü, and told to wait for her here."
 
"have you received," further asked mrs. chou, "the monthly allowance for
 incense offering due on the fifteenth or not?"
 
"i can't say," replied chih neng.
 
"who's now in charge of the issue of the monthly allowances to the
 various temples?" interposed hsi ch'un, addressing mrs. chou, as soon as
 she heard what was said.
 
"it's yü hsin," replied chou jui's wife, "who's intrusted with the
 charge."
 
"that's how it is," observed hsi ch'un with chuckle; "soon after the
 arrival of the superior, yü hsin's wife came over and kept on whispering
 with her for some time; so i presume it must have been about this
 allowance."
 
mrs. chou then went on to bandy few words with chih neng, after which
 she came over to lady feng's apartments. proceeding by narrow passage,
 she passed under li wan's back windows, and went along the wall
 ornamented with creepers on the west. going out of the western side
 gate, she entered lady feng's court, and walked over into the entrance
 hall, where she only found the waiting-girl feng erh, sitting on the
 doorsteps of lady feng's apartments.
 
when she caught sight of mrs. chou approaching, she at once waved her
 hand, bidding her go to the eastern room. chou jui's wife understood her
 meaning, and hastily came on tiptoe to the chamber on the east, where
 she saw nurse patting lady feng's daughter to sleep.
 
mrs. chou promptly asked the nurse in low tone of voice: "is the young
 lady asleep at this early hour? but if even she is i must wake her up."
 
the nurse nodded her head in assent, but as these inquiries were being
 made, sound of laughter came from over the other side, in which lady
 feng's voice could be detected; followed, shortly after, by the sound of
 door opening, and out came p'ing erh, with large brass basin in her
 hands, which she told feng erh to fill with water and take inside.
 
p'ing erh forthwith entered the room on this side, and upon perceiving
 chou jui's wife: "what have you come here again for, my old lady?" she
 readily inquired.
 
chou jui's wife rose without any delay, and handed her the box. "i've
 come," said she, "to bring you present of flowers."
 
upon hearing this, p'ing erh opened the box, and took out four sprigs,
 and, turning round, walked out of the room. in short while she came
 from the inner room with two sprigs in her hand, and calling first of
 all ts'ai ming, she bade her take the flowers over to the mansion on the
 other side and present them to "madame" jung, after which she asked mrs.
 chou to express her thanks on her return.
 
chou jui's wife thereupon came over to dowager lady chia's room on this
 side of the compound, and as she was going through the entrance hall,
 she casually came, face to face, with her daughter, got up in gala
 dress, just coming from the house of her mother-in-law.
 
"what are you running over here for at this time?" promptly inquired
 mrs. chou.
 
"have you been well of late, mother?" asked her daughter. "i've been
 waiting for ever so long at home, but you never come out! what's there
 so pressing that has prevented you from returning home? i waited till i
 was tired, and then went on all alone, and paid my respects to our
 venerable lady; i'm now, on my way to inquire about our lady wang. what
 errand haven't you delivered as yet, ma; and what is it you're holding?"
 
"ai! as luck would have it," rejoined chou jui's wife smilingly, "old
 goody liu came over to-day, so that besides my own hundred and one
 duties, i've had to run about here and there ever so long, and all for
 her! while attending to these, mrs. hsueh came across me, and asked me
 to take these flowers to the young ladies, and i've been at it up to
 this very moment, and haven't done yet! but coming at this time, you
 must surely have something or other that you want to do for you!
 what's it?"
 
"really ma, you're quick at guessing!" exclaimed her daughter with a
 smile; "i'll tell you what it's all about. the day before yesterday,
 your son-in-law had glass of wine too many, and began altercating with
 some person or other; and some one, i don't know why, spread some evil
 report, saying that his antecedents were not clear, and lodged charge
 against him at the yamen, pressing the authorities to deport him to his
 native place. that's why i've come over to consult with you, as to whom
 we should appeal to, to do us this favour of helping us out of our
 dilemma!"
 
"i knew at once," mrs. chou remarked after listening, "that there was
 something wrong; but this is nothing hard to settle! go home and wait
 for and i'll come straightway, as soon as i've taken these flowers to
 miss lin; our madame wang and lady secunda have both leisure (to
 attend to you now,) so go back and wait for me! what's the use of so
 much hurry!"
 
her daughter, upon hearing this, forthwith turned round to go back, when
 she added as she walked away, "mind, mother, and make haste."
 
"all right," replied chou jui's wife, "of course i will; you are young
 yet, and without experience, and that's why you are in this flurry."
 
as she spoke, she betook herself into tai-yü's apartments. contrary to
 her expectation tai-yü was not at this time in her own room, but in
 pao-yü's; where they were amusing themselves in trying to solve the
 "nine strung rings" puzzle. on entering mrs. chou put on smile.
 "'aunt' hsüeh," she explained, "has told to bring these flowers and
 present them to you to wear in your hair."
 
"what flowers?" exclaimed pao-yü. "bring them here and let see them."
 
as uttered these words, readily stretched out his hands and took
 them over, and upon opening the box and looking in, discovered, in
 fact, two twigs of novel and artistic kind of artificial flowers, of
 piled gauze, made in the palace.
 
tai-yü merely cast glance at them, as pao-yü held them. "have these
 flowers," she inquired eagerly, "been sent to alone, or have all the
 other girls got some too?"
 
"each one of the young ladies has the same," replied mrs. chou; "and
 these two twigs are intended for you, miss."
 
tai-yü forced smile. "oh! i see," she observed. "if all the others
 hadn't chosen, even these which remain over wouldn't have been given to
 me."
 
chou jui's wife did not utter word in reply.
 
"sister chou, what took you over on the other side?" asked pao-yü.
 
"i was told that our madame wang was over there," explained mrs. chou,
 "and as i went to give her message, 'aunt' hsüeh seized the
 opportunity to ask to bring over these flowers."
 
"what was cousin pao ch'ai doing at home?" asked pao-yü. "how is it
 she's not even been over for these few days?"
 
"she's not quite well," remarked mrs. chou.
 
when pao-yü heard this news, "who'll go," speedily ascertained of the
 waiting-maids, "and inquire after her? tell her that cousin lin and i
 have sent round to ask how our aunt and cousin are getting on! ask her
 what she's ailing from and what medicines she's taking, and explain to
 her that i know i ought to have gone over myself, but that on my coming
 back from school short while back, i again got slight chill; and
 that i'll go in person another day."
 
while pao-yü was yet speaking, hsi hsüeh volunteered to take the
 message, and went off at once; and mrs. chou herself took her leave
 without another word.
 
mrs. chou's son-in-law was, in fact, leng tzu-hsing, the intimate friend
 of yü-ts'un. having recently become involved with some party in a
 lawsuit, on account of the sale of some curios, had expressly charged
 his wife to come and sue for the favour (of helping hand). chou jui's
 wife, relying upon her master's prestige, did not so much as take the
 affair to heart; and having waited till evening, she simply went over
 and requested lady feng to befriend her, and the matter was forthwith
 ended.
 
when the lamps were lit, lady feng came over, after having disrobed
 herself, to see madame wang. "i've already taken charge," she observed,
 "of the things sent round to-day by the chen family. as for the presents
 from us to them, we should avail ourselves of the return of the boats,
 by which the fresh delicacies for the new year were forwarded, to hand
 them to them to carry back."
 
madame wang nodded her head in token of approval.
 
"the birthday presents," continued lady feng, "for lady ling ngan, the
 mother of the earl of ling ngan, have already been got together, and
 whom will you depute to take them over?"
 
"see," suggested madame wang, "who has nothing to do; let four maids go
 and all will be right! why come again and ask me?"
 
"our eldest sister-in-law chen," proceeded lady feng, "came over to
 invite to go to-morrow to their place for little change. i don't
 think there will be anything for to do to-morrow."
 
"whether there be or not," replied madame wang, "it doesn't matter; you
 must go, for whenever she comes with an invitation, it includes us, who
 are your seniors, so that, of course, it isn't such pleasant thing for
 you; but as she doesn't ask us this time, but only asks you, it's
 evident that she's anxious that you should have little distraction,
 and you mustn't disappoint her good intention. besides it's certainly
 right that you should go over for change."
 
lady feng assented, and presently li wan, ying ch'un and the other
 cousins, likewise paid each her evening salutation and retired to their
 respective rooms, where nothing of any notice transpired.
 
the next day lady feng completed her toilette, and came over first to
 tell madame wang that she was off, and then went to say good-bye to
 dowager lady chia; but when pao-yü heard where she was going, also
 wished to go; and as lady feng had help but to give in, and to wait
 until had changed his clothes, the sister and brother-in-law got into
 carriage, and in short while entered the ning mansion.
 
mrs. yu, the wife of chia chen, and mrs. ch'in, the wife of mr. chia
 jung, the two sisters-in-law, had, along with number of maids,
 waiting-girls, and other servants, come as far as the ceremonial gate to
 receive them, and mrs. yu, upon meeting lady feng, for while indulged,
 as was her wont, in humorous remarks, after which, leading pao-yü by the
 hand, they entered the drawing room and took their seats, mrs. ch'in
 handed tea round.
 
"what have you people invited to come here for?" promptly asked lady
 feng; "if you have anything to present with, hand it to at once,
 for i've other things to attend to."
 
mrs. yu and mrs. ch'in had barely any time to exchange any further
 remarks, when several matrons interposed, smilingly: "had our lady not
 come to-day, there would have been help for it, but having come, you
 can't have it all your own way."
 
while they were conversing about one thing and another, they caught
 sight of chia jung come in to pay his respects, which prompted pao-yü to
 inquire, "isn't my elder brother at home to-day?"
 
"he's gone out of town to-day," replied mrs. yu, "to inquire after his
 grandfather. you'll find sitting here," she continued, "very dull, and
 why not go out and have stroll?"
 
"a strange coincidence has taken place to-day," urged mrs. ch'in, with a
 smile; "some time back you, uncle pao, expressed wish to see my
 brother, and to-day too happens to be here at home. i think he's in
 the library; but why not go and see for yourself, uncle pao?"
 
pao-yü descended at once from the stove-couch, and was about to go, when
 mrs. yu bade the servants to mind and go with him. "don't you let him
 get into trouble," she enjoined. "it's far different thing when he
 comes over under the charge of his grandmother, when he's all right."
 
"if that be so," remarked lady feng, "why not ask the young gentleman to
 come in, and then i too can see him. there isn't, i hope, any objection
 to my seeing him?"
 
"never mind! never mind!" observed mrs. yu, smilingly; "it's as well
 that you shouldn't see him. this brother of mine is not, like the boys
 of our chia family, accustomed to roughly banging and knocking about.
 other people's children are brought up politely and properly, and not in
 this vixenish style of yours. why, you'd ridicule him to death!"
 
"i won't laugh at him then, that's all," smiled lady feng; "tell them to
 bring him in at once."
 
"he's shy," proceeded mrs. ch'in, "and has seen nothing much of the
 world, so that you are sure to be put out when you see him, sister."
 
"what an idea!" exclaimed lady feng. "were even cha himself, i'd
 like to see him; so don't talk trash; if, after all, you don't bring him
 round at once, i'll give you good slap on the mouth."
 
"i daren't be obstinate," answered mrs. ch'in smiling; "i'll bring him
 round!"
 
in short while she did in fact lead in young lad, who, compared with
 pao-yü, was somewhat more slight but, from all appearances, superior to
 pao-yü in eyes and eyebrows, (good looks), which were so clear and
 well-defined, in white complexion and in ruddy lips, as well as graceful
 appearance and pleasing manners. was however bashful and timid, like
 girl.
 
in shy and demure way, made bow to lady feng and asked after her
 health.
 
lady feng was simply delighted with him. "you take low seat next to
 him!" she ventured laughingly as she first pushed pao-yü back. then
 readily stooping forward, she took this lad by the hand and asked him to
 take seat next to her. presently she inquired about his age, his
 studies and such matters, when she found that at school went under
 the name of ch'in chung.
 
the matrons and maids in attendance on lady feng, perceiving that this
 was the first time their mistress met ch'in chung, (and knowing) that
 she had not at hand the usual presents, forthwith ran over to the other
 side and told p'ing erh about it.
 
p'ing erh, aware of the close intimacy that existed between lady feng
 and mrs. ch'in, speedily took upon herself to decide, and selecting a
 piece of silk, and two small gold medals, (bearing the wish that he
 should attain) the highest degree, the senior wranglership, she handed
 them to the servants who had come over, to take away.
 
lady feng, however, explained that her presents were too mean by far,
 but mrs. ch'in and the others expressed their appreciation of them; and
 in short time the repast was over, and mrs. yu, lady feng and mrs.
 ch'in played at dominoes, but of this details need be given; while
 both pao-yü and ch'in chung sat down, got up and talked, as they
 pleased.
 
since had first glanced at ch'in chung, and seen what kind of person
 was, felt at heart as if had lost something, and after being
 plunged in dazed state for time, began again to give way to
 foolish thoughts in his mind.
 
"there are then such beings as in the world!" reflected. "i now
 see there are! i'm however better than wallowing pig or mangy
 cow! despicable destiny! why was i ever born in this household of a
 marquis and in the mansion of duke? had i seen the light in the home
 of some penniless scholar, or poverty-stricken official, i could long
 ago have enjoyed the communion of his friendship, and i would not have
 lived my whole existence in vain! though more honourable than he, it is
 indeed evident that silk and satins only serve to swathe this rotten
 trunk of mine, and choice wines and rich meats only to gorge the filthy
 drain and miry sewer of this body of mine! wealth! and splendour! ye are
 more than contaminated with pollution by me!"
 
ever since ch'in chung had noticed pao-yü's unusual appearance, his
 sedate deportment, and what is more, his hat ornamented with gold, and
 his dress full of embroidery, attended by beautiful maids and handsome
 youths, did not indeed think it matter of surprise that every one
 was fond of him.
 
"born as i have had the misfortune to be," went on to commune within
 himself, "in an honest, though poor family, how can i presume to enjoy
 his companionship! this is verily proof of what barrier poverty and
 wealth set between man and man. what serious misfortune is this too in
 this mortal world!"
 
in wild and inane ideas of the same strain, indulged these two youths!
 
pao-yü by and by further asked of him what books was reading, and
 ch'in chung, in answer to these inquiries, told him the truth. few
 more questions and answers followed; and after about ten remarks, a
 greater intimacy sprang up between them.
 
tea and fruits were shortly served, and while they were having their
 tea, pao-yü suggested, "we two don't take any wine, and why shouldn't we
 have our fruit served on the small couch inside, and go and sit there,
 and thus save you all the trouble?"
 
the two of them thereupon came into the inner apartment to have their
 tea; and mrs. ch'in attended to the laying out of fruit and wines for
 lady feng, and hurriedly entered the room and hinted to pao-yü: "dear
 uncle pao, your nephew is young, and should happen to say anything
 disrespectful, do please overlook it, for my sake, for though shy, he's
 naturally of perverse and wilful disposition, and is rather given to
 having his own way."
 
"off with you!" cried pao-yü laughing; "i know it all." mrs. ch'in then
 went on to give bit of advice to her brother, and at length came to
 keep lady feng company. presently lady feng and mrs. yu sent another
 servant to tell pao-yü that there was outside of everything they might
 wish to eat and that they should mind and go and ask for it; and pao-yü
 simply signified that they would; but his mind was not set upon drinking
 or eating; all did was to keep making inquiries of ch'in chung about
 recent family concerns.
 
ch'in chung went on to explain that his tutor had last year relinquished
 his post, that his father was advanced in years and afflicted with
 disease, and had multifarious public duties to preoccupy his mind, so
 that had as yet had time to make arrangements for another tutor,
 and that all did was more than to keep up his old tasks; that as
 regards study, it was likewise necessary to have the company of one or
 two intimate friends, as then only, by dint of frequent exchange of
 ideas and opinions, one could arrive at progress; and pao-yü gave him no
 time to complete, but eagerly urged, "quite so! but in our household, we
 have family school, and those of our kindred who have means
 sufficient to engage the services of tutor are at liberty to come over
 for the sake of study, and the sons and brothers of our relatives are
 likewise free to join the class. as my own tutor went home last year, i
 am now also wasting my time doing nothing; my father's intention was
 that i too should have gone over to this school, so that i might at
 least temporarily keep up what i have already read, pending the arrival
 of my tutor next year, when i could again very well resume my studies
 alone at home. but my grandmother raised objections; maintaining first
 of all, that the boys who attend the family classes being so numerous,
 she feared we would be sure to be up to mischief, which wouldn't be at
 all proper; and that, in the second place, as i had been ill for some
 time, the matter should be dropped, for the present. but as, from what
 you say, your worthy father is very much exercised on this score, you
 should, on your return, tell him all about it, and come over to our
 school. i'll also be there as your schoolmate; and as you and i will
 reap mutual benefit from each other's companionship, won't it be nice!"
 
"when my father was at home the other day," ch'in chung smiled and said,
 "he alluded to the question of tutor, and explained that the free
 schools were an excellent institution. even meant to have come and
 talked matters over with his son-in-law's father about my introduction,
 but with the urgent concerns here, didn't think it right for him to
 come about this small thing, and make any trouble. but if you really
 believe that i might be of use to you, in either grinding the ink, or
 washing the slab, why shouldn't you at once make the needful
 arrangements, so that neither you nor i may idle our time? and as we
 shall be able to come together often and talk matters over, and set at
 the same time our parents' minds at ease, and to enjoy the pleasure of
 friendship, won't it be profitable thing!"
 
"compose your mind!" suggested pao-yü. "we can by and by first of all,
 tell your brother-in-law, and your sister as well as sister-in-law
 secunda lien; and on your return home to-day, lose time in explaining
 all to your worthy father, and when i get back, i'll speak to my
 grandmother; and i can't see why our wishes shouldn't speedily be
 accomplished."
 
by the time they had arrived at this conclusion, the day was far
 advanced, and the lights were about to be lit; and they came out and
 watched them once more for time as they played at dominoes. when they
 came to settle their accounts mrs. ch'in and mrs. yu were again the
 losers and had to bear the expense of theatrical and dinner party; and
 while deciding that they should enjoy this treat the day after the
 morrow, they also had the evening repast.
 
darkness having set in, mrs. yu gave orders that two youths should
 accompany mr. ch'in home. the matrons went out to deliver the
 directions, and after somewhat long interval, ch'in chung said goodbye
 and was about to start on his way.
 
"whom have you told off to escort him?" asked mrs. yu.
 
"chiao ta," replied the matrons, "has been told to go, but it happens
 that he's under the effects of drink and making free use again of
 abusive language."
 
mrs. yu and mrs. chin remonstrated. "what's the use," they said, "of
 asking him? that mean fellow shouldn't be chosen, but you will go again
 and provoke him."
 
"people always maintain," added lady feng, "that you are far too
 lenient. but fancy allowing servants in this household to go on in this
 way; why, what will be the end of it?"
 
"you don't mean to tell me," observed mrs. yu, "that you don't know this
 chiao ta? why, even the gentlemen one and all pay heed to his doings!
 your eldest brother, chia cheng, too doesn't notice him. it's all
 because when was young followed our ancestor in three or four
 wars, and because on one occasion, by extracting our senior from the
 heap of slain and carrying him on his back, saved his life. he
 himself suffered hunger and stole food for his master to eat; they had
 water for two days; and when did get half bowl, gave it to
 his master, while himself had sewage water. now simply presumes
 upon the sentimental obligations imposed by these services. when the
 seniors of the family still lived, they all looked upon him with
 exceptional regard; but who at present ventures to interfere with him?
 is also advanced in years, and doesn't care about any decent manners;
 his sole delight is wine; and when gets drunk, there isn't single
 person whom won't abuse. i've again and again told the stewards not
 to henceforward ask chiao ta to do any work whatever, but to treat him
 as dead and gone; and here he's sent again to-day."
 
"how can i not know all about this chiao ta?" remarked lady feng; "but
 the secret of all this trouble is, that you won't take any decisive
 step. why not pack him off to some distant farm, and have done with
 him?" and as she spoke, "is our carriage ready?" she went on to inquire.
 
"all ready and waiting," interposed the married women.
 
lady feng also got up, said good-bye, and hand in hand with pao-yü, they
 walked out of the room, escorted by mrs. yu and the party, as far as the
 entrance of the main hall, where they saw the lamps shedding brilliant
 light and the attendants all waiting on the platforms. chiao ta,
 however, availing himself of chia chen's absence from home, and elated
 by wine, began to abuse the head steward lai erh for his injustice.
 
"you bully of the weak and coward with the strong," cried, "when
 there's any pleasant charge, you send the other servants, but when it's
 question of seeing any one home in the dark, then you ask me, you
 disorderly clown! nice way you act the steward, indeed! do you forget
 that if mr. chiao ta chose to raise one leg, it would be good deal
 higher than your head! remember please, that twenty years ago, mr. chiao
 ta wouldn't even so much as look at any one, matter who it was; not
 to mention pack of hybrid creatures like yourselves!"
 
while went on cursing and railing with all his might, chia jung
 appeared walking by lady feng's carriage. all the servants having tried
 to hush him and not succeeding, chia jung became exasperated; and
 forthwith blew him up for time. "let some one bind him up," cried,
 "and tomorrow, when he's over the wine, i'll call him to task, and we'll
 see if won't seek death."
 
chiao ta showed consideration for chia jung. on the contrary, he
 shouted with more vigour. going up to chia jung: "brother jung," he
 said, "don't put on the airs of master with chiao ta. not to speak of
 man such as you, why even your father and grandfather wouldn't presume
 to display such side with chiao ta. were it not for chiao ta, and him
 alone, where would your office, honours, riches and dignity be? your
 ancestor, whom i brought back from the jaws of death, heaped up all this
 estate, but up to this very day have i received thanks for the
 services i rendered! on the contrary, you come here and play the master;
 don't say word more, and things may come right; but if you do, i'll
 plunge the blade of knife white in you and extract it red."
 
lady feng, from inside the carriage, remarked to chia jung: "don't you
 yet pack off this insolent fellow! why, if you keep him in your house,
 won't be source of mischief? besides, were relatives and friends to
 hear about these things, won't they have laugh at our expense, that a
 household like ours should be so devoid of all propriety?"
 
chia jung assented. the whole band of servants finding that chiao ta was
 getting too insolent had help but to come up and throw him over, and
 binding him up, they dragged him towards the stables. chiao ta abused
 even chia chen with still more vehemence, and shouted in boisterous
 manner. "i want to go," cried, "to the family ancestral temple and
 mourn my old master. who would have ever imagined that would leave
 behind such vile creatures of descendants as you all, day after day
 indulging in obscene and incestuous practices, 'in scraping of the
 ashes' and in philandering with brothers-in-law. i know all about your
 doings; the best thing is to hide one's stump of an arm in one's
 sleeve!" (wash one's dirty clothes at home).
 
the servants who stood by, upon hearing this wild talk, were quite at
 their wits' end, and they at once seized him, tied him up, and filled
 his mouth to the fullest extent with mud mixed with some horse refuse.
 
lady feng and chia jung heard all said from distance, but pretended
 not to hear; but pao-yü, seated in the carriage as was, also caught
 this extravagant talk and inquired of lady feng: "sister, did you hear
 him say something about 'scraping of the ashes?' what's it?"
 
"don't talk such rubbish!" hastily shouted lady feng; "it was the
 maudlin talk of drunkard! nice boy you are! not to speak of your
 listening, but you must also inquire! wait and i'll tell your mother and
 we'll see if she doesn't seriously take you to task."
 
pao-yü was in such state of fright that speedily entreated her to
 forgive him. "my dear sister," craved, "i won't venture again to say
 anything of the kind"
 
"my dear brother, if that be so, it's all right!" rejoined lady feng
 reassuringly; "on our return we'll speak to her venerable ladyship and
 ask her to send some one to arrange matters in the family school, and
 invite ch'in chung to come to school for his studies."
 
while yet this conversation was going on, they arrived at the jung
 mansion.
 
reader, do you wish to know what follows? if you do, the next chapter
 will unfold it.
 



chapter viii.
 
by strange coincidence, chia pao-yü becomes acquainted with the
 golden clasp.
 in an unexpected meeting, hsüeh pao-ch'ai sees the jade of spiritual
 perception.
 

pao-yü and lady feng, we will now explain, paid, on their return home,
 their respects to all the inmates, and pao-yü availed himself of the
 first occasion to tell dowager lady chia of his wish that ch'in chung
 should come over to the family school. "the presence for himself of a
 friend as schoolmate would," argued, "be fitly excellent to stir him
 to zeal," and went on to speak in terms of high praise of ch'in
 chung, his character and his manners, which most of all made people
 esteem him.
 
lady feng besides stood by him and backed his request. "in day or
 two," she added, "ch'in chung will be coming to pay his obeisance to
 your venerable ladyship."
 
this bit of news greatly rejoiced the heart of dowager lady chia, and
 lady feng likewise did not let the opportunity slip, without inviting
 the old lady to attend the theatrical performance to come off the day
 after the morrow. dowager lady chia was, it is true, well on in years,
 but was, nevertheless, very fond of enjoyment, so that when the day
 arrived and mrs. yu came over to invite her round, she forthwith took
 madame wang, lin tai-yü, pao-yü and others along and went to the play.
 
it was about noon, when dowager lady chia returned to her apartments for
 her siesta; and madame wang, who was habitually partial to quiet life,
 also took her departure after she had seen the old lady retire. lady
 feng subsequently took the seat of honour; and the party enjoyed
 themselves immensely till the evening, when they broke up.
 
but to return to pao-yü. having accompanied his grandmother chia back
 home, and waited till her ladyship was in her midday sleep, had in
 fact an inclination to return to the performance, but was afraid lest
 should be burden to mrs. ch'in and the rest and lest they should
 not feel at ease. remembering therefore that pao ch'ai had been at home
 unwell for the last few days, and that had not been to see her, he
 was anxious to go and look her up, but dreaded that if went by the
 side gate, at the back of the drawing-room, would be prevented by
 something or other, and fearing, what would be making matters worse,
 lest should come across his father, consequently thought it better
 to go on his way by detour. the nurses and waiting-maids thereupon
 came to help him to change his clothes; but they saw him not change, but
 go out again by the second door. these nurses and maids could not help
 following him out; but they were still under the impression that was
 going over to the other mansion to see the theatricals. contrary to
 their speculations, upon reaching the entrance hall, forthwith went
 to the east, then turned to the north, and walking round by the rear of
 the hall, happened to come face to face with two of the family
 companions, mr. ch'an kuang, and mr. tan t'ing-jen. as soon as they
 caught sight of pao-yü, they both readily drew up to him, and as they
 smiled, the one put his arm round his waist, while the other grasped him
 by the hand.
 
"oh divine brother!" they both exclaimed, "this we call dreaming a
 pleasant dream, for it's easy thing to come across you!"
 
while continuing their remarks they paid their salutations, and inquired
 after his health; and it was only after they had chatted for ever so
 long, that they went on their way. the nurse called out to them and
 stopped them, "have you two gentlemen," she said, "come out from seeing
 master?"
 
they both nodded assent. "your master," they explained, "is in the meng
 p'o chai small library having his siesta; so that you can go through
 there with fear."
 
as they uttered these words, they walked away.
 
this remark also evoked smile from pao-yü, but without further delay
 turned corner, went towards the north, and came into the pear
 fragrance court, where, as luck would have it, met the head manager
 of the household treasury, wu hsin-teng, who, in company with the head
 of the granary, tai liang, and several other head stewards, seven
 persons in all, was issuing out of the account room.
 
on seeing pao-yü approaching, they, in body, stood still, and hung
 down their arms against their sides. one of them alone, certain
 butler, called ch'ien hua, promptly came forward, as had not seen
 pao-yü for many day, and bending on one knee, paid his respects to
 pao-yü. pao-yü at once gave smile and pulled him up.
 
"the day before yesterday," smiled all the bystanders, "we were
 somewhere together and saw some characters written by you, master
 secundus, in the composite style. the writing is certainly better than
 it was before! when will you give us few sheets to stick on the wall?"
 
"where did you see them?" inquired pao-yü, with grin.
 
"they are to be found in more than one place," they replied, "and every
 one praises them very much, and what's more, asks us for few."
 
"they are not worth having," observed pao-yü smilingly; "but if you do
 want any, tell my young servants and it will be all right."
 
as said these words, moved onwards. the whole party waited till he
 had gone by, before they separated, each one to go his own way.
 
but we need not dilate upon matters of moment, but return to pao-yü.
 
on coming to the pear fragrance court, entered, first, into "aunt"
 hsüeh's room, where found her getting some needlework ready to give
 to the waiting-maids to work at. pao-yü forthwith paid his respects to
 her, and "aunt" hsüeh, taking him by the hand, drew him towards her and
 clasped him in her embrace.
 
"with this cold weather," she smilingly urged, "it's too kind of you, my
 dear child, to think of coming to see me; come along on the stove-couch
 at once!--bring some tea," she continued, addressing the servants, "and
 make it as hot as it can be!"
 
"isn't hsüeh p'an at home?" pao-yü having inquired: "he's like horse
 without halter," mrs. hsüeh remarked with sigh; "he's daily running
 here and there and everywhere, and nothing can induce him to stay at
 home one single day."
 
"is sister (pao ch'ai) all right again?" asked pao-yü. "yes," replied
 mrs. hsüeh, "she's well again. it was very kind of you two days ago to
 again think of her, and send round to inquire after her. she's now in
 there, and you can go and see her. it's warmer there than it's here; go
 and sit with her inside, and, as soon as i've put everything away, i'll
 come and join you and have chat."
 
pao-yü, upon hearing this, jumped down with alacrity from the
 stove-couch, and walked up to the door of the inner room, where saw
 hanging portière somewhat the worse for use, made of red silk. pao-yü
 raised the portière and making one step towards the interior, found
 pao ch'ai seated on the couch, busy over some needlework. on the top of
 her head was gathered, and made into knot, her chevelure, black as
 lacquer, and glossy like pomade. she wore honey-coloured wadded robe,
 rose-brown short-sleeved jacket, lined with the fur of the squirrel of
 two colours: the "gold and silver;" and jupe of leek-yellow silk. her
 whole costume was neither too new, neither too old, and displayed no
 sign of extravagance.
 
her lips, though not rouged, were naturally red; her eyebrows, though
 not pencilled, were yet blue black; her face resembled silver basin,
 and her eyes, juicy plums. she was sparing in her words, chary in her
 talk, so much so that people said that she posed as simpleton. she was
 quiet in the acquittal of her duties and scrupulous as to the proper
 season for everything. "i practise simplicity," she would say of
 herself.
 
"how are you? are you quite well again, sister?" inquired pao-yü, as he
 gazed at her; whereupon pao ch'ai raised her head, and perceiving pao-yü
 walk in, she got up at once and replied with smile, "i'm all right
 again; many thanks for your kindness in thinking of me."
 
while uttering this, she pressed him to take seat on the stove-couch,
 and as sat down on the very edge of the couch, she told ying erh to
 bring tea and asked likewise after dowager lady chia and lady feng. "and
 are all the rest of the young ladies quite well?" she inquired.
 
saying this she scrutinised pao-yü, who she saw had head-dress of
 purplish-gold twisted threads, studded with precious stones. his
 forehead was bound with gold circlet, representing two dragons,
 clasping pearl. on his person wore light yellow, archery-sleeved
 jacket, ornamented with rampant dragons, and lined with fur from the
 ribs of the silver fox; and was clasped with dark sash, embroidered
 with different-coloured butterflies and birds. round his neck was hung
 an amulet, consisting of clasp of longevity, talisman of recorded
 name, and, in addition to these, the precious jade which had had in
 his mouth at the time of his birth.
 
"i've daily heard every one speak of this jade," said pao ch'ai with a
 smile, "but haven't, after all, had an opportunity of looking at it
 closely, but anyhow to-day i must see it."
 
as she spoke, she drew near. pao-yü himself approached, and taking it
 from his neck, placed it in pao ch'ai's hand. pao ch'ai held it in
 her palm. it appeared to her very much like the egg of bird,
 resplendent as it was like bright russet cloud; shiny and smooth like
 variegated curd and covered with net for the sake of protection.
 
readers, you should know that this was the very block of useless stone
 which had been on the ta huang hills, and which had dropped into the
 ch'ing keng cave, in state of metamorphosis. later writer expresses
 his feelings in satirical way as follows:
 
nü wo's fusion of stones was e'er myth inane,
 but from this myth hath sprung fiction still more insane!
 lost is the subtle life, divine, and real!--gone!
 assumed, mean subterfuge! foul bags of skin and bone!
 fortune, when once adverse, how true! gold glows more!
 in evil days, alas! the jade's splendour is o'er!
 bones, white and bleached, in nameless hill-like mounds are flung,
 bones once of youths renowned and maidens fair and young.
 
the rejected stone has in fact already given record of the
 circumstances of its transformation, and the inscription in seal
 characters, engraved upon it by the bald-headed bonze, and below will
 now be also appended faithful representation of it; but its real size
 is so very diminutive, as to allow of its being held by child in his
 mouth while yet unborn, that were it to have been drawn in its exact
 proportions, the characters would, it is feared, have been so
 insignificant in size, that the beholder would have had to waste much of
 his eyesight, and it would besides have been pleasant thing.
 
while therefore its shape has been adhered to, its size has unavoidably
 been slightly enlarged, to admit of the reader being able, conveniently,
 to peruse the inscription, even by very lamplight, and though may be
 under the influence of wine.
 
these explanations have been given to obviate any such sneering remarks
 as: "what could be, pray, the size of the mouth of child in his
 mother's womb, and how could it grasp such large and clumsy thing?"
 
on the face of the jade was written:
 
precious gem of spiritual perception.
 if thou wilt lose not and never forget me,
 eternal life and constant luck will be with thee!
 
on the reverse was written:
 
1 to exorcise evil spirits and the accessory visitations;
 2 to cure predestined sickness;
 3 to prognosticate weal and woe.
 
pao ch'ai having looked at the amulet, twisted it again to the face, and
 scrutinising it closely, read aloud:
 
if thou wilt lose not and never forget me,
 eternal life and constant luck will be with thee!
 
she perused these lines twice, and, turning round, she asked ying erh
 laughingly: "why don't you go and pour the tea? what are you standing
 here like an idiot!"
 
"these two lines which i've heard," smiled ying erh, "would appear to
 pair with the two lines on your necklet, miss!"
 
"what!" eagerly observed pao-yü with grin, when caught these words,
 "are there really eight characters too on your necklet, cousin? do let
 too see it."
 
"don't listen to what she says," remarked pao ch'ai, "there are no
 characters on it."
 
"my dear cousin," pleaded pao-yü entreatingly, "how is it you've seen
 mine?"
 
pao ch'ai was brought quite at bay by this remark of his, and she
 consequently added, "there are also two propitious phrases engraved on
 this charm, and that's why i wear it every day. otherwise, what pleasure
 would there be in carrying clumsy thing."
 
as she spoke, she unfastened the button, and produced from inside her
 crimson robe, crystal-like locket, set with pearls and gems, and with
 brilliant golden fringe. pao-yü promptly received it from her, and
 upon minute examination, found that there were in fact four characters
 on each side; the eight characters on both sides forming two sentences
 of good omen. the similitude of the locket is likewise then given below.
 on the face of the locket is written:
 
"part not from and cast not away;"
 
and on the reverse:
 
"and youth, perennial freshness will display!"
 
pao-yü examined the charm, and having also read the inscription twice
 over aloud, and then twice again to himself, said as smiled, "dear
 cousin, these eight characters of yours form together with mine an
 antithetical verse."
 
"they were presented to her," ventured ying erh, "by mangy-pated
 bonze, who explained that they should be engraved on golden
 trinket...."
 
pao ch'ai left her time to finish what she wished to say, but
 speedily called her to task for not going to bring the tea, and then
 inquired of pao-yü "where had come from?"
 
pao-yü had, by this time, drawn quite close to pao ch'ai, and perceived
 whiff after whiff of some perfume or other, of what kind could not
 tell. "what perfume have you used, my cousin," forthwith asked, "to
 fumigate your dresses with? i really don't remember smelling any
 perfumery of the kind before."
 
"i'm very averse," replied pao ch'ai blandly, "to the odour of
 fumigation; good clothes become impregnated with the smell of smoke."
 
"in that case," observed pao-yü, "what scent is it?"
 
"yes, i remember," pao ch'ai answered, after some reflection; "it's the
 scent of the 'cold fragrance' pills which i took this morning."
 
"what are these cold fragrance pills," remarked pao-yü smiling, "that
 they have such fine smell? give me, cousin, pill to try."
 
"here you are with your nonsense again," pao ch'ai rejoined laughingly;
 "is pill thing to be taken recklessly?"
 
she had scarcely finished speaking, when she heard suddenly some one
 outside say, "miss lin is come;" and shortly lin tai-yü walked in in a
 jaunty manner.
 
"oh, i come at wrong moment!" she exclaimed forthwith, smirking
 significantly when she caught sight of pao-yü.
 
pao-yü and the rest lost time in rising and offering her seat,
 whereupon pao ch'ai added with smile, "how can you say such things?"
 
"had i known sooner," continued tai-yü, "that was here, i would have
 kept away."
 
"i can't fathom this meaning of yours," protested pao ch'ai.
 
"if one comes," tai-yü urged smiling, "then all come, and when one
 doesn't come, then one comes. now were to come to-day, and i to
 come to-morrow, wouldn't there be, by division of this kind, always
 some one with you every day? and in this way, you wouldn't feel too
 lonely, nor too crowded. how is it, cousin, that you didn't understand
 what i meant to imply?"
 
"is it snowing?" inquired pao-yü, upon noticing that she wore cloak
 made of crimson camlet, buttoning in front.
 
"it has been snowing for some time," ventured the matrons, who were
 standing below. "fetch my wrapper!" pao-yü remarked, and tai-yü readily
 laughed. "am i not right? i come, and, of course, must go at once."
 
"did i ever mention that i was going?" questioned pao-yü; "i only wish
 it brought to have it ready when i want it."
 
"it's snowy day," consequently remarked pao-yü's nurse, dame li, "and
 we must also look to the time, but you had better remain here and amuse
 yourself with your cousin. your aunt has, in there, got ready tea and
 fruits. i'll tell the waiting-maid to go and fetch your wrapper and the
 boys to return home." pao-yü assented, and nurse li left the room and
 told the boys that they were at liberty to go.
 
by this time mrs. hsüeh had prepared tea and several kinds of nice
 things and kept them all to partake of those delicacies. pao-yü, having
 spoken highly of some goose feet and ducks' tongues had tasted some
 days before, at his eldest sister-in-law's, mrs. yu's, "aunt" hsüeh
 promptly produced several dishes of the same kind, made by herself, and
 gave them to pao-yü to try. "with little wine," added pao-yü with a
 smile, "they would be first rate."
 
mrs. hsüeh thereupon bade the servants fetch some wine of the best
 quality; but dame li came forward and remonstrated. "my lady," she said,
 "never mind the wine."
 
pao-yü smilingly pleaded: "my nurse, i'll take just one cup and no
 more."
 
"it's use," nurse li replied, "were your grandmother and mother
 present, i wouldn't care if you drank whole jar. i remember the day
 when i turned my eyes away but for moment, and some ignorant fool or
 other, merely with the view of pandering for your favour, gave you only
 drop of wine to drink, and how this brought reproaches upon for a
 couple of days. you don't know, my lady, you have idea of his
 disposition! it's really dreadful; and when has had little wine he
 shows far more temper. on days when her venerable ladyship is in high
 spirits, she allows him to have his own way about drinking, but he's not
 allowed to have wine on any and every day; and why should i have to
 suffer inside and all for nothing at all?"
 
"you antiquated thing!" replied mrs. hsüeh laughing, "set your mind at
 ease, and go and drink your own wine! i won't let him have too much, and
 should even the old lady say anything, let the fault be mine."
 
saying this, she asked waiting-maid to take nurse li along with her
 and give her also glass of wine so as to keep out the cold air.
 
when nurse li heard these words, she had alternative but to go for a
 time with all the others and have some wine to drink.
 
"the wine need not be warmed: i prefer it cold!" pao-yü went on to
 suggest meanwhile.
 
"that won't do," remonstrated mrs. hsüeh; "cold wine will make your hand
 tremble when you write."
 
"you have," interposed pao ch'ai smiling, "the good fortune, cousin
 pao-yü, of having daily opportunities of acquiring knowledge of every
 kind of subject, and yet don't you know that the properties of wine are
 mostly heating? if you drink wine warm, its effects soon dispel, but if
 you drink it cold, it at once congeals in you; and as upon your
 intestines devolves the warming of it, how can you not derive any harm?
 and won't you yet from this time change this habit of yours? leave off
 at once drinking that cold wine."
 
pao-yü finding that the words had heard contained good deal of
 sense, speedily put down the cold wine, and having asked them to warm
 it, at length drank it.
 
tai-yü was bent upon cracking melon seeds, saying nothing but simply
 pursing up her lips and smiling, when, strange coincidence, hsüeh yen,
 tai-yü's waiting-maid, walked in and handed her mistress small
 hand-stove.
 
"who told you to bring it?" ascertained tai-yü grinningly. "i'm sorry to
 have given whoever it is the trouble; i'm obliged to her. but did she
 ever imagine that i would freeze to death?"
 
"tzu chuan was afraid," replied hsüeh yen, "that you would, miss, feel
 cold, and she asked to bring it over."
 
tai-yü took it over and held it in her lap. "how is it," she smiled,
 "that you listen to what she tells you, but that you treat what i say,
 day after day, as so much wind blowing past your ears! how is it that
 you at once do what she bids you, with even greater alacrity than you
 would an imperial edict?"
 
when pao-yü heard this, felt sure in his mind that tai-yü was
 availing herself of this opportunity to make fun of him, but made no
 remark, merely laughing to himself and paying further notice. pao
 ch'ai, again, knew full well that this habit was weak point with
 tai-yü, so she too did not go out of her way to heed what she said.
 
"you've always been delicate and unable to stand the cold," interposed
 "aunt" hsüeh, "and is it not kind attention on their part to have
 thought of you?"
 
"you don't know, aunt, how it really stands," responded tai-yü
 smilingly; "fortunately enough, it was sent to here at your quarters;
 for had it been in any one else's house, wouldn't it have been slight
 upon them? is it forsooth nice to think that people haven't so much as a
 hand-stove, and that one has fussily to be sent over from home? people
 won't say that the waiting-maids are too officious, but will imagine
 that i'm in the habit of behaving in this offensive fashion."
 
"you're far too punctilious," remarked mrs. hsüeh, "as to entertain such
 notions! such ideas as these crossed my mind just now."
 
while they were conversing, pao-yü had taken so much as three cups of
 wine, and nurse li came forward again to prevent him from having any
 more. pao-yü was just then in state of exultation and excitement, (a
 state) enhanced by the conversation and laughter of his cousins, so that
 was ready to agree to having more! but was constrained in a
 humble spirit to entreat for permission. "my dear nurse," implored,
 "i'll just take two more cups and then have more."
 
"you'd better be careful," added nurse li, "your father is at home
 to-day, and see that you're ready to be examined in your lessons."
 
when pao-yü heard this mention, his spirits at once sank within him, and
 gently putting the wine aside, dropped his head upon his breast.
 
tai-yü promptly remonstrated. "you've thrown cold water," she said,
 "over the spirits of the whole company; why, if uncle should ask to see
 you, well, say that aunt hsüeh detained you. this old nurse of yours has
 been drinking, and again makes us the means of clearing her muddled
 head!"
 
while saying this, she gave pao-yü big nudge with the intent of
 stirring up his spirits, adding, as she addressed him in low tone of
 voice: "don't let us heed that old thing, but mind our own enjoyment."
 
dame li also knew very well tai-yü's disposition, and therefore
 remarked: "now, miss lin, don't you urge him on; you should after all,
 give him good advice, as may, i think, listen to good deal of what
 you say to him."
 
"why should i urge him on?" rejoined lin tai-yü, with sarcastic smile,
 "nor will i trouble myself to give him advice. you, old lady, are far
 too scrupulous! old lady chia has also time after time given him wine,
 and if now takes cup or two more here, at his aunt's, lady hsüeh's
 house, there's harm that i can see. is it perhaps, who knows, that
 aunt is stranger in this establishment, and that we have in fact no
 right to come over here to see her?"
 
nurse li was both vexed and amused by the words she had just heard.
 "really," she observed, "every remark this girl lin utters is sharper
 than razor! i didn't say anything much!"
 
pao ch'ai too could not suppress smile, and as she pinched tai-yü's
 cheek, she exclaimed, "oh the tongue of this frowning girl! one can
 neither resent what it says, nor yet listen to it with any
 gratification!"
 
"don't be afraid!" mrs. hsüeh went on to say, "don't be afraid; my son,
 you've come to see me, and although i've nothing good to give you, you
 mustn't, through fright, let the trifle you've taken lie heavy on your
 stomach, and thus make uneasy; but just drink at your pleasure, and
 as much as you like, and let the blame fall on my shoulders. what's
 more, you can stay to dinner with me, and then go home; or if you do get
 tipsy, you can sleep with me, that's all."
 
she thereupon told the servants to heat some more wine. "i'll come," she
 continued, "and keep you company while you have two or three cups, after
 which we'll have something to eat!"
 
it was only after these assurances that pao-yü's spirits began at
 length, once more to revive, and dame li then directed the waiting-maids
 what to do. "you remain here," she enjoined, "and mind, be diligent
 while i go home and change; when i'll come back again. don't allow him,"
 she also whispered to "aunt" hsüeh, "to have all his own way and drink
 too much."
 
having said this, she betook herself back to her quarters; and during
 this while, though there were two or three nurses in attendance, they
 did not concern themselves with what was going on. as soon as they saw
 that nurse li had left, they likewise all quietly slipped out, at the
 first opportunity they found, while there remained but two
 waiting-maids, who were only too glad to curry favour with pao-yü. but
 fortunately "aunt" hsüeh, by much coaxing and persuading, only let him
 have few cups, and the wine being then promptly cleared away, pickled
 bamboo shoots and chicken-skin soup were prepared, of which pao-yü drank
 with relish several bowls full, eating besides more than half bowl of
 finest rice congee.
 
by this time, hsüeh pao ch'ai and lin tai-yü had also finished their
 repast; and when pao-yü had drunk few cups of strong tea, mrs. hsüeh
 felt more easy in her mind. hsüeh yen and the others, three or four of
 them in all, had also had their meal, and came in to wait upon them.
 
"are you now going or not?" inquired tai-yü of pao-yü.
 
pao-yü looked askance with his drowsy eyes. "if you want to go," he
 observed, "i'll go with you."
 
tai-yü hearing this, speedily rose. "we've been here nearly the whole
 day," she said, "and ought to be going back."
 
as she spoke the two of them bade good-bye, and the waiting-maids at
 once presented hood to each of them.
 
pao-yü readily lowered his head slightly and told waiting-maid to put
 it on. the girl promptly took the hood, made of deep red cloth, and
 shaking it out of its folds, she put it on pao-yü's head.
 
"that will do," hastily exclaimed pao-yü. "you stupid thing! gently a
 bit; is it likely you've never seen any one put one on before? let do
 it myself."
 
"come over here, and i'll put it on for you," suggested tai-yü, as she
 stood on the edge of the couch. pao-yü eagerly approached her, and
 tai-yü carefully kept the cap, to which his hair was bound, fast down,
 and taking the hood she rested its edge on the circlet round his
 forehead. she then raised the ball of crimson velvet, which was as large
 as walnut, and put it in such way that, as it waved tremulously, it
 should appear outside the hood. these arrangements completed she cast a
 look for while at what she had done. "that's right now," she added,
 "throw your wrapper over you!"
 
when pao-yü caught these words, eventually took the wrapper and threw
 it over his shoulders.
 
"none of your nurses," hurriedly interposed aunt hsüeh, "are yet come,
 so you had better wait while."
 
"why should we wait for them?" observed pao-yü. "we have the
 waiting-maids to escort us, and surely they should be enough."
 
mrs. hsüeh finding it difficult to set her mind at ease deputed two
 married women to accompany the two cousins; and after they had both
 expressed (to these women) their regret at having troubled them, they
 came straightway to dowager lady chia's suite of apartments.
 
her venerable ladyship had not, as yet, had her evening repast. hearing
 that they had been at mrs. hsüeh's, she was extremely pleased; but
 noticing that pao-yü had had some wine, she gave orders that should
 be taken to his room, and put to bed, and not be allowed to come out
 again.
 
"do take good care of him," she therefore enjoined the servants, and
 when suddenly she bethought herself of pao-yü's attendants, "how is it,"
 she at once inquired of them all, "that i don't see nurse li here?"
 
they did not venture to tell her the truth, that she had gone home, but
 simply explained that she had come in few moments back, and that they
 thought she must have again gone out on some business or other.
 
"she's better off than your venerable ladyship," remarked pao-yü,
 turning round and swaying from side to side. "why then ask after her?
 were i rid of her, i believe i might live little longer."
 
while uttering these words, reached the door of his bedroom, where he
 saw pen and ink laid out on the writing table.
 
"that's nice," exclaimed ch'ing wen, as she came to meet him with a
 smile on her face, "you tell to prepare the ink for you, but though
 when you get up, you were full of the idea of writing, you only wrote
 three characters, when you discarded the pencil, and ran away, fooling
 me, by making wait the whole day! come now at once and exhaust all
 this ink before you're let off."
 
pao-yü then remembered what had taken place in the morning. "where are
 the three characters i wrote?" consequently inquired, smiling.
 
"why this man is tipsy," remarked ch'ing wen sneeringly. "as you were
 going to the other mansion, you told to stick them over the door. i
 was afraid lest any one else should spoil them, as they were being
 pasted, so i climbed up high ladder and was ever so long in putting
 them up myself; my hands are even now numb with cold."
 
"oh i forgot all about it," replied pao-yü grinning, "if your hands are
 cold, come and i'll rub them warm for you."
 
promptly stretching out his hand, took those of ch'ing wen in his,
 and the two of them looked at the three characters, which recently
 had written, and which were pasted above the door. in short while,
 tai-yü came.
 
"my dear cousin," pao-yü said to her smilingly, "tell without any
 prevarication which of the three characters is the best written?"
 
tai-yü raised her head and perceived the three characters: red, rue,
 hall. "they're all well done," she rejoined, with smirk, "how is it
 you've written them so well? by and bye you must also write tablet for
 me."
 
"are you again making fun of me?" asked pao-yü smiling; "what about
 sister hsi jen?" went on to inquire.
 
ch'ing wen pouted her lips, pointing towards the stove-couch in the
 inner room, and, on looking in, pao-yü espied hsi jen fast asleep in her
 daily costume.
 
"well," pao-yü observed laughing, "there's harm in it, but its rather
 early to sleep. when i was having my early meal, on the other side," he
 proceeded, speaking to ch'ing wen, "there was small dish of dumplings,
 with bean-curd outside; and as i thought you would like to have some, i
 asked mrs. yu for them, telling her that i would keep them, and eat them
 in the evening; i told some one to bring them over, but have you
 perchance seen them?"
 
"be quick and drop that subject," suggested ch'ing wen; "as soon as they
 were brought over, i at once knew they were intended for me; as i had
 just finished my meal, i put them by in there, but when nurse li came
 she saw them. 'pao-yü,' she said, 'is not likely to eat them, so i'll
 take them and give them to my grandson.' and forthwith she bade some one
 take them over to her home."
 
while she was speaking, hsi hsüeh brought in tea, and pao-yü pressed his
 cousin lin to have cup.
 
"miss lin has gone long ago," observed all of them, as they burst out
 laughing, "and do you offer her tea?"
 
pao-yü drank about half cup, when also suddenly bethought himself
 of some tea, which had been brewed in the morning. "this morning," he
 therefore inquired of hsi hsüeh, "when you made cup of maple-dew tea,
 i told you that that kind of tea requires brewing three or four times
 before its colour appears; and how is that you now again bring this
 tea?"
 
"i did really put it by," answered hsi hsüeh, "but nurse li came and
 drank it, and then went off."
 
pao-yü upon hearing this, dashed the cup held in his hand on the
 ground, and as it broke into small fragments, with crash, it spattered
 hsi hsüeh's petticoat all over.
 
"of whose family is she the mistress?" inquired pao-yü of hsi hsüeh, as
 jumped up, "that you all pay such deference to her. i just simply had
 little of her milk, when i was brat, and that's all; and now she has
 got into the way of thinking herself more high and mighty than even the
 heads of the family! she should be packed off, and then we shall all
 have peace and quiet."
 
saying this, was bent upon going, there and then, to tell dowager
 lady chia to have his nurse driven away.
 
hsi jen was really not asleep, but simply feigning, with the idea, when
 pao-yü came, to startle him in play. at first, when she heard him speak
 of writing, and inquire after the dumplings, she did not think it
 necessary to get up, but when flung the tea-cup on the floor, and got
 into temper, she promptly jumped up and tried to appease him, and to
 prevent him by coaxing from carrying out his threat.
 
waiting-maid sent by dowager lady chia came in, meanwhile, to ask what
 was the matter.
 
"i had just gone to pour tea," replied hsi jen, without the least
 hesitation, "and i slipped on the snow and fell, while the cup dropped
 from my hand and broke. your decision to send her away is good," she
 went on to advise pao-yü, "and we are all willing to go also; and why
 not avail yourself of this opportunity to dismiss us in body? it will
 be for our good, and you too on the other hand, needn't perplex yourself
 about not getting better people to come and wait on you!"
 
when pao-yü heard this taunt, had at length not word to say, and
 supported by hsi jen and the other attendants on to the couch, they
 divested him of his clothes. but they failed to understand the drift of
 what pao-yü kept on still muttering, and all they could make out was an
 endless string of words; but his eyes grew heavier and drowsier, and
 they forthwith waited upon him until went to sleep; when hsi jen
 unclasped the jade of spiritual perception, and rolling it up in a
 handkerchief, she lay it under the mattress, with the idea that when he
 put it on the next day it should not chill his neck.
 
pao-yü fell sound asleep the moment lay his head on the pillow. by
 this time nurse li and the others had come in, but when they heard that
 pao-yü was tipsy, they too did not venture to approach, but gently made
 inquiries as to whether was asleep or not. on hearing that was,
 they took their departure with their minds more at ease.
 
the next morning the moment pao-yü awoke, some one came in to tell him
 that young mr. jung, living in the mansion on the other side, had
 brought ch'in chung to pay him visit.
 
pao-yü speedily went out to greet them and to take them over to pay
 their respects to dowager lady chia. her venerable ladyship upon
 perceiving that ch'in chung, with his handsome countenance, and his
 refined manners, would be fit companion for pao-yü in his studies,
 felt extremely delighted at heart; and having readily detained him to
 tea, and kept him to dinner, she went further and directed servant to
 escort him to see madame wang and the rest of the family.
 
with the fond regard of the whole household for mrs. ch'in, they were,
 when they saw what kind of person ch'in chung was, so enchanted with
 him, that at the time of his departure, they all had presents to give
 him; even dowager lady chia herself presented him with purse and a
 golden image of the god of learning, with view that it should incite
 him to study and harmony.
 
"your house," she further advised him, "is far off, and when it's cold
 or hot, it would be inconvenient for you to come all that way, so you
 had better come and live over here with me. you'll then be always with
 your cousin pao-yü, and you won't be together, in your studies, with
 those fellow-pupils of yours who have idea what progress means."
 
ch'in chung made suitable answer to each one of her remarks, and on
 his return home told everything to his father.
 
his father, ch'in pang-yeh, held at present the post of secretary in the
 peking field force, and was well-nigh seventy. his wife had died at an
 early period, and as she left issue, adopted and daughter
 from foundling asylum.
 
but who would have thought it, the boy also died, and there only
 remained the girl, known as kó ch'ing in her infancy, who when she grew
 up, was beautiful in face and graceful in manners, and who by reason of
 some relationship with the chia family, was consequently united by the
 ties of marriage (to one of the household).
 
ch'in pang-yeh was in his fiftieth year when at length got this son.
 as his tutor had the previous year left to go south, remained at home
 keeping up his former lessons; and (his father) had been just thinking
 of talking over the matter with his relatives of the chia family, and
 sending his to the private school, when, as luck would have it, this
 opportunity of meeting pao-yü presented itself.
 
knowing besides that the family school was under the direction of the
 venerable scholar chia tai-ju, and hoping that by joining his class,
 (his son) might advance in knowledge and by these means reap reputation,
 was therefore intensely gratified. the only drawbacks were that his
 official emoluments were scanty, and that both the eyes of everyone in
 the other establishment were set upon riches and honours, so that he
 could not contribute anything short of the amount (given by others); but
 his son's welfare throughout life was serious consideration, and he,
 needless to say, had to scrape together from the east and to collect
 from the west; and making parcel, with all deference, of twenty-four
 taels for an introduction present, came along with ch'in chung to
 tai-ju's house to pay their respects. but had to wait subsequently
 until pao-yü could fix on an auspicious date on which they could
 together enter the school.
 
as for what happened after they came to school, the next chapter will
 divulge.
 



chapter ix.
 
chia cheng gives good advice to his wayward son.
 li kuei receives reprimand.
 chia jui and li kuei rebuke the obstinate youths!
 ming yen causes trouble in the school-room.
 

but to return to our story. mr. ch'in, the father, and ch'in chung, his
 son, only waited until the receipt, by the hands of servant, of a
 letter from the chia family about the date on which they were to go to
 school. indeed, pao-yü was only too impatient that and ch'in chung
 should come together, and, without loss of time, fixed upon two days
 later as the day upon which they were definitely to begin their studies,
 and despatched servant with letter to this effect.
 
on the day appointed, as soon as it was daylight, pao-yü turned out of
 bed. hsi jen had already by that time got books, pencils and all writing
 necessaries in perfect readiness, and was sitting on the edge of the bed
 in moping mood; but as soon as she saw pao-yü approach, she was
 constrained to wait upon him in his toilette and ablutions.
 
pao-yü, noticing how despondent she was, made it point to address her.
 "my dear sister," said, "how is it you aren't again yourself? is it
 likely that you bear grudge for being about to go to school,
 because when i leave you, you'll all feel dull?"
 
hsi jen smiled. "what an ideal" she replied. "study is most excellent
 thing, and without it whole lifetime is mere waste, and what good
 comes in the long run? there's only one thing, which is simply that when
 engaged in reading your books, you should set your mind on your books;
 and that you should think of home when not engaged in reading. whatever
 you do, don't romp together with them, for were you to meet our master,
 your father, it will be joke! although it's asserted that scholar
 must strain every nerve to excel, yet it's preferable that the tasks
 should be somewhat fewer, as, in the first place, when one eats too
 much, one cannot digest it; and, in the second place, good health must
 also be carefully attended to. this is my view on the subject, and you
 should at all times consider it in practice."
 
while hsi jen gave utterance to sentence, pao-yü nodded his head in
 sign of approval of that sentence. hsi jen then went on to speak. "i've
 also packed up," she continued, "your long pelisse, and handed it to the
 pages to take it over; so mind, when it's cold in the school-room,
 please remember to put on this extra clothing, for it's not like home,
 where you have people to look after you. the foot-stove and hand-stove,
 i've also sent over; and urge that pack of lazy-bones to attend to their
 work, for if you say nothing, they will be so engrossed in their
 frolics, that they'll be loth to move, and let you, all for nothing,
 take chill and ruin your constitution."
 
"compose your mind," replied pao-yü; "when i go out, i know well enough
 how to attend to everything my own self. but you people shouldn't remain
 in this room, and mope yourselves to death; and it would be well if you
 would often go over to cousin lin's for romp."
 
while saying this, had completed his toilette, and hsi jen pressed
 him to go and wish good morning to dowager lady chia, chia cheng, madame
 wang, and the other members of the family.
 
pao-yü, after having gone on to give few orders to ch'ing wen and she
 yueh, at length left his apartments, and coming over, paid his obeisance
 to dowager lady chia. her venerable ladyship had likewise, as matter
 of course, few recommendations to make to him, which ended, next
 went and greeted madame wang; and leaving again her quarters, came
 into the library to wish chia cheng good morning.
 
as it happened, chia cheng had on this day returned home at an early
 hour, and was, at this moment, in the library, engaged in friendly
 chat with few gentlemen, who were family companions. suddenly
 perceiving pao-yü come in to pay his respects, and report that was
 about to go to school, chia cheng gave sardonic smile. "if you do
 again," remarked, "make allusions to the words going to school,
 you'll make even blush to death with shame! my advice to you is that
 you should after all go your own way and play; that's the best thing for
 you; and mind you don't pollute with dirt this floor by standing here,
 and soil this door of mine by leaning against it!"
 
the family companions stood up and smilingly expostulated.
 
"venerable sir," they pleaded, "why need you be so down upon him? our
 worthy brother is this day going to school, and may in two or three
 years be able to display his abilities and establish his reputation. he
 will, beyond doubt, not behave like child, as did in years gone
 past. but as the time for breakfast is also drawing nigh, you should,
 worthy brother, go at once."
 
when these words had been spoken, two among them, who were advanced in
 years, readily took pao-yü by the hand, and led him out of the library.
 
"who are in attendance upon pao-yü?" chia cheng having inquired, he
 heard suitable reply, "we, sir!" given from outside; and three or four
 sturdy fellows entered at an early period and fell on one knee, and
 bowed and paid their obeisance.
 
when chia cheng came to scrutinise who they were, and recognised li
 kuei, the of pao-yü's nurse, addressed himself to him. "you
 people," said, "remain waiting upon him the whole day long at school,
 but what books has after all read? books indeed! why, has read and
 filled his brains with lot of trashy words and nonsensical phrases,
 and learnt some ingenious way of waywardness. wait till i have little
 leisure, and i'll set to work, first and foremost, and flay your skin
 off, and then settle accounts with that good-for-nothing!"
 
this threat so terrified li kuei that hastily fell on both his knees,
 pulled off his hat, knocked his head on the ground, and gave vent to
 repeated assenting utterances: "oh, quite so, sir! our elder brother mr.
 pao has," continued, "already read up to the third book of the book
 of odes, up to where there's something or other like: 'yiu, yiu, the
 deer bleat; the lotus leaves and duckweed.' your servant wouldn't
 presume to tell lie!"
 
as said this, the whole company burst out into boisterous fit of
 laughter, and chia cheng himself could not also contain his countenance
 and had to laugh. "were even," observed, "to read thirty books of
 the book of odes, it would be as much an imposition upon people and no
 more, as (when the thief) who, in order to steal the bell, stops up his
 own ears! you go and present my compliments to the gentleman in the
 schoolroom, and tell him, from my part, that the whole lot of odes and
 old writings are of use, as they are subjects for empty show; and
 that should, above all things, take the four books, and explain them
 to him, from first to last, and make him know them all thoroughly by
 heart,--that this is the most important thing!"
 
li kuei signified his obedience with all promptitude, and perceiving
 that chia cheng had nothing more to say, retired out of the room.
 
during this while, pao-yü had been standing all alone outside in the
 court, waiting quietly with suppressed voice, and when they came out he
 at once walked away in their company.
 
li kuei and his companions observed as they shook their clothes, "did
 you, worthy brother, hear what said that would first of all flay
 our skins off! people's servants acquire some respectability from the
 master whom they serve, but we poor fellows fruitlessly wait upon you,
 and are beaten and blown up in the bargain. it would be well if we were,
 from henceforward, to be treated with certain amount of regard."
 
pao-yü smiled, "dear brother," added, "don't feel aggrieved; i'll
 invite you to come round to-morrow!"
 
"my young ancestor," replied li kuei, "who presumes to look forward to
 an invitation? all i entreat you is to listen to one or two words i have
 to say, that's all."
 
as they talked they came over once more to dowager lady chia's on this
 side.
 
ch'in chung had already arrived, and the old lady was first having a
 chat with him. forthwith the two of them exchanged salutations, and took
 leave of her ladyship; but pao-yü, suddenly remembering that had not
 said good-bye to tai-yü, promptly betook himself again to tai-yü's
 quarters to do so.
 
tai-yü was, at this time, below the window, facing the mirror, and
 adjusting her toilette. upon hearing pao-yü mention that was on his
 way to school, she smiled and remarked, "that's right! you're now going
 to school and you'll be sure to reach the lunar palace and pluck the
 olea fragrans; but i can't go along with you."
 
"my dear cousin," rejoined pao-yü, "wait for to come out from school,
 before you have your evening meal; wait also until i come to prepare the
 cosmetic of rouge."
 
after protracted chat, at length tore himself away and took his
 departure.
 
"how is it," interposed tai-yü, as she once again called out to him and
 stopped him, "that you don't go and bid farewell to your cousin pao
 ch'ai?"
 
pao-yü smiled, and saying not word by way of reply straightway
 walked to school, accompanied by ch'in chung.
 
this public school, which it must be noticed was also not far from his
 quarters, had been originally instituted by the founder of the
 establishment, with the idea that should there be among the young
 fellows of his clan any who had not the means to engage tutor, they
 should readily be able to enter this class for the prosecution of their
 studies; that all those of the family who held official position should
 all give (the institution) pecuniary assistance, with view to meet the
 expenses necessary for allowances to the students; and that they were to
 select men advanced in years and possessed of virtue to act as tutors of
 the family school.
 
the two of them, ch'in chung and pao-yü, had now entered the class, and
 after they and the whole number of their schoolmates had made each
 other's acquaintance, their studies were commenced. ever since this
 time, these two were wont to come together, go together, get up
 together, and sit together, till they became more intimate and close.
 besides, dowager lady chia got very fond of ch'in chung, and would again
 and again keep him to stay with them for three and five days at time,
 treating him as if were one of her own great-grandsons. perceiving
 that in ch'in chung's home there was not much in the way of sufficiency,
 she also helped him in clothes and other necessaries; and scarcely had
 one or two months elapsed before ch'in chung got on friendly terms with
 every one in the jung mansion.
 
pao-yü was, however, human being who could not practise contentment
 and observe propriety; and as his sole delight was to have every caprice
 gratified, naturally developed craving disposition. "we two, you
 and i, are," was also wont secretly to tell ch'in chung, "of the same
 age, and fellow-scholars besides, so that there's need in the future
 to pay any regard to our relationship of uncle and nephew; and we should
 treat each other as brothers or friends, that's all."
 
ch'in chung at first (explained that) could not be so presumptuous;
 but as pao-yü would not listen to any such thing, but went on to address
 him as brother and to call him by his style ch'ing ch'ing, had
 likewise himself help, but to begin calling him, at random, anything
 and anyhow.
 
there were, it is true, large number of pupils in this school, but
 these consisted of the sons and younger brothers of that same clan, and
 of several sons and nephews of family connections. the proverb
 appositely describes that there are nine species of dragons, and that
 each species differs; and it goes of course without saying that in a
 large number of human beings there were dragons and snakes, confusedly
 admixed, and that creatures of low standing were included.
 
ever since the arrival of the two young fellows, ch'in chung and pao-yü,
 both of whom were in appearance as handsome as budding flowers, and
 they, on the one hand, saw how modest and genial ch'in chung was, how he
 blushed before uttered word, how was timid and demure like a
 girl, and on the other hand, how that pao-yü was naturally proficient in
 abasing and demeaning himself, how was so affable and good-natured,
 considerate in his temperament and so full of conversation, and how that
 these two were, in consequence, on such terms of intimate friendship, it
 was, in fact, matter of surprise that the whole company of
 fellow-students began to foster envious thoughts, that they, behind
 their backs, passed on their account, this one one disparaging remark
 and that one another, and that they insinuated slanderous lies against
 them, which extended inside as well as outside the school-room.
 
indeed, after hsüeh p'an had come over to take up his quarters in madame
 wang's suite of apartments, shortly came to hear of the existence of
 family school, and that this school was mainly attended by young
 fellows of tender years, and inordinate ideas were suddenly aroused in
 him. while therefore fictitiously gave out that went to school,
 [he was as irregular in his attendance as the fisherman] who catches
 fish for three days, and suns his nets for the next two; simply
 presenting his school-fee gift to chia tai-jui and making not the least
 progress in his studies; his sole dream being to knit number of
 familiar friendships. who would have thought it, there were in this
 school young pupils, who, in their greed to obtain money, clothes and
 eatables from hsüeh p'an, allowed themselves to be cajoled by him, and
 played tricks upon; but on this topic, it is likewise superfluous to
 dilate at any length.
 
there were also two lovable young scholars, relatives of what branch of
 the family is not known, and whose real surnames and names have also not
 been ascertained, who, by reason of their good and winsome looks, were,
 by the pupils in the whole class, given two nicknames, to one that of
 "hsiang lin," "fragrant love," and to the other "yü ai," "precious
 affection." but although every one entertained feelings of secret
 admiration for them, and had the wish to take liberties with the young
 fellows, they lived, nevertheless, one and all, in such terror of hsüeh
 p'an's imperious influence, that they had not the courage to come
 forward and interfere with them.
 
as soon as ch'in chung and pao-yü had, at this time, come to school, and
 they had made the acquaintance of these two fellow-pupils, they too
 could not help becoming attached to them and admiring them, but as they
 also came to know that they were great friends of hsüeh p'an, they did
 not, in consequence, venture to treat them lightly, or to be unseemly in
 their behaviour towards them. hsiang lin and yü ai both kept to
 themselves the same feelings, which they fostered for ch'in chung and
 pao-yü, and to this reason is to be assigned the fact that though these
 four persons nurtured fond thoughts in their hearts there was however no
 visible sign of them. day after day, each one of them would, during
 school hours, sit in four distinct places: but their eight eyes were
 secretly linked together; and, while indulging either in innuendoes or
 in double entendres, their hearts, in spite of the distance between
 them, reflected the whole number of their thoughts.
 
but though their outward attempts were devoted to evade the detection of
 other people's eyes, it happened again that, while least expected,
 several sly lads discovered the real state of affairs, with the result
 that the whole school stealthily frowned their eyebrows at them, winked
 their eyes at them, or coughed at them, or raised their voices at them;
 and these proceedings were, in fact, not restricted to one single day.
 
as luck would have it, on this day tai-jui was, on account of business,
 compelled to go home; and having left them as task more than a
 heptameter line for an antithetical couplet, explaining that they should
 find sentence to rhyme, and that the following day when came back,
 would set them their lessons, went on to hand the affairs
 connected with the class to his elder grandson, chia jui, whom asked
 to take charge.
 
wonderful to say hsüeh p'an had of late not frequented school very
 often, not even so much as to answer the roll, so that ch'in chung
 availed himself of his absence to ogle and smirk with hsiang lin; and
 these two pretending that they had to go out, came into the back court
 for chat.
 
"does your worthy father at home mind your having any friends?" ch'in
 chung was the first to ask. but this sentence was scarcely ended, when
 they heard sound of coughing coming from behind. both were taken much
 aback, and, speedily turning their heads round to see, they found that
 it was fellow-scholar of theirs, called chin jung.
 
hsiang lin was naturally of somewhat hasty temperament, so that with
 shame and anger mutually impelling each other, inquired of him,
 "what's there to cough at? is it likely you wouldn't have us speak to
 each other?"
 
"i don't mind your speaking," chin jung observed laughing; "but would
 you perchance not have cough? i'll tell you what, however; if you
 have anything to say, why not utter it in intelligible language? were
 you allowed to go on in this mysterious manner, what strange doings
 would you be up to? but i have sure enough found you out, so what's the
 need of still prevaricating? but if you will, first of all, let me
 partake of share in your little game, you and i can hold our tongue
 and utter not word. if not, why the whole school will begin to turn
 the matter over."
 
at these words, ch'in chung and hsiang lin were so exasperated that
 their blood rushed up to their faces. "what have you found out?" they
 hastily asked.
 
"what i have now detected," replied chin jung smiling, "is the plain
 truth!" and saying this went on to clap his hands and to call out
 with loud voice as laughed: "they have moulded some nice well-baked
 cakes, won't you fellows come and buy one to eat!" (these two have been
 up to larks, won't you come and have some fun!)
 
both ch'in chung and hsiang lin felt resentful as well as fuming with
 rage, and with hurried step they went in, in search of chia jui, to whom
 they reported chin jung, explaining that chin jung had insulted them
 both, without any rhyme or reason.
 
the fact is that this chia jui was, in an extraordinary degree, man
 with an eye to the main chance, and devoid of any sense of propriety.
 his wont was at school to take advantage of public matters to serve his
 private interest, and to bring pressure upon his pupils with the intent
 that they should regale him. while subsequently also lent his
 countenance to hsüeh p'an, scheming to get some money or eatables out of
 him, left him entirely free to indulge in disorderly behaviour; and
 not only did not go out of his way to hold him in check, but, on the
 contrary, encouraged him, infamous though was already, to become a
 bully, so as to curry favour with him.
 
but this hsüeh p'an was, by nature, gifted with fickle disposition;
 to-day, would incline to the east, and to-morrow to the west, so that
 having recently obtained new friends, put hsiang lin and yü ai aside.
 chin jung too was at one time an intimate friend of his, but ever since
 had acquired the friendship of the two lads, hsiang lin and yü ai, he
 forthwith deposed chin jung. of late, had already come to look down
 upon even hsiang lin and yü ai, with the result that chia jui as well
 was deprived of those who could lend him support, or stand by him; but
 bore hsüeh p'an grudge, for wearying with old friends, as soon as
 found new ones, but felt angry that hsiang lin and yü ai had not put
 in word on his behalf with hsüeh p'an. chia jui, chin jung and in fact
 the whole crowd of them were, for this reason, just harbouring jealous
 grudge against these two, so that when saw ch'in chung and hsiang lin
 come on this occasion and lodge complaint against chin jung, chia jui
 readily felt displeasure creep into his heart; and, although did not
 venture to call ch'in chung to account, nevertheless made an example
 of hsiang lin. and instead (of taking his part), called him a
 busybody and denounced him in much abusive language, with the result
 that hsiang lin did not, contrariwise, profit in any way, but brought
 displeasure upon himself. even ch'in chung grumbled against the
 treatment, as each of them resumed their places.
 
chin jung became still more haughty, and wagging his head and smacking
 his lips, gave vent to many more abusive epithets; but as it happened
 that they also reached yü ai's ears, the two of them, though seated
 apart, began an altercation in loud tone of voice.
 
chin jung, with obstinate pertinacity, clung to his version. "just a
 short while back," said, "i actually came upon them, as they were
 indulging in demonstrations of intimate friendship in the back court.
 these two had resolved to be one in close friendship, and were eloquent
 in their protestations, mindful only in persistently talking their
 trash, but they were not aware of the presence of another person."
 
but his language had, contrary to all expectations, given, from the very
 first, umbrage to another person, and who do you, (gentle reader,)
 imagine this person to have been?
 
this person was, in fact, one whose name was chia se; grandson
 likewise of main branch of the ning mansion. his parents had died at
 an early period, and had, ever since his youth, lived with chia chen.
 had at this time grown to be sixteen years of age, and was, as
 compared with chia jung, still more handsome and good looking. these two
 cousins were united by ties of the closest intimacy, and were always
 together, whether they went out or stayed at home.
 
the inmates of the ning mansion were many in number, and their opinions
 of mixed kind; and that whole bevy of servants, devoid as they were of
 all sense of right, solely excelled in the practice of inventing stories
 to backbite their masters; and this is how some mean person or other
 again, who it was is not known, insinuated slanderous and opprobrious
 reports (against chia se). chia chen had, presumably, also come to hear
 some unfavourable criticisms (on his account), and having, of course, to
 save himself from odium and suspicion, had, at this juncture, after
 all, to apportion him separate quarters, and to bid chia move outside
 the ning mansion, where went and established home of his own to
 live in.
 
this chia was handsome as far as external appearances went, and
 intelligent withal in his inward natural gifts, but, though nominally
 came to school, it was simply however as mere blind; for treated,
 as had ever done, as legitimate occupations, such things as cock
 fighting, dog-racing and visiting places of easy virtue. and as, above,
 had chia chen to spoil him by over-indulgence; and below, there was
 chia jung to stand by him, who of the clan could consequently presume to
 run counter to him?
 
seeing that was on the closest terms of friendship with chia jung,
 how could reconcile himself to the harsh treatment which now saw
 ch'in chung receive from some persons? being now bent upon pushing
 himself forward to revenge the injustice, was, for the time, giving
 himself up to communing with his own heart. "chin jung, chia jui and the
 rest are," pondered, "friends of uncle hsüeh, but i too am on
 friendly terms with him, and with me, and if i do come forward and
 they tell old hsüeh, won't we impair the harmony which exists between
 us? and if i don't concern myself, such idle tales make, when spoken,
 every one feel uncomfortable; and why shouldn't i now devise some means
 to hold them in check, so as to stop their mouths, and prevent any loss
 of face!"
 
having concluded this train of thought, also pretended that had to
 go out, and, walking as far as the back, he, with low voice, called to
 his side ming yen, the page attending upon pao-yü in his studies, and in
 one way and another, made use of several remarks to egg him on.
 
this ming yen was the smartest of pao-yü's attendants, but was also
 young in years and lacked experience, so that lent patient ear to
 what chia had to say about the way chin jung had insulted ch'in
 chung. "even your own master, pao-yü," (chia added), "is involved,
 and if you don't let him know bit of your mind, will next time be
 still more arrogant."
 
this ming yen was always ready, even with valid excuse, to be
 insolent and overbearing to people, so that after hearing the news and
 being furthermore instigated by chia se, speedily rushed into the
 schoolroom and cried out "chin jung;" nor did address him as mr.
 chin, but merely shouted "what kind of fellow is this called chin?"
 
chia presently shuffled his feet, while designedly adjusted his
 dress and looked at the rays of the sun. "it's time," observed and
 walking forthwith, first up to chia jui, explained to him that had
 something to attend to and would like to get away little early; and as
 chia jui did not venture to stop him, had alternative but to let
 him have his way and go.
 
during this while, ming yen had entered the room and promptly seizing
 chin jung in grip: "what we do, whether proper or improper," said,
 "doesn't concern you! it's enough anyway that we don't defile your
 father! fine brat you are indeed, to come out and meddle with your mr.
 ming!"
 
these words plunged the scholars of the whole class in such
 consternation that they all wistfully and absently looked at him.
 
"ming yen," hastily shouted out chia jui, "you're not to kick up a
 rumpus."
 
chin jung was so full of anger that his face was quite yellow. "what a
 subversion of propriety! slave and menial to venture to behave in
 this manner! i'll just simply speak to your master," exclaimed as he
 readily pushed his hands off and was about to go and lay hold of pao-yü
 to beat him.
 
ch'in chung was on the point of turning round to leave the room, when
 with sound of 'whiff' which reached him from behind, at once caught
 sight of square inkslab come flying that way. who had thrown it he
 could not say, but it struck the desk where chia lan and chia chün were
 seated.
 
these two, chia lan and chia chün, were also the great-grandsons of a
 close branch of the jung mansion. this chia chün had been left
 fatherless at an early age, and his mother doated upon him in an unusual
 manner, and it was because at school was on most friendly terms with
 chia lan, that these two sat together at the same desk. who would have
 believed that chia chün would, in spite of being young in years, have
 had an extremely strong mind, and that would be mostly up to mischief
 without the least fear of any one. watched with listless eye from his
 seat chin jung's friends stealthily assist chin jung, as they flung an
 inkslab to strike ming yen, but when, as luck would have it, it hit the
 wrong mark, and fell just in front of him, smashing to atoms the
 porcelain inkslab and water bottle, and smudging his whole book with
 ink, chia chün was, of course, much incensed, and hastily gave way to
 abuse. "you consummate pugnacious criminal rowdies! why, doesn't this
 amount to all of you taking share in the fight!" and as uttered
 this abuse, too forthwith seized an inkslab, which was bent upon
 flinging.
 
chia lan was one who always tried to avoid trouble, so that lost no
 time in pressing down the inkslab, while with all the words his mouth
 could express, tried to pacify him, adding "my dear brother, it's no
 business of yours and mine."
 
chia chün could not repress his resentment; and perceiving that the
 inkslab was held down, at once laid hold of box containing books,
 which flung in this direction; but being, after all, short of
 stature, and weak of strength, was unable to send it anywhere near
 the mark; so that it dropped instead when it got as far as the desk
 belonging to pao-yü and ch'in chung, while dreadful crash became
 audible as it fell smash on the table. the books, papers, pencils,
 inkslabs, and other writing materials were all scattered over the whole
 table; and pao-yü's cup besides containing tea was itself broken to
 pieces and the tea spilt.
 
chia chün forthwith jumped forward with the intent of assailing the
 person who had flung the inkslab at the very moment that chin jung took
 hold of long bamboo pole which was near by; but as the space was
 limited, and the pupils many, how could very well brandish long
 stick? ming yen at an early period received whack, and shouted
 wildly, "don't you fellows yet come to start fight."
 
pao-yü had, besides, along with him several pages, one of whom was
 called sao hung, another ch'u yo, another mo yü. these three were
 naturally up to every mischief, so that with one voice, bawling
 boisterously, "you children of doubtful mothers, have you taken up
 arms?" mo yü promptly took up the bar of door; while sao hung and ch'u
 both laid hold of horsewhips, and they all rushed forward like hive
 of bees.
 
chia jui was driven to state of exasperation; now kept this one in
 check, and the next moment reasoned with another, but who would
 listen to his words? they followed the bent of their inclinations and
 stirred up serious disturbance.
 
of the whole company of wayward young fellows, some there were who gave
 sly blows for fun's sake; others there were who were not gifted with
 much pluck and hid themselves on one side; there were those too who
 stood on the tables, clapping their hands and laughing immoderately,
 shouting out: "go at it."
 
the row was, at this stage, like water bubbling over in cauldron, when
 several elderly servants, like li kuei and others, who stood outside,
 heard the uproar commence inside, and one and all came in with all haste
 and united in their efforts to pacify them. upon asking "what's the
 matter?" the whole bevy of voices shouted out different versions; this
 one giving this account, while another again another story. but li kuei
 temporised by rebuking ming yen and others, four in all, and packing
 them off.
 
ch'in chung's head had, at an early period, come into contact with chin
 jung's pole and had had the skin grazed off. pao-yü was in the act of
 rubbing it for him, with the overlap of his coat, but realising that the
 whole lot of them had been hushed up, forthwith bade li kuei collect
 his books.
 
"bring my horse round," cried; "i'm going to tell mr. chia tai-ju
 that we have been insulted. i won't venture to tell him anything else,
 but (tell him i will) that having come with all propriety and made our
 report to mr. chia jui, mr. chia jui instead (of helping us) threw the
 fault upon our shoulders. that while heard people abuse us, went
 so far as to instigate them to beat us; that ming yen seeing others
 insult us, did naturally take our part; but that they, instead (of
 desisting,) combined together and struck ming yen and even broke open
 ch'in chung's head. and that how is it possible for us to continue our
 studies in here?"
 
"my dear sir," replied li kuei coaxingly, "don't be so impatient! as mr.
 chia tai-ju has had something to attend to and gone home, were you now,
 for trifle like this, to go and disturb that aged gentleman, it will
 make us, indeed, appear as if we had sense of propriety: my idea is
 that wherever thing takes place, there should it be settled; and
 what's the need of going and troubling an old man like him. this is all
 you, mr. chia jui, who is to blame; for in the absence of mr. chia
 tai-ju, you, sir, are the head in this school, and every one looks to
 you to take action. had all the pupils been at fault, those who deserved
 beating should have been beaten, and those who merited punishment
 should have been punished! and why did you wait until things came to
 such pass, and didn't even exercise any check?"
 
"i blew them up," pleaded chia jui, "but not one of them would listen."
 
"i'll speak out, whether you, worthy sir, resent what i'm going to say
 or not," ventured li kuei. "it's you, sir, who all along have after all
 had considerable blame attached to your name; that's why all these young
 men wouldn't hear you! now if this affair is bruited, until it reaches
 mr. chia tai-ju's ears, why even you, sir, will not be able to escape
 condemnation; and why don't you at once make up your mind to disentangle
 the ravelled mess and dispel all trouble and have done with it!"
 
"disentangle what?" inquired pao-yü; "i shall certainly go and make my
 report."
 
"if chin jung stays here," interposed ch'in chung sobbing, "i mean to go
 back home."
 
"why that?" asked pao-yü. "is it likely that others can safely come and
 that you and i can't? i feel it my bounden duty to tell every one
 everything at home so as to expel chin jung. this chin jung," went on
 to inquire as turned towards lei kuei, "is the relative or friend of
 what branch of the family?"
 
li kuei gave way to reflection and then said by way of reply: "there's
 need whatever for you to raise this question; for were you to go and
 report the matter to the branch of the family to which belongs, the
 harmony which should exist between cousins will be still more impaired."
 
"he's the nephew of mrs. huang, of the eastern mansion," interposed ming
 yen from outside the window. "what determined and self-confident
 fellow must be to even come and bully us; mrs. huang is his paternal
 aunt! that mother of yours is only good for tossing about like a
 millstone, for kneeling before our lady lien, and begging for something
 to pawn. i've eye for such specimen of mistress."
 
"what!" speedily shouted li kuei, "does this of dog happen to know
 of the existence of all these gnawing maggots?" (these disparaging
 facts).
 
pao-yü gave sardonic smile. "i was wondering whose relative was,"
 remarked; "is really sister-in-law huang's nephew? well, i'll go
 at once and speak to her."
 
as uttered these words, his purpose was to start there and then, and
 called ming yen in, to come and pack up his books. ming yen walked in
 and put the books away. "master," went on to suggest, in an exultant
 manner, "there's need for you to go yourself to see her; i'll go to
 her house and tell her that our old lady has something to ask of her. i
 can hire carriage to bring her over, and then, in the presence of her
 venerable ladyship, she can be spoken to; and won't this way save lot
 of trouble?"
 
"do you want to die?" speedily shouted li kuei; "mind, when you go back,
 whether right or wrong, i'll first give you good bumping, and then go
 and report you to our master and mistress, and just tell them that it's
 you, and only you, who instigated mr. pao-yü! i've succeeded, after ever
 so much trouble, in coaxing them, and mending matters to certain
 extent, and now you come again to continue new plan. it's you who
 stirred up this row in the school-room; and not to speak of your
 finding, as would have been the proper course, some way of suppressing
 it, there you are instead still jumping into the fire."
 
ming yen, at this juncture, could not muster the courage to utter a
 sound. by this time chia jui had also apprehended that if the row came
 to be beyond clearing up, himself would likewise not be clear of
 blame, so that circumstances compelled him to pocket his grievances and
 to come and entreat ch'in chung as well as to make apologies to pao-yü.
 these two young fellows would not at first listen to his advances, but
 pao-yü at length explained that would not go and report the
 occurrence, provided only chin jung admitted his being in the wrong.
 chin jung refused, at the outset, to agree to this, but ultimately
 could find way out of it, as chia jui himself urged him to make some
 temporising apology.
 
li kuei and the others felt compelled to tender chin jung some good
 advice: "it's you," they said, "who have given rise to the disturbance,
 and if you don't act in this manner, how will the matter ever be brought
 to an end?" so that chin jung found it difficult to persist in his
 obstinacy, and was constrained to make bow to ch'in chung.
 
pao-yü was, however, not yet satisfied, but would insist upon his
 knocking his head on the ground, and chia jui, whose sole aim was to
 temporarily smother the affair, quietly again urged chin jung, adding
 that the proverb has it: "that if you keep down the anger of minute,
 you will for whole life-time feel remorse."
 
whether chin jung complied or not to his advice is not known, but the
 following chapter will explain.
 



chapter x.
 
widow chin, prompted by desire to reap advantage, puts up
 temporarily with an insult.
 dr. chang in discussing mrs. chin's illness minutely exhausts its
 origin.
 

we will now resume our story. as the persons against chin jung were so
 many and their pressure so great, and as, what was more, chia jui urged
 him to make amends, had to knock his head on the ground before ch'in
 chung. pao-yü then gave up his clamorous remonstrances and the whole
 crowd dispersed from school.
 
chin jung himself returned home all alone, but the more pondered on
 the occurrence, the more incensed felt. "ch'in chung," argued, "is
 simply chia jung's young brother-in-law, and is or grandson of
 the chia family, and too joins the class and prosecutes his studies
 on other footing than that of mine; but it's because relies upon
 pao-yü's friendship for him that has eye for any one. this being
 the case, should be somewhat proper in his behaviour, and there would
 be then not word to say about it! has besides all along been very
 mystical with pao-yü, imagining that we are all blind, and have eyes
 to see what's up! here goes again to-day and mixes with people in
 illicit intrigues; and it's all because they happened to obtrude
 themselves before my very eyes that this rumpus has broken out; but of
 what need i fear?"
 
his mother, née hu, hearing him mutter; "why meddle again," she
 explained, "in things that don't concern you? i had endless trouble in
 getting to speak to your paternal aunt; and your aunt had, on the other
 hand, thousand and one ways and means to devise, before she could
 appeal to lady secunda, of the western mansion; and then only it was
 that you got this place to study in. had we not others to depend upon
 for your studies, would we have in our house the means sufficient to
 engage teacher? besides, in other people's school, tea and eatables
 are all ready and found; and these two years that you've been there for
 your lessons, we've likewise effected at home great saving in what
 would otherwise have been necessary for your eating and use. something
 has been, it's true, economised; but you have further liking for spick
 and span clothes. besides, it's only through your being there to study,
 that you've come to know mr. hsüeh! that mr. hsüeh, who has even in one
 year given us so much pecuniary assistance as seventy and eighty taels!
 and now you would go and raise row in this school-room! why, if we
 were bent upon finding such another place, i tell you plainly, and once
 for all, that we would find it more difficult than if we tried to scale
 the heavens! now do quietly play for while, and then go to sleep, and
 you'll be ever so much better for it then."
 
chin jung thereupon stifled his anger and held his tongue; and, after a
 short while, in fact went to sleep of his own accord.
 
the next day again went to school, and further comment need be
 made about it; but we will go on to explain that young lady related to
 her had at one time been given in marriage to descendant (of the
 eldest branch) of the chia family, (whose names were written) with the
 jade radical, chia huang by name; but how could the whole number of
 members of the clan equal in affluence and power the two mansions of
 ning and jung? this fact goes, as matter of course, without saying.
 the chia huang couple enjoyed some small income; but they also went, on
 frequent occasions, to the mansions of ning and jung to pay their
 respects; and they knew likewise so well how to adulate lady feng and
 mrs. yu, that lady feng and mrs. yu would often grant them that
 assistance and support which afforded them the means of meeting their
 daily expenses.
 
it just occurred on this occasion that the weather was clear and fine,
 and that there happened, on the other hand, to be nothing to attend to
 at home, so forthwith taking along with her matron, (mrs. chia huang)
 got into carriage and came over to see widow chin and her nephew.
 while engaged in chat, chin jung's mother accidentally broached the
 subject of the affair, which had transpired in the school-room of the
 chia mansion on the previous day, and she gave, for the benefit of her
 young sister-in-law, detailed account of the whole occurrence from
 beginning to end.
 
this mrs. huang would not have had her temper ruffled had she not come
 to hear what had happened; but having heard about it, anger sprung from
 the very depths of her heart. "this fellow, ch'in chung," she exclaimed,
 "is relative of the chia family, but is it likely that jung erh isn't,
 in like manner, relative of the chia family; and when relatives are
 many, there's need to put on airs! besides, does his conduct consist,
 for the most part, of anything that would make one get any face? in
 fact, pao-yü himself shouldn't do injury to himself by condescending to
 look at him. but, as things have come to this pass, give time and
 i'll go to the eastern mansion and see our lady chen and then have a
 chat with ch'in chung's sister, and ask her to decide who's right and
 who's wrong!"
 
chin jung's mother upon hearing these words was terribly distressed.
 "it's all through my hasty tongue," she observed with vehemence, "that
 i've told you all, sister-in-law: but please, sister, give up at once
 the idea of going over to say anything about it! don't trouble yourself
 as to who is in the right, and who is in the wrong; for were any
 unpleasantness to come out of it, how could we here stand on our legs?
 and were we not to stand on our legs, not only would we never be able to
 engage tutor, but the result will be, on the contrary, that for his
 own person will be superadded many an expense for eatables and
 necessaries."
 
"what do i care about how many?" replied mrs. huang; "wait till i've
 spoken about it, and we'll see what will be the result." nor would she
 accede to her sister-in-law's entreaties, but bidding, at the same time,
 the matron look after the carriage, she got into it, and came over to
 the ning mansion.
 
on her arrival at the ning mansion, she entered by the eastern side
 gate, and dismounting from the carriage, she went in to call on mrs. yu,
 the spouse of chia chen, with whom she had not the courage to put on any
 high airs; but gently and quietly she made inquiries after her health,
 and after passing some irrelevant remarks, she ascertained: "how is it i
 don't see lady jung to-day?"
 
"i don't know," replied mrs. yu, "what's the matter with her these last
 few days; but she hasn't been herself for two months and more; and the
 doctor who was asked to see her declares that it is nothing connected
 with any happy event. couple of days back, she felt, as soon as the
 afternoon came, both to move, and both even to utter word; while the
 brightness of her eyes was all dimmed; and i told her, 'you needn't
 stick to etiquette, for there's use for you to come in the forenoon
 and evening, as required by conventionalities; but what you must do is,
 to look after your own health. should any relative come over, there's
 also myself to receive them; and should any of the senior generation
 think your absence strange, i'll explain things for you, if you'll let
 me.'
 
"i also advised brother jung on the subject: 'you shouldn't,' i said,
 'allow any one to trouble her; nor let her be put out of temper, but let
 her quietly attend to her health, and she'll get all right. should she
 fancy anything to eat, just come over here and fetch it; for, in the
 event of anything happening to her, were you to try and find another
 such wife to wed, with such face and such disposition, why, i
 fear, were you even to seek with lantern in hand, there would really
 be place where you could discover her. and with such temperament
 and deportment as hers, which of our relatives and which of our elders
 don't love her?' that's why my heart has been very distressed these two
 days! as luck would have it early this morning her brother turned up to
 see her, but who would have fancied him to be such child, and so
 ignorant of what is proper and not proper to do? saw well enough that
 his sister was not well; and what's more all these matters shouldn't
 have been recounted to her; for even supposing had received the
 gravest offences imaginable, it behoved him anyhow not to have broached
 the subject to her! yesterday, one would scarcely believe it, fight
 occurred in the school-room, and some pupil or other who attends that
 class, somehow insulted him; besides, in this business, there were a
 good many indecent and improper utterances, but all these went and
 told his sister! now, sister-in-law, you are well aware that though (our
 jung's) wife talks and laughs when she sees people, that she is
 nevertheless imaginative and withal too sensitive, so that matter
 what she hears, she's for the most part bound to brood over it for three
 days and five nights, before she loses sight of it, and it's from this
 excessive sensitiveness that this complaint of hers arises. today, when
 she heard that some one had insulted her brother, she felt both vexed
 and angry; vexed that those fox-like, cur-like friends of his had moved
 right and wrong, and intrigued with this one and deluded that one; angry
 that her brother had, by not learning anything profitable, and not
 having his mind set upon study, been the means of bringing about row
 at school; and on account of this affair, she was so upset that she did
 not even have her early meal. i went over short while back and
 consoled her for time, and likewise gave her brother few words of
 advice; and after having packed off that brother of hers to the mansion
 on the other side, in search of pao-yü, and having stood by and seen her
 have half bowl of birds' nests soup, i at length came over. now,
 sister-in-law, tell me, is my heart sore or not? besides, as there's
 nowadays good doctor, the mere thought of her complaint makes my
 heart feel as if it were actually pricked with needles! but do you and
 yours, perchance, know of any good practitioner?"
 
mrs. chin had, while listening to these words, been, at an early period,
 so filled with concern that she cast away to distant lands the reckless
 rage she had been in recently while at her sister-in-law's house, when
 she had determined to go and discuss matters over with mrs. ch'in. upon
 hearing mrs. yu inquire of her about good doctor, she lost time in
 saying by way of reply: "neither have we heard of any one speak of a
 good doctor; but from the account i've just heard of mrs. ch'in's
 illness, it may still, there's saying, be some felicitous ailment;
 so, sister-in-law, don't let any one treat her recklessly, for were she
 to be treated for the wrong thing, the result may be dreadful!"
 
"quite so!" replied mrs. yu.
 
but while they were talking, chia chen came in from out of doors, and
 upon catching sight of mrs. chin; "isn't this mrs. huang?" inquired
 of mrs. yu; whereupon mrs. chin came forward and paid her respects to
 chia chen.
 
"invite this lady to have her repast here before she goes," observed
 chia chen to mrs. yu; and as uttered these words forthwith walked
 into the room on the off side.
 
the object of mrs. chin's present visit had originally been to talk to
 mrs. ch'in about the insult which her brother had received from the
 hands of ch'in chung, but when she heard that mrs. ch'in was ill, she
 did not have the courage to even so much as make mention of the object
 of her errand. besides, as chia chen and mrs. yu had given her most
 cordial reception, her resentment was transformed into pleasure, so that
 after while spent in further chat about one thing and another, she
 at length returned to her home.
 
it was only after the departure of mrs. chin that chia chen came over
 and took seat. "what did she have to say for herself during this visit
 to-day?" asked of mrs. yu.
 
"she said nothing much," replied mrs. yu. "when she first entered the
 room, her face bore somewhat of an angry look, but, after lengthy chat
 and as soon as mention of our son's wife's illness was made, this
 angered look after all gradually abated. you also asked to keep her
 for the repast, but, having heard that our son's wife was so ill she
 could not very well stay, so that all she did was to sit down, and after
 making few more irrelevant remarks, she took her departure. but she
 had request to make. to return however now to the illness of jung's
 wife, it's urgent that you should find somewhere good doctor to
 diagnose it for her; and whatever you do, you should lose time. the
 whole body of doctors who at present go in and out of our household, are
 they worth having? each one of them listens to what the patient has to
 say of the ailment, and then, adding string of flowery sentences, out
 comes with long rigmarole; but they are exceedingly diligent in
 paying us visits; and in one day, three or four of them are here at
 least four and five times in rotation! they come and feel her pulse,
 they hold consultation together, and write their prescriptions, but,
 though she has taken their medicines, she has seen improvement; on
 the contrary, she's compelled to change her clothes three and five times
 each day, and to sit up to see the doctor; thing which, in fact, does
 the patient good."
 
"this child too is somewhat simple," observed chia chen; "for what need
 has she to be taking off her clothes, and changing them for others? and
 were she again to catch chill, she would add something more to her
 illness; and won't it be dreadful! the clothes may be matter how
 fine, but what is their worth, after all? the health of our child is
 what is important to look to! and were she even to wear out suit of
 new clothes a-day, what would that too amount to? i was about to tell
 you that short while back, feng tzu-ying came to see me, and,
 perceiving that i had somewhat of worried look, asked what was
 up; and i told him that our son's wife was not well at all, that as we
 couldn't get any good doctor, we couldn't determine with any certainty,
 whether she was in an interesting condition, or whether she was
 suffering from some disease; that as we could neither tell whether there
 was any danger or not, my heart was, for this reason, really very much
 distressed. feng tzu-ying then explained that knew young doctor who
 had made study of his profession, chang by surname, and yu-shih by
 name, whose learning was profound to degree; who was besides most
 proficient in the principles of medicine, and had the knack of
 discriminating whether patient would live or die; that this year he
 had come to the capital to purchase an official rank for his son, and
 that was now living with him in his house. in view of these
 circumstances, not knowing but that if, perchance, the case of our
 daughter-in-law were placed in his hands, couldn't avert the danger,
 i readily despatched servant, with card of mine, to invite him to
 come; but the hour to-day being rather late, probably won't be round,
 but i believe he's sure to be here to-morrow. besides, feng-tzu-ying was
 also on his return home, to personally entreat him on my behalf, so that
 he's bound, when has asked him, to come and see her. let's therefore
 wait till dr. chang has been here and seen her, when we can talk matters
 over!"
 
mrs. yu was very much cheered when she heard what was said. "the day
 after to-morrow," she felt obliged to add, "is again our senior's, mr.
 chia ching's birthday, and how are we to celebrate it after all?"
 
"i've just been over to our senior's and paid my respects," replied chia
 chen, "and further invited the old gentleman to come home, and receive
 the congratulations of the whole family.
 
"'i'm accustomed,' our senior explained, 'to peace and quiet, and have
 wish to go over to that worldly place of yours; for you people are
 certain to have published that it's my birthday, and to entertain the
 design to ask to go round to receive the bows of the whole lot of
 you. but won't it be better if you were to give the "record of
 meritorious acts," which i annotated some time ago, to some one to copy
 out clean for me, and have it printed? compared with asking to come,
 and uselessly receive the obeisances of you all, this will be yea even a
 hundred times more profitable! in the event of the whole family wishing
 to pay visit on any of the two days, to-morrow or the day after
 to-morrow, if you were to stay at home and entertain them in proper
 style, that will be all that is wanted; nor will there be any need to
 send anything! even you needn't come two days from this; and should
 you not feel contented at heart, well, you had better bow your head
 before to-day before you go. but if you do come again the day after
 to-morrow, with lot of people to disturb me, i shall certainly be
 angry with you.' after what said, i will not venture to go and see
 him two days hence; but you had better send for lai sheng, and bid him
 get ready banquet to continue for couple of days."
 
mrs. yu, having asked chia jung to come round, told him to direct lai
 sheng to make the usual necessary preparations for banquet to last for
 couple of days, with due regard to profuse and sumptuous style.
 
"you go by-and-by," (she advised him), "in person to the western mansion
 and invite dowager lady chia, mesdames hsing and wang, and your
 sister-in-law secunda lady lien to come over for stroll. your father
 has also heard of good doctor, and having already sent some one to ask
 him round, i think that by to-morrow he's sure to come; and you had
 better tell him, in minute manner, the serious symptoms of her ailment
 during these few days."
 
chia jung having signified his obedience to each of her recommendations,
 and taken his leave, was just in time to meet the youth coming back from
 feng tzu-ying's house, whither had gone short while back to invite
 the doctor round.
 
"your slave," consequently reported, "has just been with card of
 master's to mr. feng's house and asked the doctor to come. 'the gentleman
 here,' replied the doctor, 'has just told about it; but to-day, i've
 had to call on people the whole day, and i've only this moment come
 home; and i feel now my strength (so worn out), that i couldn't really
 stand any exertion. in fact were i even to get as far as the mansion, i
 shouldn't be in fit state to diagnose the pulses! i must therefore
 have night's rest, but, to-morrow for certain, i shall come to the
 mansion. my medical knowledge,' went on to observe, 'is very shallow,
 and i don't deserve the honour of such eminent recommendation; but as
 mr. feng has already thus spoken of in your mansion, i can't but
 present myself. it will be all right if in anticipation you deliver this
 message for to your honourable master; but as for your worthy
 master's card, i cannot really presume to keep it.' it was again at his
 instance that i've brought it back; but, sir, please mention this result
 for (to master)."
 
chia jung turned back again, and entering the house delivered the
 message to chia chen and mrs. yu; whereupon walked out, and, calling
 lai sheng before him, transmitted to him the orders to prepare the
 banquet for couple of days.
 
after lai sheng had listened to the directions, went off, of course,
 to get ready the customary preparations; but upon these we shall not
 dilate, but confine ourselves to the next day.
 
at noon, servant on duty at the gate announced that the doctor chang,
 who had been sent for, had come, and chia chen conducted him along the
 court into the large reception hall, where they sat down; and after they
 had partaken of tea, broached the subject.
 
"yesterday," explained, "the estimable mr. feng did the honour to
 speak to of your character and proficiency, venerable doctor, as well
 as of your thorough knowledge of medicine, and i, your mean brother, was
 filled with an immeasurable sense of admiration!"
 
"your junior," remonstrated dr. chang, "is coarse, despicable and mean
 scholar and my knowledge is shallow and vile! but as worthy mr. feng did
 the honour yesterday of telling that your family, sir, had
 condescended to look upon me, low scholar, and to favour too with
 an invitation, could i presume not to obey your commands? but as i
 cannot boast of the least particle of real learning, i feel overburdened
 with shame!"
 
"why need you be so modest?" observed chia chen; "doctor, do please walk
 in at once to see our son's wife, for i look up, with full reliance, to
 your lofty intelligence to dispel my solicitude!"
 
chia jung forthwith walked in with him. when they reached the inner
 apartment, and caught sight of mrs. ch'in, turned round and asked
 chia jung, "this is your honourable spouse, isn't it?"
 
"yes, it is," assented chia jung; "but please, doctor, take seat, and
 let tell you the symptoms of my humble wife's ailment, before her
 pulse be felt. will this do?"
 
"my mean idea is," remarked the doctor, "that it would, after all, be
 better that i should begin by feeling her pulse, before i ask you to
 inform what the source of the ailment is. this is the first visit i
 pay to your honourable mansion; besides, i possess knowledge of
 anything; but as our worthy mr. feng would insist upon my coming over to
 see you, i had in consequence alternative but to come. after i have
 now made diagnosis, you can judge whether what i say is right or not,
 before you explain to the phases of the complaint during the last few
 days, and we can deliberate together upon some prescription; as to the
 suitableness or unsuitableness of which your honourable father will then
 have to decide, and what is necessary will have been done."
 
"doctor," rejoined chia jung, "you are indeed eminently clear sighted;
 all i regret at present is that we have met so late! but please, doctor,
 diagnose the state of the pulse, so as to find out whether there be hope
 of cure or not; if cure can be effected, it will be the means of
 allaying the solicitude of my father and mother."
 
the married women attached to that menage forthwith presented pillow;
 and as it was being put down for mrs. ch'in to rest her arm on, they
 raised the lower part of her sleeve so as to leave her wrist exposed.
 the doctor thereupon put out his hand and pressed it on the pulse of the
 right hand. regulating his breath (to the pulsation) so as to be able to
 count the beatings, with due care and minuteness felt the action for
 considerable time, when, substituting the left hand, again went
 through the same operation.
 
"let us go and sit outside," suggested, after had concluded
 feeling her pulses. chia jung readily adjourned, in company with the
 doctor, to the outer apartment, where they seated themselves on the
 stove-couch. matron having served tea; "please take cup of tea,
 doctor," chia jung observed. when tea was over, "judging," inquired,
 "doctor, from the present action of the pulses, is there any remedy or
 not?"
 
"the action of the pulse, under the forefinger, on the left hand of your
 honorable spouse," proceeded the doctor, "is deep and agitated; the left
 hand pulse, under the second finger, is deep and faint. the pulse, under
 the forefinger, of the right hand, is gentle and lacks vitality. the
 right hand pulse, under my second finger, is superficial, and has lost
 all energy. the deep and agitated beating of the forepulse of the left
 hand arises from the febrile state, due to the weak action of the heart.
 the deep and delicate condition of the second part of the pulse of the
 left wrist, emanates from the sluggishness of the liver, and the
 scarcity of the blood in that organ. the action of the forefinger pulse,
 of the right wrist, is faint and lacks strength, as the breathing of the
 lungs is too weak. the second finger pulse of the right wrist is
 superficial and devoid of vigour, as the spleen must be affected
 injuriously by the liver. the weak action of the heart, and its febrile
 state, should be the natural causes which conduce to the present
 irregularity in the catamenia, and insomnia at night; the poverty of
 blood in the liver, and the sluggish condition of that organ must
 necessarily produce pain in the ribs; while the overdue of the
 catamenia, the cardiac fever, and debility of the respiration of the
 lungs, should occasion frequent giddiness in the head, and swimming of
 the eyes, the certain recurrence of perspiration between the periods of
 3 to 5 and 5 to 7, and the sensation of being seated on board ship. the
 obstruction of the spleen by the liver should naturally create distaste
 for liquid or food, debility of the vital energies and prostration of
 the four limbs. from my diagnosis of these pulses, there should exist
 these various symptoms, before (the pulses and the symptoms can be said)
 to harmonise. but should perchance (any doctor maintain) that this state
 of the pulses imports felicitous event, your servant will not presume
 to give an ear to such an opinion!"
 
matron, who was attached as personal attendant (to mrs. ch'in,) and
 who happened to be standing by interposed: "how could it be otherwise?"
 she ventured. "in real truth, doctor, you speak like supernatural
 being, and there's verily need for us to say anything! we have now,
 ready at hand, in our household, good number of medical gentlemen, who
 are in attendance upon her, but none of these are proficient enough to
 speak in this positive manner. some there are who say that it's a
 genital complaint; others maintain that it's an organic disease. this
 doctor explains that there is danger: while another, again, holds
 that there's fear of crisis either before or after the winter
 solstice; but there is, in one word, nothing certain said by them. may
 it please you, sir, now to favour us with your clear directions."
 
"this complaint of your lady's," observed the doctor, "has certainly
 been neglected by the whole number of doctors; for had treatment with
 certain medicines been initiated at the time of the first occurrence of
 her habitual sickness, i cannot but opine that, by this time, perfect
 cure would have been effected. but seeing that the organic complaint has
 now been, through neglect, allowed to reach this phase, this calamity
 was, in truth, inevitable. my ideas are that this illness stands, as
 yet, certain chance of recovery, (three chances out of ten); but we
 will see how she gets on, after she has had these medicines of mine.
 should they prove productive of sleep at night, then there will be added
 furthermore two more chances in the grip of our hands. from my
 diagnosis, your lady is person, gifted with preëminently excellent,
 and intelligent disposition; but an excessive degree of intelligence is
 the cause of frequent contrarieties; and frequent contrarieties give
 origin to an excessive amount of anxious cares. this illness arises from
 the injury done, by worrying and fretting, to the spleen, and from the
 inordinate vigour of the liver; hence it is that the relief cannot come
 at the proper time and season. has not your lady, may i ask, heretofore
 at the period of the catamenia, suffered, if indeed not from anaemia,
 then necessarily from plethora? am i right in assuming this or not?"
 
"to be sure she did," replied the matron; "but she has never been
 subject to anaemia, but to plethora, varying from either two to three
 days, and extending, with much irregularity, to even ten days."
 
"quite so!" observed the doctor, after hearing what she had to say, "and
 this is the source of this organic illness! had it in past days been
 treated with such medicine as could strengthen the heart, and improve
 the respiration, would it have reached this stage? this has now overtly
 made itself manifest in an ailment originating from the paucity of water
 and the vigour of fire; but let make use of some medicines, and we'll
 see how she gets on!"
 
there and then set to work and wrote prescription, which handed
 to chia jung, the purpose of which was: decoction for the improvement of
 respiration, the betterment of the blood, and the restoration of the
 spleen. ginseng, atractylodes lancea; yunnan root; prepared root;
 aralia edulis; peony roots; levisticum from sze ch'uan; sophora
 tormentosa; cyperus rotundus, prepared with rice; gentian, soaked in
 vinegar; huai shan yao root; real "o" glue; carydalis ambigua; and dried
 liquorice. seven fukien lotus seeds, (the cores of which should be
 extracted,) and two large zizyphi to be used as preparative.
 
"what exalted intelligence!" chia jung, after perusing it, exclaimed.
 "but i would also ask you, doctor, to be good enough to tell whether
 this illness will, in the long run, endanger her life or not?"
 
the doctor smiled. "you, sir, who are endowed with most eminent
 intelligence (are certain to know) that when human illness has reached
 this phase, it is not derangement of day or of single night; but
 after these medicines have been taken, we shall also have to watch the
 effect of the treatment! my humble opinion is that, as far as the winter
 of this year goes, there is fear; in fact, after the spring equinox,
 i entertain hopes of complete cure."
 
chia jung was likewise person with all his wits about him, so that he
 did not press any further minute questions.
 
chia jung forthwith escorted the doctor and saw him off, and taking the
 prescription and the diagnosis, handed them both to chia chen for his
 perusal, and in like manner recounted to chia chen and mrs. yu all that
 had been said on the subject.
 
"the other doctors have hitherto not expressed any opinions as positive
 as this one has done," observed mrs. yu, addressing herself to chia
 chen, "so that the medicines to be used are, i think, surely the right
 ones!"
 
"he really isn't man," rejoined chia chen, "accustomed to give much of
 his time to the practice of medicine, in order to earn rice for his
 support: and it's feng tzu-ying, who is so friendly with us, who is
 mainly to be thanked for succeeding, after ever so much trouble, in
 inducing him to come. but now that we have this man, the illness of our
 son's wife may, there is saying, stand chance of being cured. but
 on that prescription of his there is ginseng mentioned, so you had
 better make use of that catty of good quality which was bought the other
 day."
 
chia jung listened until the conversation came to close, after which
 left the room, and bade servant go and buy the medicines, in order
 that they should be prepared and administered to mrs. ch'in.
 
what was the state of mrs. ch'in's illness, after she partook of these
 medicines, we do not know; but, reader, listen to the explanation given
 in the chapter which follows.
 



chapter xi.
 
in honour of chia ching's birthday, family banquet is spread in the
 ning mansion.
 at the sight of hsi-feng, chia jui entertains feelings of licentious
 love.
 

we will now explain, in continuation of our story, that on the day of
 chia ching's birthday, chia chen began by getting ready luscious
 delicacies and rare fruits, which packed in sixteen spacious present
 boxes, and bade chia jung take them, along with the servants belonging
 to the household, over to chia ching.
 
turning round towards chia jung: "mind," said, "that you observe
 whether your grandfather be agreeable or not, before you set to work and
 pay your obeisance! 'my father,' tell him, 'has complied with your
 directions, venerable senior, and not presumed to come over; but has
 at home ushered the whole company of the members of the family (into
 your apartments), where they all paid their homage facing the side of
 honour.'"
 
after chia jung had listened to these injunctions, speedily led off
 the family domestics, and took his departure. during this interval, one
 by one arrived the guests. first came chia lien and chia se, who went to
 see whether the seats in the various places (were sufficient). "is there
 to be any entertainment or not?" they also inquired.
 
"our master," replied the servants, "had, at one time, intended to
 invite the venerable mr. chia ching to come and spend this day at home,
 and hadn't for this reason presumed to get up any entertainment. but
 when the other day came to hear that the old gentleman was not
 coming, at once gave us orders to go in search of troupe of young
 actors, as well as band of musicians, and all these people are now
 engaged making their preparations on the stage in the garden."
 
next came, in group, mesdames hsing and wang, lady feng and pao-yü,
 followed immediately after by chia chen and mrs. yu; mrs. yu's mother
 having already arrived and being in there in advance of her. salutations
 were exchanged between the whole company, and they pressed one another
 to take seat. chia chen and mrs. yu both handed the tea round.
 
"our venerable lady," they explained, as they smiled, "is worthy
 senior; while our father is, on the other hand, only her nephew; so that
 on birthday of man of his age, we should really not have had the
 audacity to invite her ladyship; but as the weather, at this time, is
 cool, and the chrysanthemums, in the whole garden, are in luxuriant
 blossom, we have requested our venerable ancestor to come for little
 distraction, and to see the whole number of her children and
 grand-children amuse themselves. this was the object we had in view,
 but, contrary to our expectations, our worthy senior has not again
 conferred upon us the lustre of her countenance."
 
lady feng did not wait until madame wang could open her mouth, but took
 the initiative to reply. "our venerable lady," she urged, "had, even so
 late as yesterday, said that she meant to come; but, in the evening,
 upon seeing brother pao eating peaches, the mouth of the old lady once
 again began to water, and after partaking of little more than the half
 of one, she had, about the fifth watch, to get out of bed two
 consecutive times, with the result that all the forenoon to-day, she
 felt her body considerably worn out. she therefore bade inform our
 worthy senior that it was utterly impossible for her to come to-day;
 adding however that, if there were any delicacies, she fancied few
 kinds, but that they should be very tender."
 
when chia chen heard these words, smiled. "our dowager lady," he
 replied, "is, i argued, so fond of amusement that, if she doesn't come
 to-day, there must, for certainty, be some valid reason; and that's
 exactly what happens to be the case."
 
"the other day i heard your eldest sister explain," interposed madame
 wang, "that chia jung's wife was anything but well; but what's after all
 the matter with her?"
 
"she has," observed mrs. yu, "contracted this illness verily in a
 strange manner! last moon at the time of the mid-autumn festival, she
 was still well enough to be able to enjoy herself, during half the
 night, in company with our dowager lady and madame wang. on her return,
 she continued in good health, until after the twentieth, when she began
 to feel more and more languid every day, and loth, likewise, to eat
 anything; and this has been going on for well-nigh half month and
 more; she hasn't besides been anything like her old self for two
 months."
 
"may she not," remarked madame hsing, taking up the thread of the
 conversation, "be ailing for some happy event?"
 
but while she was uttering these words, some one from outside announced:
 "our senior master, second master and all the gentlemen of the family
 have come, and are standing in the reception hall!" whereupon chia chen
 and chia lien quitted the apartment with hurried step; and during this
 while, mrs. yu reiterated how that some time ago doctor had also
 expressed the opinion that she was ailing for happy event, but that
 the previous day, had come doctor, recommended by feng tzu-ying--a
 doctor, who had from his youth up made medicine his study, and was very
 proficient in the treatment of diseases,--who asserted, after had
 seen her, that it was felicitous ailment, but that it was some grave
 complaint. "it was only yesterday," (she explained,) "that wrote his
 prescription; and all she has had is but one dose, and already to-day
 the giddiness in the head is considerably better; as regards the other
 symptoms they have as yet shown marked improvement."
 
"i maintain," remarked lady feng, "that, were she not quite unfit to
 stand the exertion, would she in fact, on day like this, be unwilling
 to strain every nerve and come round."
 
"you saw her," observed mrs. yu, "on the third in here; how that she
 bore up with violent effort for ever so long, but it was all because
 of the friendship that exists between you two, that she still longed for
 your society, and couldn't brook the idea of tearing herself away."
 
when lady feng heard these words, her eyes got quite red, and after a
 time she at length exclaimed: "in the heavens of sudden come wind and
 rain; while with man, in day and in night, woe and weal survene! but
 with her tender years, if for complaint like this she were to run any
 risk, what pleasure is there for any human being to be born and to
 sojourn in the world?"
 
she was just speaking, when chia jung walked into the apartment; and
 after paying his respects to madame hsing, madame wang, and lady feng,
 then observed to mrs. yu: "i have just taken over the eatables to our
 venerable ancestor; and, at the same time, i told him that my father was
 at home waiting upon the senior, and entertaining the junior gentlemen
 of the whole family, and that in compliance with grandfather's orders,
 did not presume to go over. the old gentleman was much delighted by
 what heard say, and having signified that that was all in order,
 bade tell father and you, mother, to do all you can in your
 attendance upon the senior gentlemen and ladies, enjoining to
 entertain, with all propriety, my uncles, aunts, and my cousins. also
 went on to urge to press the men to cut, with all despatch, the
 blocks for the record of meritorious deeds, and to print ten thousand
 copies for distribution. all these messages i have duly delivered to my
 father, but i must now be quick and go out, so as to send the eatables
 for the elder as well as for the younger gentlemen of the entire
 household."
 
"brother jung erh," exclaimed lady feng, "wait moment. how is your
 wife getting on? how is she, after all, to-day?"
 
"not well," replied chia jung. "but were you, aunt, on your return to go
 in and see her, you will find out for yourself."
 
chia jung forthwith left the room. during this interval, mrs. yu
 addressed herself to mesdames hsing and wang; "my ladies," she asked,
 "will you have your repast in here, or will you go into the garden for
 it? there are now in the garden some young actors engaged in making
 their preparations?"
 
"it's better in here," madame wang remarked, as she turned towards
 madame hsing.
 
mrs. yu thereupon issued directions to the married women and matrons to
 be quick in serving the eatables. the servants, in waiting outside the
 door, with one voice signified their obedience; and each of them went
 off to fetch what fell to her share. in short while, the courses were
 all laid out, and mrs. yu pressed mesdames hsing and wang, as well as
 her mother, into the upper seats; while she, together with lady feng and
 pao-yü, sat at side table.
 
"we've come," observed mesdames hsing and wang, "with the original idea
 of paying our congratulations to our venerable senior on the occasion of
 his birthday; and isn't this as if we had come for our own birthdays?"
 
"the old gentleman," answered lady feng, "is man fond of quiet life;
 and as has already consummated process of purification, may well
 be looked upon as supernatural being, so that the purpose to which
 your ladyships have given expression may be considered as manifest to
 his spirit, upon the very advent of the intention."
 
as this sentence was uttered the whole company in the room burst out
 laughing. mrs. yu's mother, mesdames hsing and wang, and lady feng
 having one and all partaken of the banquet, rinsed their mouths and
 washed their hands, which over, they expressed wish to go into the
 garden.
 
chia jung entered the room. "the senior gentlemen," said to mrs. yu,
 "as well as all my uncles and cousins, have finished their repast; but
 the elder gentleman mr. chia she, who excused himself on the score of
 having at home something to attend to, and mr. secundus (chia cheng),
 who is not partial to theatrical performances and is always afraid that
 people will be too boisterous in their entertainments, have both of them
 taken their departure. the rest of the family gentlemen have been taken
 over by uncle secundus mr. lien, and mr. se, to the other side to listen
 to the play. few moments back prince nan an, prince tung p'ing, prince
 hsi ning, prince pei ching, these four princes, with niu, duke of chen
 kuo, and five other dukes, six in all, and shih, marquis of chung ching,
 and other seven, in all eight marquises, sent their messengers with
 their cards and presents. i have already told father all about it; but
 before i did so, the presents were put away in the counting room, the
 lists of presents were all entered in the book, and the 'received with
 thanks' cards were handed to the respective messengers of the various
 mansions; the men themselves were also tipped in the customary manner,
 and all of them were kept to have something to eat before they went on
 their way. but, mother, you should invite the two ladies, your mother
 and my aunt, to go over and sit in the garden."
 
"just so!" observed mrs. yu, "but we've only now finished our repast,
 and were about to go over."
 
"i wish to tell you, madame," interposed lady feng, "that i shall go
 first and see brother jung's wife and then come and join you."
 
"all right," replied madame wang; "we should all have been fain to have
 paid her visit, did we not fear lest she should look upon our
 disturbing her with displeasure, but just tell her that we would like to
 know how she is getting on!"
 
"my dear sister," remarked mrs. yu, "as our son's wife has ready ear
 for all you say, do go and cheer her up, (and if you do so,) it will
 besides set my own mind at ease; but be quick and come as soon as you
 can into the garden."
 
pao-yü being likewise desirous to go along with lady feng to see lady
 ch'in, madame wang remarked, "go and see her just for while, and then
 come over at once into the garden; (for remember) she is your nephew's
 wife, (and you couldn't sit in there long)."
 
mrs. yu forthwith invited mesdames wang and hsing, as well as her own
 mother, to adjourn to the other side, and they all in body walked into
 the garden of concentrated fragrance; while lady feng and pao-yü betook
 themselves, in company with chia jung, over to this side.
 
having entered the door, they with quiet step walked as far as the
 entrance of the inner chamber. mrs. ch'in, upon catching sight of them,
 was bent upon getting up; but "be quick," remonstrated lady feng, "and
 give up all idea of standing up; for take care your head will feel
 dizzy."
 
lady feng hastened to make few hurried steps forward and to grasp mrs.
 ch'in's hand in hers. "my dear girl!" she exclaimed; "how is it that
 during the few days i've not seen you, you have grown so thin?"
 
readily she then took seat on the rug, on which mrs. ch'in was seated,
 while pao-yü, after inquiring too about her health, sat in the chair on
 the opposite side.
 
"bring the tea in at once," called out chia jung, "for aunt and uncle
 secundus have not had any tea in the drawing room."
 
mrs. ch'in took lady feng's hand in her own and forced smile. "this is
 all due to my lack of good fortune; for in such family as this, my
 father and mother-in-law treat just as if i were daughter of their
 own flesh and blood! besides, your nephew, (my husband,) may, it is
 true, my dear aunt, be young in years, but is full of regard for me,
 as i have regard for him, and we have had so far misunderstanding
 between us! in fact, among the senior generation, as well as that of the
 same age as myself, in the whole clan, putting you aside, aunt, about
 whom mention need be made, there is not one who has not ever had
 anything but love for me, and not one who has not ever shown anything
 but kindness! but since i've fallen ill with this complaint, all my
 energy has even every bit of it been taken out of me, so that i've been
 unable to show to my father and mother-in-law any mark of filial
 attention, yea so much as for one single day and to you, my dear aunt,
 with all this affection of yours for me, i have every wish to be dutiful
 to the utmost degree, but, in my present state, i'm really not equal to
 it; my own idea is, that it isn't likely that i shall last through this
 year."
 
pao-yü kept, while (she spoke,) his eyes fixed intently upon picture
 on the opposite side, representing some begonias drooping in the spring
 time, and upon pair of scrolls, with this inscription written by ch'in
 tai-hsü:
 
gentle chill doth circumscribe the dreaming man because the spring
 is cold!
 the fragrant whiff which wafts itself into man's nose, is the perfume
 of wine!
 
and could not help recalling to mind his experiences at the time when
 had fallen asleep in this apartment, and had, in his dream, visited
 the confines of the great void. was just plunged in state of
 abstraction, when heard mrs. ch'in give utterance to these
 sentiments, which pierced his heart as if they were ten thousand arrows,
 (with the result that) tears unwittingly trickled from his eyes.
 
lady feng perceiving him in tears felt it extremely painful within
 herself to bear the sight; but she was on pins and needles lest the
 patient should detect their frame of mind, and feel, instead (of
 benefit), still more sore at heart, which would not, after all, be quite
 the purpose of her visit; which was to afford her distraction and
 consolation. "pao-yü," she therefore exclaimed, "you are like an old
 woman! ill, as she is, simply makes her speak in this wise, and how ever
 could things come to such pass! besides, she is young in years, so
 that after short indisposition, her illness will get all right!"
 "don't," she said as she turned towards mrs. ch'in, "give way to silly
 thoughts and idle ideas! for by so doing won't you yourself be
 aggravating your ailment?"
 
"all that her sickness in fact needs," observed chia jung, "is, that she
 should be able to take something to eat, and then there will be nothing
 to fear."
 
"brother pao," urged lady feng, "your mother told you to go over, as
 soon as you could, so that don't stay here, and go on in the way you're
 doing, for you after all incite this lady also to feel uneasy at heart.
 besides, your mother over there is solicitous on your account." "you had
 better go ahead with your uncle pao," she consequently continued,
 addressing herself to chia jung, "while i sit here little longer."
 
when chia jung heard this remark, promptly crossed over with pao-yü
 into the garden of concentrated fragrance, while lady feng went on both
 to cheer her up for time, and to impart to her, in an undertone, a
 good deal of confidential advice.
 
mrs. yu had despatched servants, on two or three occasions, to hurry
 lady feng, before she said to mrs. ch'in: "do all you can to take good
 care of yourself, and i'll come and see you again. you're bound to get
 over this illness; and now, in fact, that you've come across that
 renowned doctor, you have really nothing more to fear."
 
"he might," observed mrs. ch'in as she smiled, "even be supernatural
 being and succeed in healing my disease, but won't be able to remedy
 my destiny; for, my dear aunt, i feel sure that with this complaint of
 mine, i can do more than drag on from day to day."
 
"if you encourage such ideas," remonstrated lady feng, "how can this
 illness ever get all right? what you absolutely need is to cast away all
 these notions, and then you'll improve. i hear moreover that the doctor
 asserts that if cure be effected, the fear is of change for the
 worse in spring, and not till then. did you and i moreover belong to a
 family that hadn't the means to afford any ginseng, it would be
 difficult to say how we could manage to get it; but were your father and
 mother-in-law to hear that it's good for your recovery, why not to speak
 of two mace of ginseng day, but even two catties will be also within
 their means! so mind you do take every care of your health! i'm now off
 on my way into the garden."
 
"excuse me, my dear aunt," added mrs. ch'in, "that i can't go with you;
 but when you have nothing to do, i entreat you do come over and see me!
 and you and i can sit and have long chat."
 
after lady feng had heard these words, her eyes unwillingly got quite
 red again. "when i'm at leisure i shall, of course," she rejoined, "come
 often to see you;" and forthwith leading off the matrons and married
 women, who had come over with her, as well as the women and matrons of
 the ning mansion, she passed through the inner part of the house, and
 entered, by circuitous way, the side gate of the park, when she
 perceived: yellow flowers covering the ground; white willows flanking
 the slopes; diminutive bridges spanning streams, resembling the jo yeh;
 zigzag pathways (looking as if) they led to the steps of heaven; limpid
 springs dripping from among the rocks; flowers hanging from hedges
 emitting their fragrance, as they were flapped by the winds; red leaves
 on the tree tops swaying to and fro; groves picture-like, half stripped
 of foliage; the western breeze coming with sudden gusts, and the wail of
 the oriole still audible; the warm sun shining with genial rays, and the
 cicada also adding its chirp: structures, visible to the gaze at a
 distance in the south-east, soaring high on various sites and resting
 against the hills; three halls, visible near by on the north-west,
 stretching in one connected line, on the bank of the stream; strains of
 music filling the pavilion, imbued with an unwonted subtle charm; and
 maidens in fine attire penetrating the groves, lending an additional
 spell to the scene.
 
lady feng, while engaged in contemplating the beauties of the spot,
 advanced onwards step by step. she was plunged in state of ecstasy,
 when suddenly, from the rear of the artificial rockery, egressed a
 person, who approached her and facing her said, "my respects to you,
 sister-in-law."
 
lady feng was so startled by this unexpected appearance that she drew
 back. "isn't this mr. jui?" she ventured.
 
"what! sister-in-law," exclaimed chia jui, "don't you recognise even
 me?"
 
"it isn't that i didn't recognise you," explained lady feng, "but at the
 sudden sight of you, i couldn't conceive that it would possibly be you,
 sir, in this place!"
 
"this was in fact bound to be," replied chia jui; "for there's some
 subtle sympathy between and you, sister-in-law. here i just
 stealthily leave the entertainment, in order to revel for while in
 this solitary place when, against every expectation, i come across you,
 sister-in-law; and isn't this subtle sympathy?"
 
as spoke, kept his gaze fixed on lady feng, who being an
 intelligent person, could not but arrive, at the sight of his manner, at
 the whole truth in her surmises. "it isn't to be wondered at," she
 consequently observed, as she smiled hypocritically, "that your eldest
 brother should make frequent allusion to your qualities! for after
 seeing you on this occasion, and hearing you utter these few remarks, i
 have readily discovered what an intelligent and genial person you are! i
 am just now on my way to join the ladies on the other side, and have no
 leisure to converse with you; but wait until i've nothing to attend to,
 when we can meet again."
 
"i meant to have gone over to your place and paid my respects to you,
 sister-in-law," pleaded chia jui, "but i was afraid lest person of
 tender years like yourself mightn't lightly receive any visitors!"
 
lady feng gave another sardonic smile. "relatives," she continued, "of
 one family, as we are, what need is there to say anything of tender
 years?"
 
after chia jui had heard these words, felt his heart swell within him
 with such secret joy that was urged to reflect: "i have at length
 to-day, when least i expected it, obtained this remarkable encounter
 with her!"
 
but as the display of his passion became still more repulsive, lady feng
 urged him to go. "be off at once," she remarked, "and join the
 entertainment; for mind, if they find you out, they will mulct you in so
 many glasses of wine!"
 
by the time this suggestion had reached chia jui's ears, half of his
 body had become stiff like log of wood; and as betook himself away,
 with lothful step, turned his head round to cast glances at her. lady
 feng purposely slackened her pace; and when she perceived that had
 gone certain distance, she gave way to reflection. "this is indeed,"
 she thought, "knowing person, as far as face goes, and not as heart!
 can there be another such beast as he! if really continues to
 behave in this manner, i shall soon enough compass his death, with my
 own hands, and he'll then know what stuff i'm made of."
 
lady feng, at this juncture moved onward, and after turning round a
 chain of hillocks, she caught sight of two or three matrons coming along
 with all speed. as soon as they espied lady feng they put on smile.
 "our mistress," they said, "perceiving that your ladyship was not
 forthcoming, has been in great state of anxiety, and bade your
 servants come again to request you to come over.
 
"is your mistress," observed lady feng, "so like quick-footed demon?"
 
while lady feng advanced leisurely, she inquired, "how many plays have
 been recited?" to which question one of the matrons replied, "they have
 gone through eight or nine." but while engaged in conversation, they had
 already reached the back door of the tower of celestial fragrance, where
 she caught sight of pao-yü playing with company of waiting-maids and
 pages. "brother pao," lady feng exclaimed, "don't be up to too much
 mischief!" "the ladies are all sitting upstairs," interposed one of the
 maids. "please, my lady, this is the way up."
 
at these words lady feng slackened her pace, raised her dress, and
 walked up the stairs, where mrs. yu was already at the top of the
 landing waiting for her.
 
"you two," remarked mrs. yu, smiling, "are so friendly, that having met
 you couldn't possibly tear yourself away to come. you had better
 to-morrow move over there and take up your quarters with her and have
 done; but sit down and let me, first of all, present you glass of
 wine."
 
lady feng speedily drew near mesdames hsing and wang, and begged
 permission to take seat; while mrs. yu brought the programme, and
 pressed lady feng to mark some plays.
 
"the senior ladies occupy the seats of honour," remonstrated lady feng,
 "and how can i presume to choose?"
 
"we, and our relative by marriage, have selected several plays,"
 explained mesdames hsing and wang, "and it's for you now to choose some
 good ones for us to listen to."
 
standing up, lady feng signified her obedience; and taking over the
 programme, and perusing it from top to bottom, she marked off one
 entitled, the "return of the spirit," and another called "thrumming and
 singing;" after which she handed back the programme, observing, "when
 they have done with the 'ennoblement of two officers,' which they are
 singing just at present, it will be time enough to sing these two."
 
"of course it will," retorted madame wang, "but they should get it over
 as soon as they can, so as to allow your elder brother and your
 sister-in-law to have rest; besides, their hearts are not at ease."
 
"you senior ladies don't come often," expostulated mrs. yu, "and you and
 i will derive more enjoyment were we to stay little longer; it's as
 yet early in the day!"
 
lady feng stood up and looked downstairs. "where have all the gentlemen
 gone to?" she inquired.
 
"the gentlemen have just gone over to the pavilion of plenteous
 effulgence," replied matron, who stood by; "they have taken along with
 them ten musicians and gone in there to drink their wine."
 
"it wasn't convenient for them," remarked lady feng, "to be over here;
 but who knows what they have again gone to do behind our backs?"
 
"could every one," interposed mrs. yu, "resemble you, person of such
 propriety!"
 
while they indulged in chatting and laughing, the plays they had chosen
 were all finished; whereupon the tables were cleared of the wines, and
 the repast was served. the meal over, the whole company adjourned into
 the garden, and came and sat in the drawing-room. after tea, they at
 length gave orders to get ready the carriages, and they took their leave
 of mrs. yu's mother. mrs. yu, attended by all the secondary wives,
 servants, and married women, escorted them out, while chia chen, along
 with the whole bevy of young men, stood by the vehicles, waiting in a
 group for their arrival.
 
after saluting mesdames hsing and wang, "aunts," they said, "you must
 come over again to-morrow for stroll."
 
"we must be excused," observed madame wang, "we've sat here the whole
 day to-day, and are, after all, feeling quite tired; besides, we shall
 need to have some rest to-morrow."
 
both of them thereupon got into their carriages and took their
 departure, while chia jui still kept fixed gaze upon lady feng; and it
 was after chia chen had gone in that li kuei led round the horse, and
 that pao-yü mounted and went off, following in the track of mesdames
 hsing and wang.
 
chia chen and the whole number of brothers and nephews belonging to the
 family had, during this interval, partaken of their meal, and the whole
 party at length broke up. but in like manner, all the inmates of the
 clan and the guests spent on the morrow another festive day, but we need
 not advert to it with any minuteness.
 
after this occasion, lady feng came in person and paid frequent visits
 to mrs. ch'in; but as there were some days on which her ailment was
 considerably better, and others on which it was considerably worse, chia
 chen, mrs. yu, and chia jung were in an awful state of anxiety.
 
chia jui, it must moreover be noticed, came over, on several instances,
 on visit to the jung mansion; but it invariably happened that found
 that lady feng had gone over to the ning mansion.
 
this was just the thirtieth of the eleventh moon, the day on which the
 winter solstice fell; and the few days preceding that season, dowager
 lady chia, madame wang and lady feng did not let one day go by without
 sending some one to inquire about mrs. ch'in; and as the servants, on
 their return, repeatedly reported that, during the last few days,
 neither had her ailment aggravated, nor had it undergone any marked
 improvement, madame wang explained to dowager lady chia, that as a
 complaint of this nature had reached this kind of season without getting
 any worse, there was some hope of recovery.
 
"of course there is!" observed the old lady; "what dear child she is!
 should anything happen to her, won't it be enough to make people die
 from grief!" and as she spake she felt for time quite sore at heart.
 "you and she," continuing, she said to lady feng, "have been friends for
 ever so long; to-morrow is the glorious first (and you can't go), but
 after to-morrow you should pay her visit and minutely scrutinise her
 appearance: and should you find her any better, come and tell on your
 return! whatever things that dear child has all along fancy for, do
 send her round few even as often as you can by some one or other!"
 
lady feng assented to each of her recommendations; and when the second
 arrived, she came, after breakfast, to the ning mansion to see how mrs.
 ch'in was getting on; and though she found her none the worse, the flesh
 all over her face and person had however become emaciated and parched
 up. she readily sat with mrs. ch'in for long while, and after they had
 chatted on one thing and another, she again reiterated the assurances
 that this illness involved danger, and distracted her for ever so
 long.
 
"whether i get well or not," observed mrs. ch'in, "we'll know in spring;
 now winter is just over, and i'm anyhow worse, so that possibly i may
 get all right; and yet there's saying; but, my dear sister-in-law, do
 press our old lady to compose her mind! yesterday, her ladyship sent me
 some potato dumplings, with minced dates in them, and though i had two,
 they seem after all to be very easily digested!"
 
"i'll send you round some more to-morrow," lady feng suggested; "i'm now
 going to look up your mother-in-law, and will then hurry back to give my
 report to our dowager lady."
 
"please, sister-in-law," mrs. ch'in said, "present my best respects to
 her venerable ladyship, as well as to madame wang."
 
lady feng signified that she would comply with her wishes, and,
 forthwith leaving the apartment, she came over and sat in mrs. yu's
 suite of rooms.
 
"how do you, who don't see our son's wife very often, happen to find
 her?" inquired mrs. yu.
 
lady feng drooped her head for some time. "there's help," she
 ventured, "for this illness! but you should likewise make every
 subsequent preparation, for it would also be well if you could scour it
 away."
 
"i've done so much as to secretly give orders," replied mrs. yu, "to get
 things ready; but for that thing (the coffin), there's good timber to
 be found, so that it will have to be looked after by and by."
 
lady feng swallowed hastily cup of tea, and after short chat, "i
 must be hurrying back," she remarked, "to deliver my message to our
 dowager lady!"
 
"you should," urged mrs. yu, "be sparse in what you tell her lady ship
 so as not to frighten an old person like her!"
 
"i know well enough what to say," replied lady feng.
 
without any further delay, lady feng then sped back. on her arrival at
 home she looked up the old lady. "brother jung's wife," she explained,
 "presents her compliments, and pays obeisance to your venerable
 ladyship; she says that she's much better, and entreats you, her worthy
 senior, to set your mind at ease! that as soon as she's little better
 she will come and prostrate herself before your ladyship."
 
"how do you find her?" inquired dowager lady chia.
 
"for the present there's nothing to fear," continued lady feng; "for her
 mien is still good."
 
after the old lady had heard these words, she was plunged for long
 while in deep reflection; and as she turned towards lady feng, "go and
 divest yourself of your toilette," she said, "and have some rest."
 
lady feng in consequence signified her obedience, and walked away,
 returning home after paying madame wang visit. p'ing erh helped lady
 feng to put on the house costume, which she had warmed by the fire, and
 lady feng eventually took seat and asked "whether there was anything
 doing at home?"
 
p'ing erh then brought the tea, and after going over to hand the cup:
 "there's nothing doing," she replied; "as regards the interest on the
 three hundred taels, wang erh's wife has brought it in, and i've put it
 away. besides this, mr. jui sent round to inquire if your ladyship was
 at home or not, as meant to come and pay his respects and to have a
 chat."
 
"heng!" exclaimed lady feng at these words. "why should this beast
 compass his own death? we'll see when comes what is to be done."
 
"why is this mr. jui so bent upon coming?' p'ing erh having inquired,
 lady feng readily gave her an account of how she had met him in the
 course of the ninth moon in the ning mansion, and of what had been said
 by him.
 
"what mangy frog to be bent upon eating the flesh of heavenly
 goose!" ejaculated p'ing erh. "a stupid and disorderly fellow with no
 conception of relationship, to harbour such thought! but we'll make
 him find an unnatural death!"
 
"wait till comes," added lady feng, "when i feel certain i shall find
 some way."
 
what happened, however, when chia jui came has not, as yet, been
 ascertained, but listen, reader, to the explanation given in the next
 chapter.
 



chapter xii.
 
wang hsi-feng maliciously lays trap for chia jui, under pretence
 that his affection is reciprocated.
 chia t'ien-hsiang gazes at the face of the mirror of voluptuousness.
 

lady feng, it must be noticed in continuation of our narrative, was just
 engaged in talking with p'ing erh, when they heard some one announce
 that mr. jui had come. lady feng gave orders that should be invited
 to step in, and chia jui perceiving that had been asked to walk in
 was at heart elated at the prospect of seeing her.
 
with face beaming with smiles, lady feng inquired again and again how
 was; and, with simulated tenderness she further pressed him to take a
 seat and urged him to have cup of tea.
 
chia jui noticed how still more voluptuous lady feng looked in her
 present costume, and, as his eyes burnt with love, "how is it," he
 inquired, "that my elder brother secundus is not yet back?"
 
"what the reason is i cannot tell," lady feng said by way of reply.
 
"may it not be," chia jui smilingly insinuated, "that some fair damsel
 has got hold of him on the way, and that cannot brook to tear himself
 from her to come home?"
 
"that makes it plain that there are those among men who fall in love
 with any girl they cast their eyes on," hinted lady feng.
 
"your remarks are, sister-in-law, incorrect, for i'm none of this kind!"
 chia jui explained smirkingly.
 
"how many like you can there be!" rejoined lady feng with sarcastic
 smile; "in ten, not one even could be picked out!"
 
when chia jui heard these words, felt in such high glee that he
 rubbed his ears and smoothed his cheeks. "my sister-in-law," he
 continued, "you must of course be extremely lonely day after day."
 
"indeed i am," observed lady feng, "and i only wish some one would come
 and have chat with to break my dull monotony."
 
"i daily have ample leisure," chia jui ventured with simper, "and
 wouldn't it be well if i came every day to dispel your dulness,
 sister-in-law?"
 
"you are simply fooling me," exclaimed lady feng laughing. "it isn't
 likely you would wish to come over here to me?"
 
"if in your presence, sister-in-law, i utter single word of falsehood,
 may the thunder from heaven blast me!" protested chia jui. "it's only
 because i had all along heard people say that you were dreadful
 person, and that you cannot condone even the slightest shortcoming
 committed in your presence, that i was induced to keep back by fear; but
 after seeing you, on this occasion, so chatty, so full of fun and most
 considerate to others, how can i not come? were it to be the cause of my
 death, i would be even willing to come!"
 
"you're really clever person," lady feng observed sarcastically. "and
 oh so much superior to both chia jung and his brother! handsome as their
 presence was to look at, i imagined their minds to be full of
 intelligence, but who would have thought that they would, after all, be
 couple of stupid worms, without the least notion of human affection!"
 
the words which chia jui heard, fell in so much the more with his own
 sentiments, that could not restrain himself from again pressing
 forward nearer to her; and as with eyes strained to give intentness to
 his view, gazed at lady feng's purse: "what rings have you got on?"
 went on to ask.
 
"you should be little more deferential," remonstrated lady feng in a
 low tone of voice, "so as not to let the waiting-maids detect us."
 
chia jui withdrew backward with as much alacrity as if had received
 an imperial decree or mandate from buddha.
 
"you ought to be going!" lady feng suggested, as she gave him smile.
 
"do let stay while longer," entreated chia jui, "you are indeed
 ruthless, my sister-in-law."
 
but with gentle voice did lady feng again expostulate. "in broad
 daylight," she said, "with people coming and going, it is not really
 convenient that you should abide in here; so you had better go, and when
 it's dark and the watch is set, you can come over, and quietly wait for
 in the corridor on the eastern side!"
 
at these words, chia jui felt as if had received some jewel or
 precious thing. "don't make fun of me!" remarked with vehemence. "the
 only thing is that crowds of people are ever passing from there, and how
 will it be possible for to evade detection?"
 
"set your mind at ease!" lady feng advised; "i shall dismiss on leave
 all the youths on duty at night; and when the doors, on both sides, are
 closed, there will be one else to come in!"
 
chia jui was delighted beyond measure by the assurance, and with
 impetuous haste, took his leave and went off; convinced at heart of
 the gratification of his wishes. continued, up to the time of dusk, a
 prey to keen expectation; and, when indeed darkness fell, felt his
 way into the jung mansion, availing himself of the moment, when the
 doors were being closed, to slip into the corridor, where everything was
 actually pitch dark, and not soul to be seen going backwards or
 forwards.
 
the door leading over to dowager lady chia's apartments had already been
 put under key, and there was but one gate, the one on the east, which
 had not as yet been locked. chia jui lent his ear, and listened for ever
 so long, but saw one appear. suddenly, however, was heard sound
 like "lo teng," and the east gate was also bolted; but though chia jui
 was in great state of impatience, none the less did not venture to
 utter sound. all that necessity compelled him to do was to issue, with
 quiet steps, from his corner, and to try the gates by pushing; but they
 were closed as firmly as if they had been made fast with iron bolts; and
 much though may, at this juncture, have wished to find his way out,
 escape was, in fact, out of the question; on the south and north was one
 continuous dead wall, which, even had wished to scale, there was
 nothing which could clutch and pull himself up by.
 
this room, besides, was one the interior (of which was exposed) to the
 wind, which entered through (the fissure) of the door; and was perfectly
 empty and bare; and the weather being, at this time, that of december,
 and the night too very long, the northerly wind, with its biting gusts,
 was sufficient to penetrate the flesh and to cleave the bones, so that
 the whole night long had narrow escape from being frozen to death;
 and was yearning, with intolerable anxiety for the break of day, when
 espied an old matron go first and open the door on the east side, and
 then come in and knock at the western gate.
 
chia jui seeing that she had turned her face away, bolted out, like a
 streak of smoke, as hugged his shoulders with his hands (from intense
 cold.) as luck would have it, the hour was as yet early, so that the
 inmates of the house had not all got out of bed; and making his escape
 from the postern door, straightaway betook himself home, running back
 the whole way.
 
chia jui's parents had, it must be explained, departed life at an early
 period, and had one else, besides his grandfather tai-ju, to take
 charge of his support and education. this tai-ju had, all along,
 exercised very strict control, and would not allow chia jui to even
 make one step too many, in the apprehension that might gad about out
 of doors drinking and gambling, to the neglect of his studies.
 
seeing, on this unexpected occasion, that had not come home the whole
 night, simply felt positive, in his own mind, that was certain to
 have run about, if not drinking, at least gambling, and dissipating in
 houses of the demi-monde up to the small hours; but never even gave
 so much as thought to the possibility of public scandal, as that in
 which was involved. the consequence was that during the whole length
 of the night boiled with wrath.
 
chia jui himself, on the other hand, was (in such state of
 trepidation) that could wipe the perspiration (off his face) by
 handfuls; and felt constrained on his return home, to have recourse
 to deceitful excuses, simply explaining that had been at his eldest
 maternal uncle's house, and that when it got dark, they kept him to
 spend the night there.
 
"hitherto," remonstrated tai-ju, "when about to go out of doors, you
 never ventured to go, on your own hook, without first telling about
 it, and how is it that yesterday you surreptitiously left the house? for
 this offence alone you deserve beating, and how much more for the lie
 imposed upon me."
 
into such violent fit of anger did consequently fly that laying
 hands on him, pulled him over and administered to him thirty or forty
 blows with cane. nor would allow him to have anything to eat, but
 bade him remain on his knees in the court conning essays; impressing on
 his mind that would not let him off, before had made up for the
 last ten days' lessons.
 
chia jui had in the first instance, frozen the whole night, and, in the
 next place, came in for flogging. with stomach, besides, gnawed by
 the pangs of hunger, had to kneel in place exposed to drafts
 reading the while literary compositions, so that the hardships had to
 endure were of manifold kinds.
 
chia jui's infamous intentions had at this junction undergone change;
 but far from his thoughts being even then any idea that lady feng was
 humbugging him, seized, after the lapse of couple of days, the
 first leisure moments to come again in search of that lady.
 
lady feng pretended to bear him grudge for his breach of faith, and
 chia jui was so distressed that tried by vows and oaths (to establish
 his innocence.) lady feng perceiving that had, of his own accord,
 fallen into the meshes of the net laid for him, could not but devise
 another plot to give him lesson and make him know what was right and
 mend his ways.
 
with this purpose, she gave him another assignation. "don't go over
 there," she said, "to-night, but wait for in the empty rooms giving
 on to small passage at the back of these apartments of mine. but
 whatever you do, mind don't be reckless."
 
"are you in real earnest?" chia jui inquired.
 
"why, who wants to play with you?" replied lady feng; "if you don't
 believe what i say, well then don't come!"
 
"i'll come, i'll come, yea i'll come, were i even to die!" protested
 chia jui.
 
"you should first at this very moment get away!" lady feng having
 suggested, chia jui, who felt sanguine that when evening came, success
 would for certainty crown his visit, took at once his departure in
 anticipation (of his pleasure.)
 
during this interval lady feng hastily set to work to dispose of her
 resources, and to add to her stratagems, and she laid trap for her
 victim; while chia jui, on the other hand, was until the shades of
 darkness fell, prey to incessant expectation.
 
as luck would have it relative of his happened to likewise come on
 that very night to their house and to only leave after had dinner
 with them, and at an hour of the day when the lamps had already been
 lit; but had still to wait until his grandfather had retired to rest
 before could, at length with precipitate step, betake himself into
 the jung mansion.
 
straightway came into the rooms in the narrow passage, and waited
 with as much trepidation as if had been an ant in hot pan. he
 however waited and waited, but saw one arrive; listened but not
 even the sound of voice reached his ear. his heart was full of intense
 fear, and could not restrain giving way to surmises and suspicion.
 "may it not be," thought, "that she is not coming again; and that i
 may have once more to freeze for another whole night?"
 
while indulging in these erratic reflections, discerned some one
 coming, looking like black apparition, who chia jui readily concluded,
 in his mind, must be lady feng; so that, unmindful of distinguishing
 black from white, as soon as that person arrived in front of him,
 speedily clasped her in his embrace, like ravenous tiger pouncing upon
 its prey, or cat clawing rat, and cried: "my darling sister, you
 have made wait till i'm ready to die."
 
as uttered these words, dragged the comer, in his arms, on to the
 couch in the room; and while indulging in kisses and protestations of
 warm love, began to cry out at random epithets of endearment.
 
not sound, however, came from the lips of the other person; and chia
 jui had in the fulness of his passion, exceeded the bounds of timid love
 and was in the act of becoming still more affectionate in his
 protestations, when sudden flash of light struck his eye, by the
 rays of which espied chia with candle in hand, casting the light
 round the place, "who's in this room?" exclaimed.
 
"uncle jui," heard some one on the couch explain, laughing, "was
 trying to take liberties with me!"
 
chia jui at one glance became aware that it was other than chia jung;
 and sense of shame at once so overpowered him that could find
 nowhere to hide himself; nor did know how best to extricate himself
 from the dilemma. turning himself round, made an attempt to make good
 his escape, when chia with one grip clutched him in his hold.
 
"don't run away," said; "sister-in-law lien has already reported your
 conduct to madame wang; and explained that you had tried to make her
 carry on an improper flirtation with you; that she had temporised by
 having recourse to scheme to escape your importunities, and that she
 had imposed upon you in such way as to make you wait for her in this
 place. our lady was so terribly incensed, that she well-nigh succumbed;
 and hence it is that she bade come and catch you! be quick now and
 follow me, and let us go and see her."
 
after chia jui had heard these words, his very soul could not be
 contained within his body.
 
"my dear nephew," entreated, "do tell her that it wasn't i; and i'll
 show you my gratitude to-morrow in substantial manner."
 
"letting you off," rejoined chia se, "is difficult thing; but how
 much, i wonder, are you likely to give? besides, what you now utter with
 your lips, there will be proof to establish; so you had better write
 promissory note."
 
"how could i put what happened in black and white on paper?" observed
 chia jui.
 
"there's difficulty about that either!" replied chia se; "just write
 an account of debt due, for losses in gambling, to some one outside;
 for payment of which you had to raise funds, by loan of stated
 number of taels, from the head of the house; and that will be all that
 is required."
 
"this is, in fact, easy enough!" chia jui having added by way of answer;
 chia turned round and left the room; and returning with paper and
 pencils, which had been got ready beforehand for the purpose, bade
 chia jui write. the two of them (chia jung and chia se) tried, the one
 to do good turn, and the other to be perverse in his insistence; but
 (chia jui) put down more than fifty taels, and appended his
 signature.
 
chia pocketed the note, and endeavoured subsequently to induce chia
 jung to come away; but chia jung was, at the outset, obdurate and
 unwilling to give in, and kept on repeating; "to-morrow, i'll tell the
 members of our clan to look into your nice conduct!"
 
these words plunged chia jui in such state of dismay, that even
 went so far as to knock his head on the ground; but, as chia was
 trying to get unfair advantage of him though had at first done him a
 good turn, had to write another promissory note for fifty taels,
 before the matter was dropped.
 
taking up again the thread of the conversation, chia remarked, "now
 when i let you go, i'm quite ready to bear the blame! but the gate at
 our old lady's over there is already bolted, and mr. chia cheng is just
 now engaged in the hall, looking at the things which have arrived from
 nanking, so that it would certainly be difficult for you to pass through
 that way. the only safe course at present is by the back gate; but if
 you do go by there, and perchance meet any one, even i will be in for a
 mess; so you might as well wait until i go first and have peep, when
 i'll come and fetch you! you couldn't anyhow conceal yourself in this
 room; for in short time they'll be coming to stow the things away, and
 you had better let find safe place for you."
 
these words ended, took hold of chia jui, and, extinguishing again
 the lantern, brought him out into the court, feeling his way up to
 the bottom of the steps of the large terrace. "it's safe enough in this
 nest," observed, "but just squat down quietly and don't utter a
 sound; wait until i come back before you venture out."
 
having concluded this remark, the two of them (chia and chia jung)
 walked away; while chia jui was, all this time, out of his senses, and
 felt constrained to remain squatting at the bottom of the terrace
 stairs. was about to consider what course was open for him to adopt,
 when heard noise just over his head; and, with splash, the
 contents of bucket, consisting entirely of filthy water, was emptied
 straight down over him from above, drenching, as luck would have it, his
 whole person and head.
 
chia jui could not suppress an exclamation. "ai ya!" cried, but he
 hastily stopped his mouth with his hands, and did not venture to give
 vent to another sound. his whole head and face were mass of filth, and
 his body felt icy cold. but as shivered and shook, espied chia se
 come running. "get off," shouted, "with all speed! off with you at
 once!"
 
as soon as chia jui returned to life again, bolted with hasty
 strides, out of the back gate, and ran the whole way home. the night had
 already reached the third watch, so that had to knock at the door for
 it to be opened.
 
"what's the matter?" inquired the servants, when they saw him in this
 sorry plight; (an inquiry) which placed him in the necessity of making
 some false excuse. "the night was dark," explained, "and my foot
 slipped and i fell into gutter."
 
saying this, betook himself speedily to his own apartment; and it was
 only after had changed his clothes and performed his ablutions, that
 began to realise that lady feng had made fool of him. he
 consequently gave way to fit of wrath; but upon recalling to mind the
 charms of lady feng's face, felt again extremely aggrieved that he
 could not there and then clasp her in his embrace, and as indulged in
 these wild thoughts and fanciful ideas, could not the whole night
 long close his eyes.
 
from this time forward his mind was, it is true, still with lady feng,
 but did not have the courage to put his foot into the jung mansion;
 and with chia jung and chia both coming time and again to dun him for
 the money, was likewise full of fears lest his grandfather should
 come to know everything.
 
his passion for lady feng was, in fact, already burden hard to bear,
 and when, moreover, the troubles of debts were superadded to his tasks,
 which were also during the whole day arduous, he, young man of about
 twenty, as yet unmarried, and prey to constant cravings for lady feng,
 which were difficult to gratify, could not avoid giving way, to great
 extent, to such evil habits as exhausted his energies. his lot had, what
 is more, been on two occasions to be frozen, angered and to endure much
 hardship, so that with the attacks received time and again from all
 sides, unconsciously soon contracted an organic disease. in his heart
 inflammation set in; his mouth lost the sense of taste; his feet got as
 soft as cotton from weakness; his eyes stung, as if there were vinegar
 in them. at night, burnt with fever. during the day, was
 repeatedly under the effects of lassitude. perspiration was profuse,
 while with his expectorations of phlegm, brought up blood. the whole
 number of these several ailments came upon him, before the expiry of a
 year, (with the result that) in course of time, had not the strength
 to bear himself up. of sudden, would fall down, and with his eyes,
 albeit closed, his spirit would be still plunged in confused dreams,
 while his mouth would be full of nonsense and would be subject to
 strange starts.
 
every kind of doctor was asked to come in, and every treatment had
 recourse to; and, though of such medicines as cinnamon, aconitum seeds,
 turtle shell, ophiopogon, yü-chü herb, and the like, took several
 tens of catties, nevertheless experienced change for the better;
 so that by the time the twelfth moon drew once again to an end, and
 spring returned, this illness had become still more serious.
 
tai-ju was very much concerned, and invited doctors from all parts to
 attend to him, but none of them could do him any good. and as later on,
 had to take nothing else but decoctions of pure ginseng, tai-ju could
 not of course afford it. having other help but to come over to the
 jung mansion, and make requisition for some, madame wang asked lady feng
 to weigh two taels of it and give it to him. "the other day," rejoined
 lady feng, "not long ago, when we concocted some medicine for our
 dowager lady, you told us, madame, to keep the pieces that were whole,
 to present to the spouse of general yang to make physic with, and as it
 happens it was only yesterday that i sent some one round with them."
 
"if there's none over here in our place," suggested madame wang, "just
 send servant to your mother-in-law's, on the other side, to inquire
 whether they have any. or it may possibly be that your elder
 brother-in-law chen, over there, might have little. if so, put all you
 get together, and give it to them; and when shall have taken it, and
 got well and you shall have saved the life of human being, it will
 really be to the benefit of you all."
 
lady feng acquiesced; but without directing single person to institute
 any search, she simply took some refuse twigs, and making up few mace,
 she despatched them with the meagre message that they had been sent by
 madame wang, and that there was, in fact, more; subsequently
 reporting to madame wang that she had asked for and obtained all there
 was and that she had collected as much as two taels, and forwarded it to
 them.
 
chia jui was, meanwhile, very anxious to recover his health, so that
 there was medicine that would not take, but the outlay of money
 was of avail, for derived benefit.
 
on certain day and at an unexpected moment, lame taoist priest came
 to beg for alms, and averred that had the special gift of healing
 diseases arising from grievances received, and as chia jui happened,
 from inside, to hear what said, forthwith shouted out: "go at
 once, and bid that divine come in and save my life!" while he
 reverentially knocked his head on the pillow.
 
the whole bevy of servants felt constrained to usher the taoist in; and
 chia jui, taking hold of him with dash, "my buddha!" repeatedly
 cried out, "save my life!"
 
the taoist heaved sigh. "this ailment of yours," remarked, "is not
 one that could be healed with any medicine; i have precious thing here
 which i'll give you, and if you gaze at it every day, your life can be
 saved!"
 
when had done talking, produced from his pouch looking-glass
 which could reflect person's face on the front and back as well. on
 the upper part of the back were engraved the four characters: "precious
 mirror of voluptuousness." handing it over to chia jui: "this object,"
 proceeded, "emanates from the primordial confines of the great void
 and has been wrought by the monitory dream fairy in the palace of
 unreality and spirituality, with the sole intent of healing the
 illnesses which originate from evil thoughts and improper designs.
 possessing, as it does, the virtue of relieving mankind and preserving
 life, i have consequently brought it along with into the world, but i
 only give it to those intelligent preëminent and refined princely men to
 set their eyes on. on account must you look at the front side; and
 you should only gaze at the back of it; this is urgent, this is
 expedient! after three days, i shall come and fetch it away; by which
 time, i'm sure, it will have made him all right."
 
these words finished, walked away with leisurely step, and though all
 tried to detain him, they could not succeed.
 
chia jui received the mirror. "this taoist," thought, "would seem to
 speak sensibly, and why should i not look at it and try its effect?" at
 the conclusion of these thoughts, took up the mirror of
 voluptuousness, and cast his eyes on the obverse side; but upon
 perceiving nought else than skeleton standing in it, chia jui
 sustained such fright that lost time in covering it with his
 hands and in abusing the taoist. "you good-for-nothing!" exclaimed,
 "why should you frighten so? but i'll go further and look at the
 front and see what it's like."
 
while reflected in this manner, readily looked into the face of
 the mirror, wherein caught sight of lady feng standing, nodding her
 head and beckoning to him. with one gush of joy, chia jui felt himself,
 in vague and mysterious manner, transported into the mirror, where he
 held an affectionate tête-à-tête with lady feng. lady feng escorted him
 out again. on his return to bed, gave vent to an exclamation of "ai
 yah!" and opening his eyes, turned the glass over once more; but
 still, as hitherto, stood the skeleton in the back part.
 
chia jui had, it is true, experienced all the pleasant sensations of a
 tête-à-tête, but his heart nevertheless did not feel gratified; so that
 again turned the front round, and gazed at lady feng, as she still
 waved her hand and beckoned to him to go. once more entering the mirror,
 went on in the same way for three or four times, until this occasion,
 when just as was about to issue from the mirror, espied two
 persons come up to him, who made him fast with chains round the neck,
 and hauled him away. chia jui shouted. "let take the mirror and i'll
 come along." but only this remark could utter, for it was forthwith
 beyond his power to say one word more. the servants, who stood by in
 attendance, saw him at first still holding the glass in his hand and
 looking in, and then, when it fell from his grasp, open his eyes again
 to pick it up, but when at length the mirror dropped, and at once
 ceased to move, they in body came forward to ascertain what had
 happened to him. had already breathed his last. the lower part of his
 body was icy-cold; his clothes moist from profuse perspiration. with all
 promptitude they changed him there and then, and carried him to another
 bed.
 
tai-ju and his wife wept bitterly for him, to the utter disregard of
 their own lives, while in violent terms they abused the taoist priest.
 "what kind of magical mirror is it?" they asked. "if we don't destroy
 this glass, it will do harm to not few men in the world!"
 
having forthwith given directions to bring fire and burn it, voice was
 heard in the air to say, "who told you to look into the face of it? you
 yourselves have mistaken what is false for what is true, and why burn
 this glass of mine?"
 
suddenly the mirror was seen to fly away into the air; and when tai-ju
 went out of doors to see, found one else than the limping taoist,
 shouting, "who is who wishes to destroy the mirror of
 voluptuousness?" while uttering these words, snatched the glass, and,
 as all eyes were fixed upon him, moved away lissomely, as if swayed
 by the wind.
 
tai-ju at once made preparations for the funeral and went everywhere to
 give notice that on the third day the obsequies would commence, that on
 the seventh the procession would start to escort the coffin to the iron
 fence temple, and that on the subsequent day, it would be taken to his
 original home.
 
not much time elapsed before all the members of the chia family came, in
 body, to express their condolences. chia she, of the jung mansion,
 presented twenty taels, and chia cheng also gave twenty taels. of the
 ning mansion, chia chen likewise contributed twenty taels. the remainder
 of the members of the clan, of whom some were poor and some rich, and
 not equally well off, gave either one or two taels, or three or four,
 some more, some less. among strangers, there were also contributions,
 respectively presented by the families of his fellow-scholars,
 amounting, likewise, collectively to twenty or thirty taels.
 
the private means of tai-ju were, it is true, precarious, but with the
 monetary assistance obtained, anyhow performed the funeral rites
 with all splendour and éclat.
 
but who would have thought it, at the close of winter of this year, lin
 ju-hai contracted serious illness, and forwarded letter, by some
 one, with the express purpose of fetching lin tai-yü back. these
 tidings, when they reached dowager lady chia, naturally added to the
 grief and distress (she already suffered), but she felt compelled to
 make speedy preparations for tai-yü's departure. pao-yü too was
 intensely cut up, but had alternative but to defer to the
 affection of father and daughter; nor could very well place any
 hindrance in the way.
 
old lady chia, in due course, made up her mind that she would like chia
 lien to accompany her, and she also asked him to bring her back again
 along with him. but minute particulars need be given of the manifold
 local presents and of the preparations, which were, of course,
 everything that could be wished for in excellence and perfectness.
 forthwith the day for starting was selected, and chia lien, along with
 lin tai-yü, said good-bye to all the members of the family, and,
 followed by their attendants, they went on board their boats, and set
 out on their journey for yang chou.
 
but, reader, should you have any wish to know fuller details, listen to
 the account given in the subsequent chapter.
 



chapter xiii.
 
ch'in k'o-ch'ing dies, and chia jung is invested with the rank of
 military officer to the imperial body-guard.
 wang hsi-feng lends her help in the management of the jung kuo
 mansion.
 

lady feng, it must be added, in prosecuting our narrative, was ever
 since chia lien's departure to accompany tai-yü to yang chou, really
 very dejected at heart; and every day, when evening came, she would,
 after simply indulging in chat and laugh with p'ing erh, turn in, in
 heedless frame of mind, for the night.
 
in the course of the night of this day, she had been sitting with p'ing
 erh by lamp-light clasping the hand-stove; and weary of doing her work
 of embroidery, she had at an early hour, given orders to warm the
 embroidered quilt, and both had gone to bed; and as she was bending her
 fingers, counting the progress of the journey, and when they should be
 arriving, unexpectedly, the third watch struck.
 
p'ing erh had already fallen fast asleep; and lady feng was feeling at
 length her sleepy eyes slightly dose, when she faintly discerned mrs.
 ch'in walk in from outside.
 
"my dear sister-in-law," she said as she smiled, "sleep in peace; i'm on
 my way back to-day, and won't even you accompany just one stage? but
 as you and i have been great friends all along, i cannot part from you,
 sister-in-law, and have therefore come to take my leave of you. there
 is, besides, wish of mine, which isn't yet accomplished; and if i
 don't impart it to you, it isn't likely that telling any one else will
 be of any use."
 
lady feng could not make out the sense of the words she heard. "what
 wish is it you have?" she inquired, "do tell me, and it will be safe
 enough with me."
 
"you are, my dear sister-in-law, heroine among women," observed mrs.
 ch'in, "so much so that those famous men, with sashes and official hats,
 cannot excel you; how is it that you're not aware of even couple of
 lines of common adages, of that trite saying, 'when the moon is full, it
 begins to wane; when the waters are high, they must overflow?' and of
 that other which says that 'if you ascend high, heavy must be your
 fall.' our family has now enjoyed splendour and prosperity for already
 well-nigh century, but day comes when at the height of good fortune,
 calamity arises; and if the proverb that 'when the tree falls, the
 monkeys scatter,' be fulfilled, will not futile have been the reputation
 of culture and old standing of whole generation?"
 
lady feng at these words felt her heart heavy, and overpowered by
 intense awe and veneration.
 
"the fears you express are well founded," she urgently remarked, "but
 what plan is there adequate to preserve it from future injury?"
 
"my dear sister-in-law," rejoined mrs. ch'in with sardonic smile,
 "you're very simple indeed! when woe has reached its climax, weal
 supervenes. prosperity and adversity, from days of yore up to the
 present time, now pass away, and now again revive, and how can
 (prosperity) be perpetuated by any human exertion? but if now, we could
 in the time of good fortune, make provision against any worldly
 concerns, which might arise at any season of future adversity, we might
 in fact prolong and preserve it. everything, for instance, is at present
 well-regulated; but there are two matters which are not on sure
 footing, and if such and such suitable action could be adopted with
 regard to these concerns, it will, in subsequent days, be found easy to
 perpetuate the family welfare in its entity."
 
"what matters are these?" inquired lady feng.
 
"though at the graves of our ancestors," explained mrs. ch'in,
 "sacrifices and oblations be offered at the four seasons, there's
 nevertheless fixed source of income. in the second place, the family
 school is, it is true, in existence; but it has definite
 grants-in-aid. according to my views, now that the times are prosperous,
 there's, as matter of course, lack of offerings and contributions;
 but by and bye, when reverses set in, whence will these two outlays be
 met from? would it not be as well, and my ideas are positive on this
 score, to avail ourselves of the present time, when riches and honours
 still reign, to establish in the immediate vicinity of our ancestral
 tombs, large number of farms, cottages, and estates, in order to
 enable the expenditure for offerings and grants to entirely emanate from
 this source? and if the household school were also established on this
 principle, the old and young in the whole clan can, after they have, by
 common consent, determined upon rules, exercise in days to come control,
 in the order of the branches, over the affairs connected with the landed
 property, revenue, ancestral worship and school maintenance for the year
 (of their respective term.) under this rotatory system, there will
 likewise be animosities; neither will there be any mortgages, or
 sales, or any of these numerous malpractices; and should any one happen
 to incur blame, his personal effects can be confiscated by government.
 but the properties, from which will be derived the funds for ancestral
 worship, even the officials should not be able to appropriate, so that
 when reverses do supervene, the sons and grandsons of the family may be
 able to return to their homes, and prosecute their studies, or go in for
 farming. thus, while they will have something to fall back upon, the
 ancestral worship will, in like manner, be continued in perpetuity. but,
 if the present affluence and splendour be looked upon as bound to go on
 without intermission, and with thought for the day to come, no
 enduring plan be after all devised, presently, in little while, there
 will, once again, transpire felicitous occurrence of exceptional kind,
 which, in point of fact, will resemble the splendour of oil scorched on
 violent fire, or fresh flowers decorated with brocades. you should
 bear in mind that it will also be nothing more real than transient
 pageant, nothing but short-lived pleasure! whatever you do, don't
 forget the proverb, that 'there's banquet, however sumptuous, from
 which the guests do not disperse;' and unless you do, at an early date,
 take precautions against later evils, regret will, i apprehend, be of no
 avail."
 
"what felicitous occurrence will take place?" lady feng inquired with
 alacrity.
 
"the decrees of heaven cannot be divulged; but as i have been very
 friendly with you, sister-in-law, for so long, i will present you,
 before i take my leave, with two lines, which it behoves you to keep in
 mind," rejoined mrs. ch'in, as she consequently proceeded to recite what
 follows:
 
the three springs, when over, all radiance will wane;
 the inmates to seek each home will be fain.
 
lady feng was bent upon making further inquiries, when she heard a
 messenger at the second gate strike the "cloudy board" four consecutive
 blows. it was indeed the announcement of death; and it woke up lady
 feng with start. servant reported that lady jung of the eastern
 mansion was more.
 
lady feng was so taken aback that cold perspiration broke out all over
 her person, and she fell for while into vacant abstraction. but she
 had to change her costume, with all possible haste, and to come over to
 madame wang's apartments.
 
by this time, all the members of the family were aware of the tidings,
 and there was not one of them who did not feel disconsolate; one and all
 of them were much wounded at heart. the elder generation bethought
 themselves of the dutiful submission which she had all along displayed;
 those of the same age as herself reflected upon the friendship and
 intimacy which had ever existed with her; those younger than her
 remembered her past benevolence. even the servants of the household,
 whether old or young, looked back upon her qualities of sympathy with
 the poor, pity of the destitute, affection for the old, and
 consideration for the young; and not one of them all was there who did
 not mourn her loss, and give way to intense grief.
 
but these irrelevant details need not be dilated upon; suffice it to
 confine ourselves to pao-yü.
 
consequent upon lin tai-yü's return home, was left to his own self
 and felt very lonely. neither would go and disport himself with
 others; but with the daily return of dusk, was wont to retire quietly
 to sleep.
 
on this day, while was yet under the influence of dream, heard
 the announcement of mrs. ch'in's death, and turning himself round
 quickly crept out of bed, when felt as if his heart had been
 stabbed with sword. with sudden retch, straightway expectorated a
 mouthful of blood, which so frightened hsi jen and the rest that they
 rushed forward and supported him.
 
"what is the matter?" they inquired, and they meant also to go and let
 dowager lady chia know, so as to send for doctor, but pao-yü dissuaded
 them.
 
"there's need of any flurry; it's nothing at all," said, "it's
 simply that the fire of grief has attacked the heart, and that the blood
 did not circulate through the arteries."
 
as spoke, speedily raised himself up, and, after asking for his
 clothes and changing, came over to see dowager lady chia. his wish
 was to go at once to the other side; and hsi jen, though feeling uneasy
 at heart, seeing the state of mind was in, did not again hinder him,
 as she felt constrained to let him please himself.
 
when old lady chia saw that was bent upon going: "the breath is just
 gone out of the body," she consequently remonstrated, "and that side is
 still sullied. in the second place it's now dark, and the wind is high;
 so you had better wait until to-morrow morning, when you will be in
 ample time."
 
pao-yü would not agree to this, and dowager lady chia gave orders to get
 the carriage ready, and to depute few more attendants and followers to
 go with him. under this escort went forward and straightway arrived
 in front of the ning mansion, where they saw the main entrance wide
 open, the lamps on the two sides giving out light as bright as day,
 and people coming and going in confused and large numbers; while the
 sound of weeping inside was sufficient to shake the mountains and to
 move the hills.
 
pao-yü dismounted from the carriage; and with hurried step, walked into
 the apartment, where the coffin was laid. gave vent to bitter tears
 for few minutes, and subsequently paid his salutations to mrs. yu.
 mrs. yu, as it happened, had just had relapse of her old complaint of
 pains in the stomach and was lying on her bed.
 
eventually came out again from her chamber to salute chia chen, just
 at the very moment that chia tai-ju, chia tai-hsiu, chia ch'ih, chiao
 hsiao, chia tun, chia she, chia cheng, chia tsung, chia pin, chia hsing,
 chia kuang, chia shen, chia ch'iung, chia lin, chia se, chia ch'ang,
 chia ling, chia yün, chia ch'in, chia chen, chia p'ing, chia tsao, chia
 heng, chia fen, chia fang, chia lan, chia chun, chia chih and the other
 relatives of the families had likewise arrived in body.
 
chia chen wept so bitterly that was like man of tears. "of the
 whole family, whether young or old, distant relatives or close friends,"
 was just explaining to chia tai-ju and the rest, "who did not know
 that this girl was hundred times better than even our son? but now
 that her spirit has retired, it's evident that this elder branch of the
 family will be cut off and that there will be survivor."
 
while gave vent to these words, again burst into tears, and the
 whole company of relatives set to work at once to pacify him. "she has
 already departed this life," they argued, "and tears are also of no
 avail, besides the pressing thing now is to consult as to what kind of
 arrangements are to be made."
 
chia chen clapped his hands. "what arrangements are to be made!" he
 exclaimed; "nothing is to be done, but what is within my means."
 
as they conversed, they perceived ch'in yeh and ch'in chung, as well as
 several relations of mrs. yu, arrive, together with mrs. yu's sisters;
 and chia chen forthwith bade chia ch'ung, chia shen, chia lin and chia
 se, the four of them, to go and entertain the guests; while he, at the
 same time, issued directions to go and ask the astrologer of the
 imperial observatory to come and choose the days for the ceremonies.
 
(this astrologer) decided that the coffin should remain in the house for
 seven times seven days, that is forty-nine days; that after the third
 day, the mourning rites should be begun and the formal cards should be
 distributed; that all that was to be done during these forty-nine days
 was to invite one hundred and eight buddhist bonzes to perform, in the
 main hall, the high confession mass, in order to ford the souls of
 departed relatives across the abyss of suffering, and afterwards to
 transmute the spirit (of mrs. ch'in); that, in addition, an altar should
 be erected in the tower of heavenly fragrance, where nine times nine
 virtuous taoist priests should, for nineteen days, offer up prayers for
 absolution from punishment, and purification from retribution. that
 after these services, the tablet should be moved into the garden of
 concentrated fragrance, and that in the presence of the tablet, fifteen
 additional eminent bonzes and fifteen renowned taoist priests should
 confront the altar and perform meritorious deeds every seven days.
 
the news of the death of the wife of his eldest grandson reached chia
 ching; but as himself felt sure that, at distant date, would
 ascend to the regions above, was loth to return again to his home,
 and so expose himself to the contamination of the world, as to
 completely waste the meritorious excellence acquired in past days. for
 this reason, paid heed to the event, but allowed chia chen free
 hand to accomplish the necessary preparations.
 
chia chen, to whom we again revert, was fond of display and
 extravagance, so that found, on inspection of coffins, those few made
 of pine-wood unsuitable to his taste; when, strange coincidence, hsüeh
 p'an came to pay his visit of condolence, and perceiving that chia chen
 was in quest of good coffin: "in our establishment," readily
 suggested, "we have lot of timber of some kind or other called ch'iang
 wood, which comes from the t'ieh wang mount, in huang hai; and which
 made into coffins will not rot, not for ten thousand years. this lot
 was, in fact, brought down, some years back, by my late father; and had
 at one time been required by his highness i chung, prince of the royal
 blood; but as became guilty of some mismanagement, it was, in
 consequence, not used, and is still lying stored up in our
 establishment; and another thing besides is that there's one with the
 means to purchase it. but if you do want it, you should come and have a
 look at it."
 
chia chen, upon hearing this, was extremely delighted, and gave orders
 that the planks should be there and then brought over. when the whole
 family came to inspect them, they found those for the sides and the
 bottom to be all eight inches thick, the grain like betel-nut, the smell
 like sandal-wood or musk, while, when tapped with the hand, the sound
 emitted was like that of precious stones; so that one and all agreed in
 praising the timber for its remarkable quality.
 
"what is their price?" chia chen inquired with smile.
 
"even with one thousand taels in hand," explained hsüeh p'an laughingly,
 "i feel sure you wouldn't find any place, where you could buy the like.
 why ask about price? if you just give the workmen few taels for their
 labour, it will be quite sufficient."
 
chia chen, at these words, lost time in giving expression to profuse
 assurances of gratitude, and was forthwith issuing directions that the
 timber should be split, sawn and made up, when chia cheng proffered his
 advice. "such articles shouldn't," said, "be, in my idea, enjoyed by
 persons of the common run; it would be quite ample if the body were
 placed in coffin made of pine of the best quality."
 
but chia chen would not listen to any suggestion.
 
suddenly further heard that mrs. ch'in's waiting-maid, jui chu by
 name, had, after she had become alive to the fact that her mistress had
 died, knocked her head against post, and likewise succumbed to the
 blows. this unusual occurrence the whole clan extolled in high terms;
 and chia chen promptly directed that, with regard to ceremonies, she
 should be treated as granddaughter, and that the body should, after it
 had been placed in the coffin, be also deposited in the hall of attained
 immortality, in the garden of concentrated fragrance.
 
there was likewise young waiting-maid, called pao chu, who, as mrs.
 ch'in left issue, was willing to become an adopted child, and begged
 to be allowed to undertake the charge of dashing the mourning bowl, and
 accompanying the coffin; which pleased chia chen so much that he
 speedily transmitted orders that from that time forth pao chu should be
 addressed by all as 'young miss.'
 
pao chu, after the rites of an unmarried daughter, mourned before the
 coffin to such an unwonted degree, as if bent upon snapping her own
 life; while the members of the entire clan, as well as the inmates of
 the mansions, each and all, readily observed, in their conduct, the
 established mourning usages, without of course any transgression or
 confusion.
 
"chia jung," pondered chia chen, "has higher status than that of
 graduate by purchase, and were this designation written on the funeral
 streamer, it will not be imposing, and, in point of fact, the retinue
 will likewise be small." therefore was exceedingly unhappy, in his
 own mind, when, as luck would have it, on this day, which was the fourth
 day of the first seven, tai ch'üan, eunuch of the palace of high
 renown, whose office was that of palace overseer, first prepared
 sacrificial presents, which sent round by messengers, and next came
 himself in an official chair, preceded by criers beating the gong, to
 offer sacrificial oblations.
 
chia chen promptly received him, and pressed him into seat; and when
 they adjourned into the hall of the loitering bees, tea was presented.
 
chia chen had already arrived at fixed purpose, so that seized an
 opportunity to tell him of his wish to purchase an office for chia
 jung's advancement.
 
tai ch'üan understood the purport of his remark. "it is, i presume," he
 added smilingly, "that the funeral rites should be little more
 sumptuous."
 
"my worthy sir," eagerly rejoined chia chen, "your surmise on that score
 is perfectly correct."
 
"the question," explained tai ch'üan, "comes up at an opportune moment;
 for there is just at present good vacancy. of the three hundred
 officers who at present constitute the imperial body guard, there are
 two wanting. yesterday marquis hsiang yang's third brother came to
 appeal to with one thousand five hundred taels of ready money, which
 brought over to my house. you know the friendship of old standing
 which exists between him and me, so that, placing other considerations
 aside, i without second thought, assented for his father's sake. but
 there still remains another vacancy, which, who would have thought it,
 fat general feng, of yung hsing, asked to purchase for his son; but i
 have had time to give him an answer. besides, as our child wants to
 purchase it, you had better at once write statement of his
 antecedents."
 
chia chen lost time in bidding some one write the statement on red
 paper, which tai ch'üan found, on perusal, to record that chia jung was
 graduate, by purchase, of the district of chiang ning, of the ying
 t'ien prefecture, in chiang nan; that chia tai-hua, his great
 grandfather, had been commander-in-chief of the metropolitan camp, and
 an hereditary general of the first class, with the prefix of spiritual
 majesty; that his grandfather chia ching was metropolitan graduate of
 the tripos in the ping ch'en year; and that his father chia chen had
 inherited rank of nobility of the third degree, and was general,
 with the prefix of majestic intrepidity.
 
tai ch'üan, after perusal, turned his hand behind him and passed (the
 statement) to constant attendant of his, to put away: "go back," he
 enjoined him, "and give it to his excellency mr. chao, at the head of
 the board of revenue, and tell him, that i present him my compliments,
 and would like him to draw up warrant for subaltern of the imperial
 body guard of the fifth grade, and to also issue commission; that he
 should take the particulars from this statement and fill them up; and
 that to-morrow i'll come and have the money weighed and sent over."
 
the young attendant signified his obedience, and tai ch'üan thereupon
 took his leave. chia chen did all could to detain him, but with no
 success; so that had alternative but to escort him as far as the
 entrance of the mansion. as was about to mount into his chair, chia
 chen inquired, "as regards the money, shall i go and pay it into the
 board, or am i to send it to the board of eunuchs?"
 
"if you were to go and pay it at the board," observed tai ch'üan; "you
 are sure to suffer loss; so that it would be better if you just weighed
 exactly one thousand taels and sent them over to my place; for then an
 end will be put to all trouble."
 
chia chen was incessant in his expression of gratitude. "when the period
 of mourning has expired," consequently added, "i shall lead in
 person, my despicable eldest to your mansion, to pay our obeisance,
 and express our thanks."
 
they then parted company, but close upon this, were heard again the
 voices of runners. it was, in fact, the spouse of shih ting, the marquis
 of chung ching, who was just arriving. shih hsiang-yun, mesdames wang,
 and hsing, lady feng and the rest came out at once, to greet her, and
 lead her into the main building; when they further saw the sacrificial
 presents of the three families, of the marquis of chin hsiang, the
 marquis of ch'uan ning, and the earl of shou shan, likewise spread out
 in front of the tablet.
 
in short while, these three noblemen descended from their chairs, and
 chia chen received them in the large hall. in like manner all the
 relatives and friends arrived in such quick succession, one coming,
 another going, that it is impossible to remember even so much as their
 number. one thing need be said that during these forty-nine days the
 street on which the ning kuo mansion stood, was covered with sheet of
 white, formed by the people, coming and going; and thronged with
 clusters of flowers, as the officials came and went.
 
at the instance of chia chen, chia jung, the next day donned his gala
 dress and went over for his papers; and on his return the articles in
 use in front of the coffin, as well as those belonging to the cortege
 and other such things, were all regulated by the rules prescribed for an
 official status of the fifth degree; while, on the tablet and notice
 alike the inscription consisted of: spirit of lady ch'in, (by marriage)
 of the chia mansion, and by patent lady of the fifth rank (of the
 titles of honour).
 
the main entrance of the garden of concentrated fragrance, adjoining the
 street, was opened wide; and on both sides were raised sheds for the
 musicians, and two companies of players, dressed in blue, discoursed
 music at the proper times; while one pair after another of the
 paraphernalia was drawn out so straight as if cut by knife or slit by
 an axe. there were also two large carmine boards, carved with gilt
 inscriptions, erected outside the gate; the designations in bold
 characters on the upper sides being: guard of the imperial antechamber,
 charged with the protection of the inner palace and roads, in the red
 prohibited city.
 
on the opposite side, facing each other, rose, high above the ground,
 two altars for the services of the buddhist and taoist priests, while a
 placard bore the inscription in bold type: funeral obsequies of lady
 ch'in, (by marriage) of the chia mansion, by patent lady of the fifth
 rank, consort of the eldest grandson of the hereditary duke of ning kuo,
 and guard of the imperial antechamber, charged with the protection of
 the inner palace and roads in the red prohibited city. we, wan hsü, by
 heaven's commands charged with the perennial preservation of perfect
 peace in the kingdom of the four continents, as well as of the lands
 contained therein, head controller of the school of void and asceticism,
 and superior in chief (of the buddhist hierarchy); and yeh sheng,
 principal controller, since the creation, of the disciples of perfect
 excellence and superior in chief (of the taoist priesthood), and others,
 having in reverent spirit purified ourselves by abstinence, now raise
 our eyes up to heaven, prostrate ourselves humbly before buddha, and
 devoutly pray all the chia lans, chieh tis, kung ts'aos and other
 divinities to extend their sacred bounties, and from afar to display
 their spiritual majesty, during the forty-nine days (of the funeral
 rites), for the deliverance from judgment and the absolution from
 retribution (of the spirit of lady ch'in), so that it may enjoy a
 peaceful and safe passage, whether by or by land; and other such
 prayers to this effect, which are in fact not worth the trouble of
 putting on record.
 
chia chen had, it is true, all his wishes gratified; but, as his wife
 was laid up in the inner chambers, with relapse of her old complaint,
 and was not in fit state to undertake the direction of the ceremonies,
 was very much distressed lest, when the high officials (and their
 wives) came and went, there should occur any breach of the prescribed
 conventionalities, which was afraid would evoke ridicule. hence it
 was that felt in low spirits; but while was plunged in solicitude
 pao-yü, who happened to be close by, readily inquired, "everything may
 be safely looked upon as being satisfactorily settled, and why need you,
 elder brother, still be so full of concern?"
 
chia chen forthwith explained to him how it was that in the ladies'
 apartments there was one (to do the honours), but pao-yü at these
 words smiled: "what difficulty is there about it?" remarked; "i'll
 recommend some one to take temporary charge of the direction of things
 for you during the month, and i can guarantee that everything will be
 properly carried out."
 
"who is it?" chia chen was quick to ask; but as pao-yü perceived that
 there were still too many relatives and friends seated around, did
 not feel as if could very well speak out; so that went up to chia
 chen and whispered couple of remarks in his ear.
 
chia chen's joy knew bounds when heard this suggestion.
 "everything will indeed be properly carried out," added laughingly;
 "but i must now be going at once."
 
with these words, drew pao-yü along, and taking leave of the whole
 number of visitors, they forthwith came into the drawing rooms.
 
this day was luckily not grand occasion, so that few relatives and
 friends had come. in the inner apartments there were only small number
 of ladies of close kinship. mesdames hsing and wang, and lady feng, and
 the women of the whole household, were entertaining the guests, when
 they heard servant announce that mr. chia chen had come. (this
 announcement) took the whole body of ladies and young ladies so much by
 surprise, that, with rushing sound, they tried to hide in the back
 rooms; but they were not quick enough (to effect their escape).
 
lady feng alone composedly stood up. chia chen was himself at this time
 rather unwell, and being also very much cut up, entered the room
 shuffling along, propping himself up with staff.
 
"you are not well?" therefore remarked madame hsing and the others, "and
 you've had besides so much to attend to during these consecutive days,
 that what you require is rest to get all right; and why do you again
 come over?"
 
chia chen was, as leant on his staff, straining every nerve to bend
 his body so as to fall on his knees and pay his respects to them, and
 express his sense of obligation for the trouble they had taken, when
 madame hsing and the other ladies hastily called pao-yü to raise him up,
 bidding servant move chair for him to sit on. chia chen would not
 take seat; but making an effort to return smile, "your nephew," he
 urged, "has come over, as there's favour that i want to ask of my two
 aunts as well as of my eldest cousin."
 
"what is it?" promptly inquired madame hsing and the rest.
 
"my aunts," chia chen replied with all haste, "you surely are aware that
 your grandson's wife is now more; your nephew's wife is also laid up
 unwell, and, as i see that things in the inner apartments are really not
 what they should properly be, i would trouble my worthy eldest cousin to
 undertake in here the direction of affairs for month; and if she does,
 my mind will be set at ease."
 
madame hsing smiled. "is it really about this that you've come?" she
 asked; "your eldest cousin is at present staying with your aunt secunda,
 and all you have to do is to speak to her and it will be all right."
 
"how ever could mere child like her," speedily remonstrated madame
 wang, "carry out all these matters? and shouldn't she manage things
 properly, she will, on the contrary, make people laugh, so it would
 therefore be better that you should trouble some one else."
 
"what your ideas are, aunt," rejoined chia chen smiling, "your nephew
 has guessed; you're afraid lest my eldest cousin should have to bear
 fatigue and annoyance; for as to what you say, that she cannot manage
 things, why my eldest cousin has, from her youth up, ever been in her
 romping and playing so firm and decided; and now that she has entered
 the married estate, and has the run of affairs in that mansion, she must
 have reaped so much the more experience, and have become quite an old
 hand! i've been thinking these last few days that outside my eldest
 cousin, there's one else who could come to my help; and, aunt, if you
 don't do it for the face of your nephew and your nephew's wife, do it,
 at least, for the affection you bore to her who is more."
 
while uttered these words tears trickled down his face. the fears
 that madame wang inwardly entertained were that lady feng had no
 experience in funeral matters, and she apprehended, that if she was not
 equal to managing them, she would incur the ridicule of others; but when
 she now heard chia chen make the appeal in such disconsolate mood, she
 relented considerably in her resolution. but as she turned her eyes
 towards lady feng (to ascertain her wishes), she saw that she was
 plunged in abstraction.
 
lady feng had all along found the greatest zest in taking the initiative
 in everything, with the idea of making display of her abilities, so
 that when she perceived how earnest chia chen was in his entreaties, she
 had, at an early period, made up her mind to give favourable reply.
 seeing besides madame wang show signs of relenting, she readily turned
 round and said to her, "my elder cousin has made his appeal in such a
 solicitous way that your ladyship should give your consent and have done
 with it."
 
"do you think you are equal to the task?" inquired madame wang in a
 whisper.
 
"what's there that i couldn't be equal to?" replied lady feng; "for
 urgent matters outside, my cousin may be said to have already made full
 provision; and all there is to be done is to keep an eye over things
 inside. but should there occur anything that i don't know, i can ask
 you, madame, and it will be right."
 
madame wang perceiving the reasonableness of what she heard her say,
 uttered not word, and when chia chen saw that lady feng had assented;
 "how much you do attend to i don't mind," observed, forcing another
 smile, "but i must, in any case, entreat you, cousin, to assume the
 onerous charge. as first step i'll pay my obeisance to you in here,
 and when everything has been finished, i shall then come over into that
 mansion to express my thanks."
 
with these words still on his lips, made low bow, but lady feng had
 scarcely had time to return the compliment, before chia chen had
 directed servant to fetch the warrant of the ning mansion, which he
 bade pao-yü hand over to lady feng.
 
"cousin," added, "take whatever steps you think best; and if you want
 anything, all you have to do is to simply send for it with this, and
 there will even be use to consult me. the only thing i must ask you
 is, not to be too careful in order to save expense, for the main
 consideration is that things should be handsomely done. in the second
 place, it will be well if you were also to treat servants here in the
 same way as in the other mansion, and not be too scrupulous in the fear
 that any one might take offence. outside these two concerns, there's
 nothing else to disturb my mind."
 
lady feng did not venture to take over the warrant at once, but merely
 turned round to ascertain what were madame wang's wishes.
 
"in view of the reason brother chen advances," madame wang rejoined,
 "you had better assume the charge at once and finish with it; don't,
 however, act on your own ideas; but when there's aught to be done, be
 careful and send some one to consult your cousin's wife, ever so little
 though it be on the subject."
 
pao-yü had already taken over the warrant from chia chen's grasp, and
 forcibly handed it to lady feng, "will you, cousin," went on to
 question, "take up your quarters here or will you come every day? should
 you cross over, day after day, it will be ever so much more fatiguing
 for you, so that i shall speedily have separate court got ready for
 you in here, where you, cousin, can put up for these several days and be
 more comfortable."
 
"there's need," replied lady feng smiling; "for on that side they
 can't do without me; and it will be better if i were to come daily."
 
"do as you like," chia chen observed; and after subsequently passing a
 few more irrelevant remarks, at length left the room.
 
after time, the lady relatives dispersed, and madame wang seized the
 opportunity to inquire of lady feng, "what do you purpose doing to-day?"
 
"you had better, please madame, go back," urged lady feng, "for i must
 first of all find out some clue before i can go home."
 
madame wang, upon hearing these words, returned to her quarters, in
 advance, in company with madame hsing, where we will leave them.
 
lady feng meanwhile came into colonnade, which enclosed suite of
 three apartments, and taking seat, she gave way to reflection. "the
 first consideration," she communed within herself, "is that the
 household is made up of mixed elements, and things might be lost; the
 second is that the preparations are under particular control, with
 the result that, when the time comes, the servants might shirk their
 duties; the third is that the necessary expenditure being great, there
 will be reckless disbursements and counterfeit receipts; the fourth,
 that with the absence of any distinction in the matter of duties,
 whether large or small, hardship and ease will be unequally shared; and
 the fifth, that the servants being arrogant, through leniency, those
 with any self-respect will not brook control, while those devoid of
 'face' will not be able to improve their ways."
 
these five were, in point of fact, usages in vogue in the ning mansion.
 but as you are unable, reader, to ascertain here how lady feng set
 things right, listen to the explanations given in the following chapter.
 



chapter xiv.
 
lin ju-hai dies in the city of yang chou.
 chia pao-yü meets the prince of pei ching on the way.
 

when lai sheng, be it noticed in continuing our story, the major-domo in
 the ning kuo mansion, came to hear that from inside an invitation had
 been extended to lady feng to act as deputy, summoned together his
 co-workers and other servants. "lady secunda, of the western mansion,"
 harangued them, "has now been asked to take over the control of
 internal affairs; and should she come we must, when we apply for
 anything, or have anything to say, be circumspect in our service; we
 should all every day come early and leave late; and it's better that we
 should exert ourselves during this one month and take rest after it's
 over. we mustn't throw away our old 'face,' for she's well known to be
 an impetuous thing, with soured face and hard heart, who, when
 angry, knows distinction of persons."
 
the whole company unanimously admitted that was right; and one of
 their number too observed smilingly, "it's but right that for the inner
 apartments, we should, in fact, get her to come and put things in proper
 order, as everything is very much what it should not be."
 
but while uttered these words, they saw lai wang's wife coming, with
 an indent in hand, to fetch paper for the supplications and prayers, the
 amount of which was mentioned on the order; and they one and all
 hastened to press her into seat, and to help her to cup of tea;
 while servant was told to fetch the quantity of paper required. (when
 it was brought,) lai wang carried it in his arms and came, the whole way
 with his wife, as far as the ceremonial gate; when he, at length,
 delivered it over to her and she clasped it, and walked into the room
 all alone.
 
lady feng issued prompt directions to ts'ai ming to prepare register;
 and sending, there and then, for lai sheng's wife, she asked her to
 submit, for her perusal, the roll with the servants' names. she
 furthermore fixed upon an early hour of the following day to convene the
 domestics and their wives in the mansion, in order that they should
 receive their orders; but, after cursorily glancing over the number of
 entries in the list, and making few inquiries of lai sheng's wife, she
 soon got into her curricle, and went home.
 
on the next day, at six and two quarters, she speedily came over. the
 matrons and married women of the ning kuo mansion assembled together, as
 soon as they heard of her arrival; but, perceiving lady feng, assisted
 by lai sheng's wife, engaged in apportioning the duties of each servant,
 they could not presume to intrude, but remained outside the window
 listening to what was going on.
 
"as i've been asked to take over the charge," they heard lady feng
 explain to lai sheng's wife, "i'm, needless to say, sure to incur the
 displeasure of you all, for i can't compare with your mistress, who has
 such sweet temper, and allows you to have your own way. but saying
 nothing more of those ways, which prevailed hitherto among your people
 in this mansion, you must now do as i tell you; for on the slightest
 disregard of my orders, i shall, with discrimination between those
 who may be respectable and those who may not be, clearly and distinctly
 call all alike to account."
 
having concluded these remarks, she went on to order ts'ai ming to read
 the roll; and, as their names were uttered, one by one was called in,
 and passed under inspection. after this inspection, which was got over
 in short time, she continued giving further directions. "these
 twenty," she said "should be divided into two companies; ten in each
 company, whose sole daily duties should be to attend inside to the
 guests, coming and going, and to serve tea for them; while with any
 other matters, they needn't have anything to do. these other twenty
 should also be divided into two companies, whose exclusive duties will
 be, day after day, to look after the tea and eatables of the relatives
 of our family; and these too will have business to concern themselves
 with outside matters. these forty will again be divided into two
 companies, who will have nothing else to look to than to remain in front
 of the coffin and offer incense, renew the oil, hang up the streamers,
 watch the coffin, offer sacrifices of rice, and oblations of tea, and
 mourn with the mourners; and neither need they mind anything outside
 these duties. these four servants will be specially attached to the
 inner tea-rooms to look after cups, saucers and the tea articles
 generally; and in the event of the loss of any single thing, the four of
 them will have to make it good between them. these other four servants
 will have the sole charge of the articles required for eatables and
 wine; and should any get mislaid compensation will have likewise to be
 made by them. these eight servants will only have to attend to taking
 over the sacrificial offerings; while these eight will have nothing more
 to see to beyond keeping an eye over the lamps, oil, candles and paper
 wanted everywhere. i'll have whole supply served out and handed to you
 eight to by and by apportion to the various places, in quantities which
 i will determine. these thirty servants are each day, by rotation, to
 keep watch everywhere during the night, looking after the gates and
 windows, taking care of the fires and candles, and sweeping the grounds;
 while the servants, who remain, are to be divided for duty in the houses
 and rooms, each one having charge of particular spot. and beginning
 from the tables, chairs and curios in each place, up to the very
 cuspidors and brooms, yea even to each blade of grass or sprout of herb,
 which may be there, the servants looking after this part will be called
 upon to make good anything that may be either mislaid or damaged. you,
 lai sheng's wife, will every day have to exercise general supervision
 and inspection; and should there be those who be lazy, any who may
 gamble, drink, fight or wrangle, come at once and report the matter to
 me; and you mustn't show any leniency, for if i come to find it out, i
 shall have regard to the good old name of three or four generations,
 which you may enjoy. you now all have your fixed duties, so that
 whatever batch of you after this acts contrary to these orders, i shall
 simply have something to say to that batch and to one else. the
 servants, who have all along been in my service, carry watches on their
 persons, and things, whether large or small, are invariably done at a
 fixed time. but, in any case, you also have clocks in your master's
 rooms, so that at 6.30, i shall come and read the roll, and at ten
 you'll have breakfast. whenever there is any indent of any permits to be
 made or any report to be submitted, it should be done at 11.30 a.m. and
 later. at 7 p.m., after the evening paper has been burnt, i shall
 come to each place in person to hold an inspection; and on my return,
 the servants on watch for the night will hand over the keys. the next
 day, i shall again come over at 6.30 in the morning; and needless to say
 we must all do the best we can for these few days; and when the work has
 been finished your master is sure to recompense you."
 
when she had done speaking, she went on to give orders that tea, oil,
 candles, feather dusters, brooms and other necessaries should be issued,
 according to the fixed quantities. she also had furniture, such as
 table-covers, antimacassars, cushions, rugs, cuspidors, stools and the
 like brought over and distributed; while, at the same time, she took up
 the pencil and made note of the names of the persons in charge of the
 various departments, and of the articles taken over by the respective
 servants, in entries remarkable for the utmost perspicacity.
 
the whole body of servants received their charge and left; but they all
 had work to go and attend to; not as in former times, when they were at
 liberty to select for themselves what was convenient to do, while the
 arduous work, which remained over, one could be found to take in
 hand. neither was it possible for them in the various establishments to
 any longer avail themselves of the confusion to carelessly mislay
 things. in fact, visitors came and guests left, but everything after all
 went off quietly, unlike the disorderly way which prevailed hitherto,
 when there was clue to the ravel; and all such abuses as indolence,
 and losses, and the like were completely eradicated.
 
lady feng, on her part, (perceiving) the weight her influence had in
 enjoining the observance of her directions, was in her heart exceedingly
 delighted. but as she saw, that chia chen was, in consequence of mrs.
 yu's indisposition, even so much the more grieved as to take very little
 to drink or to eat, she daily, with her own hands, prepared, in the
 other mansion, every kind of fine congee and luscious small dishes,
 which she sent over, in order that might be tempted to eat.
 
and chia lien had likewise given additional directions that every day
 the finest delicacies should be taken into the ante-chamber, for the
 exclusive use of lady feng.
 
lady feng was not one to shirk exertion and fatigue, so that, day after
 day, she came over at the proper time, called the roll, and managed
 business, sitting all alone in the ante-chamber, and not congregating
 with the whole bevy of sisters-in-law. indeed, even when relatives or
 visitors came or went, she did not go to receive them, or see them off.
 
this day was the thirty-fifth day, the very day of the fifth seven, and
 the whole company of bonzes had just (commenced the services) for
 unclosing the earth, and breaking hell open; for sending light to show
 the way to the departed spirit; for its being admitted to an audience by
 the king of hell; for arresting all the malicious devils, as well as for
 soliciting the soul-saving buddha to open the golden bridge and to lead
 the way with streamers. the taoist priests were engaged in reverently
 reading the prayers; in worshipping the three pure ones and in
 prostrating themselves before the gemmy lord. the disciples of
 abstraction were burning incense, in order to release the hungered
 spirits, and were reading the water regrets manual. there was also a
 company of twelve nuns of tender years, got up in embroidered dresses,
 and wearing red shoes, who stood before the coffin, silently reading all
 the incantations for the reception of the spirit (from the lower
 regions,) with the result that the utmost bustle and stir prevailed.
 
lady feng, well aware that not few guests would call on this day, was
 quick to get out of bed at four sharp, to dress her hair and perform her
 ablutions. after having completed every arrangement for the day, she
 changed her costume, washed her hands, and swallowed couple of
 mouthfuls of milk. by the time she had rinsed her mouth, it was exactly
 6.30; and lai wang's wife, at the head of company of servants, had
 been waiting good long while, when lady feng appeared in front of the
 entrance hall, mounted her carriage and betook herself, preceded by a
 pair of transparent horn lanterns, on which were written, in large type,
 the three characters, jung kuo mansion, to the main entrance gate of the
 ning household. the door lanterns shed brilliant rays from where they
 were suspended; while on either side the lanterns, of uniform colours,
 propped upright, emitted lustrous light as bright as day.
 
the servants of the family, got up in their mourning clothes, covered
 the ground far and wide like white sheet. they stood drawn in two
 rows, and requested that the carriage should drive up to the main
 entrance. the youths retired, and all the married women came forward,
 and raising the curtain of the carriage, lady feng alighted; and as with
 one arm she supported herself on feng erh, two married women, with
 lanterns in their hands, lighted the way. pressed round by the servants,
 lady feng made her entry. the married women of the ning mansion advanced
 to greet her, and to pay their respects; and this over, lady feng, with
 graceful bearing, entered the garden of concentrated fragrance.
 ascending the spirit hall, where the tablet was laid, the tears, as soon
 as she caught sight of the coffin, trickled down her eyes like pearls
 whose string had snapped; while the youths in the court, and their
 number was not small, stood in reverent posture, with their arms
 against their sides, waiting to burn the paper. lady feng uttered one
 remark, by way of command: "offer the tea and burn the paper!" when the
 sound of two blows on the gong was heard and the whole band struck up
 together. servant had at an early period placed large armchair in
 front of the tablet, and lady feng sat down, and gave way to loud
 lamentations. promptly all those, who stood inside or outside, whether
 high or low, male or female, took up the note, and kept on wailing and
 weeping until chia chen and mrs. yu, after time, sent message to
 advise her to withhold her tears; when at length lady feng desisted.
 
lai wang's wife served the tea; and when she had finished rinsing her
 mouth, lady feng got up; and, taking leave of all the members of the
 clan, she walked all alone into the ante-chamber, where she ascertained,
 in the order of their names, the number of the servants of every
 denomination in there. they were all found to be present, with the
 exception of one, who had failed to appear, whose duties consisted in
 receiving and escorting the relatives and visitors. orders were promptly
 given to summon him, and the man appeared in dreadful fright. "what!"
 exclaimed lady feng, as she forced smile, "is it you who have been
 remiss? is it because you're more respectable than they that you don't
 choose to listen to my words?"
 
"your servant," pleaded, "has come at an early hour every day; and
 it's only to-day that i come late by one step; and i entreat your
 ladyship to forgive this my first offence."
 
while yet spoke, she perceived the wife of wang hsing, of the jung
 kuo mansion, come forward and pop her head in to see what was going on;
 but lady feng did not let this man go, but went on to inquire of wang
 hsing's wife what she had come for.
 
wang hsing's wife drew near. "i've come," she explained, "to get an
 order, so as to obtain some thread to make tassels for the carriages and
 chairs." saying this, she produced the permit and handed it up,
 whereupon lady feng directed ts'ai ming to read the contents aloud. "for
 two large, sedan chairs," said, "four small sedan chairs and four
 carriages, are needed in all so many large and small tassels, each
 tassel requiring so many catties of beads and thread."
 
lady feng finding, after she had heard what was read, that the numbers
 (and quantities) corresponded, forthwith bade ts'ai ming make the proper
 entry; and when the order from the jung kuo mansion had been fetched,
 and thrown at her, wang hsing's wife took her departure.
 
lady feng was on the very point of saying something, when she espied
 four managers of the jung kuo mansion walk in; all of whom wanted
 permits to indent for stores. having asked them to read out the list of
 what they required, she ascertained that they wanted four kinds of
 articles in all. drawing attention to two items: "these entries," she
 remarked, "are wrong; and you had better go again and make out the
 account clearly, and then come and fetch permit."
 
with these words, she flung down the requisitions, and the two men went
 their way in lower spirits than when they had come.
 
lady feng then caught sight of the wife of chang ts'ai standing by, and
 asked her what was her business, whereupon chang ts'ai's wife promptly
 produced an indent. "the covers of the carriages and sedan chairs," she
 reported, "have just been completed, and i've come to fetch the amount
 due to the tailors for wages."
 
lady feng, upon hearing her explanation, took over the indent, and
 directed ts'ai ming to enter the items in the book. after wang hsing had
 handed over the money, and obtained the receipt of the accountant, duly
 signed, which tallied with the payment, subsequently walked away in
 company with chang ts'ai's wife. lady feng simultaneously proceeded to
 give orders that another indent should be read, which was for money to
 purchase paper with to paste on the windows of pao-yü's outer
 school-room, the repairs to which had been brought to completion, and as
 soon as lady feng heard the nature of the application, she there and
 then gave directions that the permit should be taken over and an entry
 made, and that the money should be issued after chang ts'ai's wife had
 delivered everything clearly.
 
"if to-morrow were to come late," lady feng then remarked, "and if
 the day after, i were to come late; why by and by there'll be one
 here at all! i should have liked to have let you off, but if i be
 lenient with you on this first instance, it will be hard for me, on the
 occurrence of another offence, to exercise any control over the rest.
 it's much better therefore that i should settle accounts with you."
 
the moment she uttered these words, she put on serious look, and gave
 orders that should be taken out and administered twenty blows with
 the bamboo. when the servants perceived that lady feng was in an angry
 mood, they did not venture to dilly-dally, but dragged him out, and gave
 him the full number of blows; which done, they came in to report that
 the punishment had been inflicted.
 
lady feng likewise threw down the ning mansion order and exclaimed,
 addressing herself to lai sheng: "cut him month's wages and rice! and
 tell them all to disperse, and have done with it!"
 
all the servants at length withdrew to attend to their respective
 duties, while the man too, who had been flogged, walked away, as did
 all could to conceal his shame and stifle his tears. about this time
 arrived and went, in an incessant stream, servants from both the jung
 and ning mansions, bent upon applying for permits and returning permits,
 and with one by one again did lady feng settle accounts. and, as in due
 course, the inmates of the ning mansion came to know how terrible lady
 feng was, each and all were ever since so wary and dutiful that they did
 not venture to be lazy.
 
but without going into further details on this subject, we shall now
 return to pao-yü. seeing that there were lot of people about and
 fearing lest ch'in chung might receive some offence, lost time in
 coming along with him to sit over at lady feng's. lady feng was just
 having her repast, and upon seeing them arrive: "your legs are long
 enough, and couldn't you have come somewhat quicker!" she laughingly
 observed.
 
"we've had our rice, thanks," replied pao-yü.
 
"have you had it," inquired lady feng, "outside here, or over on the
 other side?"
 
"would we eat anything with all that riff-raff?" exclaimed pao-yü;
 "we've really had it over there; in fact, i now come after having had
 mine with dowager lady chia."
 
as uttered these words, they took their seats. lady feng had just
 finished her meal, when married woman from the ning mansion came to
 get an order to obtain an advance of money to purchase incense and
 lanterns with.
 
"i calculated," observed lady feng, "that you would come to-day to make
 requisition, but i was under the impression that you had forgotten; had
 you really done so you would certainly have had to get them on your own
 account, and i would have been the one to benefit."
 
"didn't i forget? i did," rejoined the married woman as she smiled; "and
 it's only few minutes back that it came to my mind; had i been one
 second later i wouldn't have been in time to get the things."
 
these words ended, she took over the order and went off. entries had, at
 the time to be made in the books, and orders to be issued, and ch'in
 chung was induced to interpose with smirk, "in both these mansions of
 yours, such orders are alike in use; but were any outsider stealthily to
 counterfeit one and to abscond, after getting the money, what could ever
 be done?"
 
"in what you say," replied lady feng, "you take account of the laws
 of the land."
 
"how is it that from our house, one comes to get any orders or to
 obtain anything?" pao-yü having inquired: "at the time they come to
 fetch them," rejoined lady feng, "you're still dreaming; but let ask
 you one thing, when will you two at last begin your evening course of
 studies?"
 
"oh, i wish we were able to begin our studies this very day," pao-yü
 added; "that would be the best thing, but they're very slow in putting
 the school-room in order, so that there's help for it!"
 
lady feng laughed. "had you asked me," she remarked, "i can assure you
 it would have been ready quick enough."
 
"you too would have been of use," observed pao-yü, "for it will
 certainly be ready by the time they ought to finish it in."
 
"but in order that they should do the work," suggested lady feng, "it's
 also necessary that they should have the material, they can't do without
 them; and if i don't give them any permits, it will be difficult to
 obtain them."
 
pao-yü at these words readily drew near to lady feng, and there and then
 applied for the permits. "my dear sister," added, "do give them the
 permits to enable them to obtain the material and effect the repairs."
 
"i feel quite sore from fatigue," ventured lady feng, "and how can i
 stand your rubbing against me? but compose your mind. they have this
 very day got the paper, and gone to paste it; and would they, for
 whatever they need, have still waited until they had been sent for? they
 are not such fools after all!"
 
pao-yü would not believe it, and lady feng at once called ts'ai ming to
 look up the list, which she handed for pao-yü's inspection; but while
 they were arguing servant came in to announce that chao erh, who had
 gone to chow, had returned, and lady feng all in flurry directed
 that should be asked to walk in. chao erh bent one knee and paid his
 obeisance.
 
"why have you come back?" lady feng readily inquired.
 
"mr. secundus (chia lien)," reported, "sent back to tell you that
 mr. lin (our dowager lady's) son-in-law, died on the third of the ninth
 moon; that master secundus is taking miss lin along with him to escort
 the coffin of mr. lin as far as chow; and that they hope to be back
 some time about the end of the year. master despatched to come and
 announce the news, to bring his compliments, and to crave our old lady's
 instructions as well as to see how you are getting on in my lady's home.
 also bade take back to him few long fur pelisses."
 
"have you seen any one else besides me?" lady feng inquired.
 
"i've seen every one," rejoined chao erh; and withdrew hastily at the
 conclusion of this remark, out of the apartment, while lady feng turned
 towards pao-yü with smile and said, "your cousin lin can now live in
 our house for ever."
 
"poor thing!" exclaimed pao-yü. "i presume that during all these days
 she has wept who knows how much;" and saying this wrinkled his brow
 and heaved deep sigh.
 
lady feng saw chao erh on his return, but as she could not very well, in
 the presence of third persons, make minute inquiries after chia lien,
 she had to continue prey to inward solicitude till it was time to go
 home, for, not having got through what she had to do, she was compelled
 to wait patiently until she went back in the evening, when she again
 sent word for chao erh to come in, and asked him with all minuteness
 whether the journey had been pleasant throughout, and for full
 particulars. that very night, she got in readiness the long pelisses,
 which she herself, with the assistance of p'ing erh, packed up in a
 bundle; and after careful thought as to what things would require,
 she put them in the same bundle and committed them to chao erh's care.
 she went on to solicitously impress upon chao erh to be careful in his
 attendance abroad. "don't provoke your master to wrath," she said, "and
 from time to time do advise him not to drink too much wine; and don't
 entice him to make the acquaintance of any low people; for if you do,
 when you come back i will cut your leg off."
 
the preparations were hurriedly and confusedly completed; and it was
 already the fourth watch of the night when she went to sleep. but soon
 again the day dawned, and after hastily performing her toilette and
 ablutions, she came over to the ning mansion.
 
as chia chen realised that the day for escorting the body away was
 drawing nigh, in person went out in curricle, along with
 geomancers, to the temple of the iron fence to inspect suitable place
 for depositing the coffin. also, point by point, enjoined the
 resident managing-bonze, k'ung, to mind and get ready brand-new
 articles of decoration and furniture, and to invite considerable
 number of bonzes of note to be at hand to lend their services for the
 reception of the coffin.
 
k'ung lost time in getting ready the evening meal, but chia chen
 had, in fact, wish for any tea or rice; and, as the day was far
 advanced and was not in time to enter the city, had, after all, to
 rest during that night as best could in "chaste" room in the
 temple. the next morning, as soon as it was day, hastened to come
 into the city and to make every preparation for the funeral. likewise
 deputed messengers to proceed ahead to the temple of the iron fence to
 give, that very night, additional decorative touches to the place where
 the coffin was to be deposited, and to get ready tea and all the other
 necessaries, for the use of the persons who would be present at the
 reception of the coffin.
 
lady feng, seeing that the day was not far distant, also apportioned
 duties and made provision for everything beforehand with circumspect
 care; while at the same time she chose in the jung mansion, such
 carriages, sedan chairs and retinue as were to accompany the cortege, in
 attendance upon madame wang, and gave her mind furthermore to finding a
 place where she herself could put up in at the time of the funeral.
 about this very time, it happened that the consort of the duke shan kuo
 departed this life, and that mesdames wang and hsing had likewise to go
 and offer sacrifices, and to follow the burial procession; that the
 birthday occurred of the consort of prince hsi an; that presents had to
 be forwarded on the occasion of this anniversary; and that the consort
 of the duke of chen kuo gave birth to first child, son, and
 congratulatory gifts had, in like manner, to be provided. besides, her
 uterine brother wang jen was about to return south, with all his family,
 and she had too to write her home letters, to send her reverent
 compliments to her father and mother, as well as to get the things ready
 that were to be taken along. there was also ying ch'un, who had
 contracted some illness, and the doctor had every day to be sent for,
 and medicines to be administered, the notes of the doctor to be looked
 after, consisting of the bulletins of the diagnosis and the
 prescriptions, with the result that the various things that had to be
 attended to by lady feng were so manifold that it would, indeed, be
 difficult to give an exhaustive idea of them.
 
in addition to all this, the day for taking the coffin away was close at
 hand, so that lady feng was so hard pressed for time that she had even
 desire for any tea to drink or anything to eat, and that she could
 not sit or rest in peace. as soon as she put her foot into the ning
 mansion, the inmates of the jung mansion would follow close upon her
 heels; and the moment she got back into the jung mansion, the servants
 again of the ning mansion would follow her about. in spite however of
 this great pressure, lady feng, whose natural disposition had ever been
 to try and excel, was urged to strain the least of her energies, as her
 sole dread was lest she should incur unfavourable criticism from any
 one; and so excellent were the plans she devised, that every one in the
 clan, whether high or low, readily conceded her unlimited praise.
 
on the night of this day, the body had to be watched, and in the inner
 suite of apartments two companies of young players as well as jugglers
 entertained the relatives, friends and other visitors during the whole
 of the night. mrs. yu was still laid up in the inside room, so that the
 whole task of attending to and entertaining the company devolved upon
 lady feng alone, who had to look after everything; for though there
 were, in the whole clan, many sisters-in-law, some there were too
 bashful to speak, others too timid to stand on their feet; while there
 were also those who were not accustomed to meeting company; and those
 likewise who were afraid of people of high estate and shy of officials.
 of every kind there were, but the whole number of them could not come up
 to lady feng's standard, whose deportment was correct and whose speech
 was according to rule. hence it was that she did not even so much as
 heed any of that large company, but gave directions and issued orders,
 adopting any course of action which she fancied, just as if there were
 bystander.
 
the whole night, the lanterns emitted bright light and the fires
 brilliant rays; while guests were escorted on their way out and
 officials greeted on their way in; but of this hundredfold bustle and
 stir nothing need, of course, be said.
 
the next morning at the dawn of day, and at propitious moment,
 sixty-four persons, dressed all alike in blue, carried the coffin,
 preceded by streamer with the record in large characters: coffin of
 lady ch'in, lady of the fifth degree, (by marriage) of the chia
 mansion, deceased at middle age, consort of the grandson of the ning kuo
 duke with the first rank title of honour, (whose status is) guard of
 the imperial antechamber, charged with the protection of the inner
 palace and roads in the red prohibited city.
 
the various paraphernalia and ornaments were all brand-new, hurriedly
 made for the present occasion, and the uniform lustrous brilliancy they
 shed was sufficient to dazzle the eyes.
 
pao-chu, of course, observed the rites prescribed for unmarried
 daughters, and dashed the bowl and walked by the coffin, as she gave way
 to most bitter lamentations.
 
at that time, among the officials who escorted the funeral procession,
 were niu chi-tsung, the grandson of the chen kuo duke, who had now
 inherited the status of earl of the first degree; liu fang, the grandson
 of liu piao, duke of li kuo, who had recently inherited the rank of
 viscount of the first class; ch'en jui-wen, grandson of ch'en yi, duke
 of ch'i kuo, who held the hereditary rank of general of the third
 degree, with the prefix of majestic authority; ma shang, the grandson of
 ma k'uei, duke of chih kuo, by inheritance general of the third rank
 with the prefix of majesty afar; hou hsiao-keng, an hereditary viscount
 of the first degree, grandson of the duke of hsiu kuo, hou hsiao-ming by
 name; while the death of the consort of the duke of shan kuo had obliged
 his grandson shih kuang-chu to go into mourning so that could not be
 present. these were the six families which had, along with the two
 households of jung and ning, been, at one time, designated the eight
 dukes.
 
among the rest, there were besides the grandson of the prince of nan an;
 the grandson of the prince of hsi an; shih ting, marquis of chung ching;
 chiang tzu-ning, an hereditary baron of the second grade, grandson of
 the earl of p'ing yuan; hsieh k'un, an hereditary baron of the second
 order and captain of the metropolitan camp, grandson of the marquis of
 ting ch'ang: hsi chien-hui, an hereditary baron of the second rank, a
 grandson of the marquis of nang yang; ch'in liang, in command of the
 five cities, grandson of the marquis of ching t'ien. the remainder were
 wei chi, the of the earl of chin hsiang; feng tzu-ying, the of a
 general, whose prefix was supernatural martial spirit; ch'en yeh-chün,
 wei jo-lan and others, grandsons and sons of princes who could not be
 enumerated.
 
in the way of ladies, there were also in all about ten large official
 sedan chairs full of them, thirty or forty private chairs, and including
 the official and non-official chairs, and carriages containing inmates
 of the household, there must have been over hundred and ten; so that
 with the various kinds of paraphernalia, articles of decoration and
 hundreds of nick-nacks, which preceded, the vast expanse of the cortege
 covered continuous line extending over three or four li.
 
they had not been very long on their way, when they reached variegated
 sheds soaring high by the roadside, in which banquets were spread,
 feasts laid out, and music discoursed in unison. these were the viatory
 sacrificial offerings contributed by the respective families. the first
 shed contained the sacrificial donations of the mansion of the prince of
 tung p'ing; the second shed those of the prince of nan an; the third
 those of the prince of hsi ning, and the fourth those of the prince of
 pei ching.
 
indeed of these four princes, the reputation enjoyed in former days by
 the prince of pei ching had been the most exalted, and to this day his
 sons and grandsons still succeeded to the inheritance of the princely
 dignity. the present incumbent of the princedom of pei ching, shih jung,
 had not as yet come of age, but was gifted with presence of
 exceptional beauty, and with disposition condescending and genial. at
 the demise, recently, of the consort of the eldest grandson of the
 mansion of ning kuo, he, in consideration of the friendship which had
 formerly existed between the two grandfathers, by virtue of which they
 had been inseparable, both in adversity as well as in prosperity,
 treating each other as if they had not been of different surnames, was
 consequently induced to pay regard to princely dignity or to his
 importance, but having like the others paid, on the previous day, his
 condolences and presented sacrificial offerings, had further now
 raised shed wherein to offer libations. having directed every one of
 his subordinate officers to remain in this spot in attendance, he
 himself went at the fifth watch to court, and when acquitted himself
 of his public duties forthwith changed his attire for mourning
 costume, and came along, in an official sedan chair, preceded by gongs
 and umbrellas. upon reaching the front of the shed the chair was
 deposited on the ground, and as his subordinate officers pressed on
 either side and waited upon him, neither the military nor the populace,
 which composed the mass of people, ventured to make any commotion. in a
 short while, the long procession of the ning mansion became visible,
 spreading far and wide, covering in its course from the north, the whole
 ground like silver mountain. at an early hour, the forerunners,
 messengers and other attendants on the staff of the ning mansion
 apprised chia chen (of the presence of the sheds), and chia chen with
 all alacrity gave orders that the foremost part of the cortege should
 halt. attended by chia she and chia chen, the three of them came with
 hurried step to greet (the prince of pei ching), whom they saluted with
 due ceremony. shih jung, who was seated in his sedan chair, made bow
 and returned their salutations with smile, proceeding to address them
 and to treat them, as had done hitherto, as old friends, without any
 airs of self-importance.
 
"my daughter's funeral has," observed chia chen, "put your highness to
 the trouble of coming, an honour which we, though noble by birth, do not
 deserve."
 
shih jung smiled. "with the terms of friendship," added, "which have
 existed for so many generations (between our families), is there any
 need for such apologies?"
 
turning his head round there and then, gave directions to the senior
 officer of his household to preside at the sacrifices and to offer
 libations in his stead; and chia she and the others stood together on
 one side and made obeisance in return, and then came in person again and
 gave expression to their gratitude for his bounty.
 
shih jung was most affable and complaisant. "which is the gentleman," he
 inquired of chia chen, "who was born with piece of jade in his mouth?
 i've long had wish to have the pleasure of seeing him, and as he's
 sure to be on the spot on an occasion like this, why shouldn't you
 invite him to come round?"
 
chia chen speedily drew back, and bidding pao-yü change his mourning
 clothes, led him forward and presented him.
 
pao-yü had all along heard that shih jung was worthy prince, perfect
 in ability as well as in appearance, pleasant and courteous, not bound
 down by any official custom or state rite, so that had repeatedly
 felt keen desire to meet him. with the sharp control, however, which
 his father exercised over him, had not been able to gratify his wish.
 but on this occasion, saw on the contrary that came to call him,
 and it was but natural that should be delighted. whilst advancing, he
 scrutinised shih jung with the corner of his eye, who, seated as was
 in the sedan chair, presented an imposing sight.
 
but, reader, what occurred on his approach is not yet known, but listen
 to the next chapter, which will divulge it.
 



chapter xv.
 
lady peng, née wang, exercises her authority in the iron fence temple.
 ch'in ching-ch'ing (ch'ing chung) amuses himself in the man-t'ou
 (bread) nunnery.
 

but we shall now resume our story. when pao-yü raised his eyes, he
 noticed that shih jung, prince of pei ching, wore on his head princely
 cap with pure white tassels and silvery feathers, that was appareled
 in white ceremonial robe, (with pattern representing) the toothlike
 ripple of river and the waters of the sea, embroidered with
 five-clawed dragons; and that was girded with red leather belt,
 inlaid with white jade. that his face was like beauteous gem; that his
 eyes were like sparkling stars; and that was, in very truth, human
 being full of graceful charms.
 
pao-yü hastily pressed forward and made reverent obeisance, and shih
 jung lost time in extending his arms from inside the sedan-chair, and
 embracing him. at glance, saw that pao-yü had on his head silver
 cap, to which the hair was attached, that had, round his forehead, a
 flap on which were embroidered couple of dragons issuing from the sea,
 that wore white archery-sleeved robe, ornamented with dragons, and
 that his waist was encircled by silver belt, inlaid with pearls; that
 his face resembled vernal flowers and that his eyes were like drops of
 lacquer.
 
shih jung smiled. "your name is," said, "no trumped-up story; for
 you, verily, resemble precious gem; but where's the valuable trinket
 you had in your mouth?" inquired.
 
as soon as pao-yü heard this inquiry, hastened to produce the jade
 from inside his clothes and to hand it over to shih jung. shih jung
 minutely examined it; and having also read the motto on it, he
 consequently ascertained whether it was really efficacious or not.
 
"it's true that it's said to be," pao-yü promptly explained, "but it
 hasn't yet been put to the test."
 
shih jung extolled it with unbounded praise, and, as did so, set
 the variegated tassels in proper order, and, with his own hands,
 attached it on to pao-yü's neck. taking also his hand in his, he
 inquired of pao-yü what was his age? and what books was reading at
 present, to each of which questions pao-yü gave suitable answer.
 
shih jung perceiving the perspicacity of his speech and the propriety of
 his utterances, simultaneously turned towards chia chen and observed
 with smile on his face: "your worthy is, in very truth, like the
 young of dragon or like the nestling of phoenix! and this isn't an
 idle compliment which i, despicable prince, utter in your venerable
 presence! but how much more glorious will be, in the future, the voice
 of the young phoenix than that of the old phoenix, it isn't easy to
 ascertain."
 
chia chen forced smile: "my cur-like son," replied, "cannot presume
 to such bountiful praise and golden commendation; but if, by the virtue
 of your highness' excess of happiness, does indeed realise your
 words, will be source of joy to us all!"
 
"there's one thing, however," continued shih jung; "with the excellent
 abilities which your worthy scion possesses, he's sure, i presume, to be
 extremely loved by her dowager ladyship, (his grandmother), and by all
 classes. but for young men of our age it's great drawback to be doated
 upon, for with over-fondness, we cannot help utterly frustrating the
 benefits of education. when i, despicable prince, was young, i walked
 in this very track, and i presume that your honourable cannot
 likewise but do the same. by remaining at home, your worthy scion will
 find it difficult to devote his attention to study; and will not reap
 any harm, were to come, at frequent intervals, to my humble home; for
 though my deserts be small, i nevertheless enjoy the great honour of the
 acquaintance of all the scholars of note in the empire, so that,
 whenever any of them visit the capital, not one of them is there who
 does not lower his blue eyes upon me. hence it is that in my mean abode,
 eminent worthies rendezvous; and were your esteemed to come, as
 often as can, and converse with them and meet them, his knowledge
 would, in that case, have every opportunity of making daily strides
 towards improvement."
 
chia chen speedily bent his body and expressed his acquiescence, by way
 of reply; whereupon shih jung went further, and taking off from his
 wrist chaplet of pearls, presented it to pao-yü.
 
"this is the first time we meet," observed. "our meeting was so
 unexpected that i have suitable congratulatory present to offer you.
 this was conferred upon by his majesty, and is string of
 chaplet-pearls, scented with ling ling, which will serve as temporary
 token of respectful congratulations."
 
pao-yü hastened to receive it from his hands, and turning round, he
 reverently presented it to chia chen. chia chen and pao-yü jointly
 returned thanks; and forthwith chia she, chia chen and the rest came
 forward in body, and requested the prince to turn his chair homewards.
 
"the departed," expostulated shih jung, "has already ascended the
 spiritual regions, and is more mortal being in this dusty world
 exposed to vicissitude like you and i. although mean prince like me
 has been the recipient of the favour of the emperor, and has
 undeservedly been called to the princely inheritance, how could i
 presume to go before the spiritual hearse and return home?"
 
chia she and the others, perceiving how persistent was in his refusal
 had course but to take their leave, express their sense of gratitude
 and to rejoin the cortege. they issued orders to their servants to stop
 the band, and to hush the music, and making the procession go by, they
 at length left the way clear for shih jung to prosecute his way.
 
but we will now leave him and resume our account of the funeral of the
 ning mansion. all along its course the road was plunged in unusual
 commotion. as soon as they reached the city gates chia she, chia cheng,
 chia chen, and the others again received donations from all their fellow
 officers and subordinates, in sacrificial sheds erected by their
 respective families, and after they returned thanks to one after
 another, they eventually issued from the city walls, and proceeded
 eventually along the highway, in the direction of the temple of the iron
 fence.
 
chia chen, at this time, went, together with chia jung, up to all their
 seniors, and pressed them to get into their sedan chairs, and to ride
 their horses; and chia she and all of the same age as himself were
 consequently induced to mount into their respective carriages or chairs.
 chia chen and those of the same generation were likewise about to ride
 their horses, when lady feng, through her solicitude on pao-yü's
 account, gave way to fears lest now that they had reached the open
 country, should do as pleased, and not listen to the words of any
 of the household, and lest chia chen should not be able to keep him in
 check; and, as she dreaded that might go astray, she felt compelled
 to bid youth call him to her; and pao-yü had help but to appear
 before her curricle.
 
"my dear brother," lady feng remarked smiling, "you are respectable
 person, and like girl in your ways, and shouldn't imitate those
 monkeys on horseback! do get down and let both you and i sit together in
 this carriage; and won't that be nice?"
 
at these words, pao-yü readily dismounted and climbed up into the
 carriage occupied by lady feng; and they both talked and laughed, as
 they continued their way.
 
but not long time elapsed before two men, on horseback, were seen
 approaching from the opposite direction. coming straight up to lady
 feng's vehicle they dismounted, and said, as they leaned on the sides of
 her carriage, "there's halting place here, and will it not please your
 ladyship to have rest and change?"
 
lady feng directed them to ask the two ladies hsing and wang what they
 would like to do, and the two men explained: "these ladies have
 signified that they had desire to rest, and they wish your ladyship
 to suit your convenience."
 
lady feng speedily issued orders that they should have rest, before
 they prosecuted their way, and the servant youth led the harnessed
 horses through the crowd of people and came towards the north, while
 pao-yü, from inside the carriage, urgently asked that mr. ch'in should
 be requested to come.
 
ch'in chung was at this moment on horseback following in the track of
 his father's carriage, when unexpectedly caught sight of pao-yü's
 page, come at running pace and invite him to have some refreshment.
 ch'in chung perceived from distance that the horse, which pao-yü had
 been riding, walked behind lady feng's vehicle, as it went towards the
 north, with its saddle and bridles all piled up, and readily concluding
 that pao-yü must be in the same carriage with that lady, too turned
 his horse and came over in haste and entered, in their company, the door
 of farm-house.
 
this dwelling of the farmer's did not contain many rooms so that the
 women and girls had nowhere to get out of the way; and when the village
 lasses and country women perceived the bearing and costumes of lady
 feng, pao-yü, and ch'in chung, they were inclined to suspect that
 celestial beings had descended into the world.
 
lady feng entered thatched house, and, in the first place, asked
 pao-yü and the rest to go out and play. pao-yü took the hint, and, along
 with ch'in chung, led off the servant boys and went to romp all over
 the place.
 
the various articles in use among the farmers they had not seen before,
 with the result that after pao-yü had inspected them, thought them
 all very strange; but could neither make out their names nor their
 uses. but among the servant boys, there were those who knew, and they
 explained to them, one after another, what they were called, as well as
 what they were for. as pao-yü, after this explanation, nodded his head;
 "it isn't strange," said, "that an old writer has this line in his
 poetical works, 'who can realise that the food in bowl is, grain by
 grain, all the fruit of labour.' this is indeed so!" as spoke, they
 had come into another house; and at the sight of spinning wheel on a
 stove-bed, they thought it still more strange and wonderful, but the
 servant boys again told them that it was used for spinning the yarn to
 weave cloth with, and pao-yü speedily jumping on to the stove-bed, set
 to work turning the wheel for the sake of fun, when village lass of
 about seventeen or eighteen years of age came forward, and asked them
 not to meddle with it and spoil it.
 
the servant boys promptly stopped her interference; but pao-yü himself
 desisted, as added: "it's because i hadn't seen one before that i
 came to try it for fun."
 
"you people can't do it," rejoined the lass, "let turn it for you to
 see."
 
ch'in chung secretly pulled pao-yü and remarked, "it's great fun in this
 village!" but pao-yü gave him nudge and observed, "if you talk
 nonsense again, i'll beat you." watching intently, as uttered these
 words, the village girl who started reeling the thread, and presented,
 in very truth, pretty sight. but suddenly an old woman from the other
 side gave shout. "my girl secunda, come over at once;" and the lass
 discarded the spinning-wheel and hastily went on her way.
 
pao-yü was the while feeling disappointed and unhappy, when espied a
 servant, whom lady feng had sent, come and call them both in. lady feng
 had washed her hands and changed her costume; and asked him whether he
 would change or not, and pao-yü, having replied "no! it doesn't matter
 after all if i don't change," the female attendants served tea, cakes
 and fruits and also poured the scented tea. lady feng and the others
 drank their tea, and waiting until they had put the various articles by,
 and made all the preparations, they promptly started to get into their
 carriages. outside, wang erh had got ready tips and gave them to the
 people of the farm, and the farm women and all the inmates went up to
 them to express their gratitude; but when pao-yü came to look carefully,
 failed to see anything of the lass who had reeled the thread. but
 they had not gone far before they caught sight of this girl secunda
 coming along with small child in her arms, who, they concluded, was
 her young brother, laughing and chatting, in company with few young
 girls.
 
pao-yü could not suppress the voice of love, but being seated in the
 carriage, was compelled to satisfy himself by following her with his
 eyes. soon however the vehicle sped on as rapidly as cloud impelled by
 the wind, so that when turned his head round, there was already no
 vestige to be seen of her; but, while they were bandying words, they had
 unexpectedly overtaken the great concourse of the cortege.
 
likewise, at an early stage men were stationed ahead, with buddhist
 drums and gold cymbals, with streamers, and jewelled coverings; and the
 whole company of bonzes, belonging to the iron fence temple, had already
 been drawn out in line by the sides of the road. in short while,
 they reached the interior of the temple, where additional sacrifices
 were offered and buddhistic services performed; and where altars had
 again been erected to burn incense on. the coffin was deposited in a
 side room of the inner court; and pao chu got ready bed-room in which
 she could keep her watch.
 
in the outer apartments, chia chen did the honours among the whole party
 of relatives and friends, some of whom asked to be allowed to stay for
 their meals, while others at this stage took their leave. and after they
 had one by one returned thanks, the dukes, marquises, earls, viscounts
 and barons, each in respective batches, (got up to go,) and they kept on
 leaving from between 1 and 3 p.m. before they had finally all dispersed.
 
in the inner chambers, the ladies were solely entertained and attended
 to by lady feng. first to make move were the consorts of officials;
 and noon had also come, by the time the whole party of them had taken
 their departure. those that remained were simply few relatives of the
 same clan and others like them, who eventually left after the completion
 of the three days' rationalistic liturgies.
 
the two ladies hsing and wang, well aware at this time that lady feng
 could on account return home, desired to enter the city at once; and
 madame wang wanted to take pao-yü home; but pao-yü, who had, on an
 unexpected occasion, come out into the country, entertained, of course,
 wish to go back; and would agree to nothing else than to stay
 behind with lady feng, so that madame wang had alternative but to
 hand him over to her charge and to start.
 
this temple of the iron fence had, in fact, been erected in days gone
 by, at the expense of the two dukes ning and jung; and there still
 remained up to these days, acres of land, from which were derived the
 funds for incense and lights for such occasions, on which the coffins of
 any members, old or young, (who died) in the capital, had to be
 deposited in this temple; and the inner and outer houses, in this
 compound were all kept in readiness and good order, for the
 accommodation of those who formed part of the cortège.
 
at this time, as it happened, the descendants mustered an immense crowd,
 and among them were poor and rich of various degrees, or with likes and
 dislikes diametrically opposed. there were those, who, being in
 straitened circumstances at home, and easily contented, readily took up
 their quarters in the temple. and there were those with money and
 position, and with extravagant ideas, who maintained that the
 accommodation in the temple was not suitable, and, of course, went in
 search of additional quarters, either in country houses, or in convents,
 where they could have their meals and retire, after the ceremonies were
 over.
 
on the occasion of mrs. ch'in's funeral, all the members of the clan put
 up temporarily in the iron fence temple; lady feng alone looked down
 upon it as inconvenient, and consequently despatched servant to go and
 tell ch'ing hsü, nun in the bread convent, to empty two rooms for her
 to go and live in.
 
this bread convent had at one time been styled the shui yueh nunnery
 (water moon); but as good bread was made in that temple, it gave rise to
 this nickname.
 
this convent was not very distant from the temple of the iron fence, so
 that as soon as the bonzes brought their functions to close, and the
 sacrifice of evening was offered, chia chen asked chia jung to request
 lady feng to retire to rest; and as lady feng perceived that there still
 remained several sisters-in-law to keep company to the female relatives,
 she readily, of her own accord, took leave of the whole party, and,
 along with pao-yü and ch'in chung, came to the water moon convent.
 
ch'in yeh, it must be noticed, was advanced in years and victim to
 many ailments, so that was unable to remain in the temple long, and
 bade ch'in chung tarry until the coffin had been set in its resting
 place, with the result that ch'in chung came along, at the same time as
 lady feng and pao-yü, to the water moon convent, where ch'ing hsü
 appeared, together with two neophytes, chih shan and chih neng, to
 receive them. after they had exchanged greetings, lady feng and the
 others entered the "chaste" apartments to change their clothes and wash
 their hands; and when they had done, as she perceived how much taller in
 stature chih neng had grown and how much handsomer were her features,
 she felt prompted to inquire, "how is it that your prioress and
 yourselves haven't been all these days as far as our place?"
 
"it's because during these days we haven't had any time which we could
 call our own," explained ch'ing hsü. "owing to the birth of in mr.
 hu's mansion, dame hu sent over about ten taels and asked that we should
 invite several head-nuns to read during three days the service for the
 churching of women, with the result that we've been so very busy and had
 so little leisure, that we couldn't come over to pay our respects to
 your ladyship."
 
but leaving aside the old nun, who kept lady feng company, we will now
 return to the two lads pao-yü and ch'in chung. they were up to their
 pranks in the main building of the convent, when seeing chih neng come
 over: "here's neng erh," pao-yü exclaimed with smile.
 
"why notice creature like her?" remarked ch'in chung; to which pao-yü
 rejoined laughingly: "don't be sly! why then did you the other day, when
 you were in the old lady's rooms, and there was not soul present, hold
 her in your arms? and do you want to fool now ?"
 
"there was nothing of the kind," observed ch'in chung smiling.
 
"whether there was or not," replied pao-yü, "doesn't concern me; but if
 you will stop her and tell her to pour cup of tea and bring it to me
 to drink, i'll then keep hands off."
 
"this is indeed very strange!" ch'in chung answered laughing; "do you
 fear that if you told her to pour you one, that she wouldn't; and what
 need is there that i should tell her?"
 
"if i ask her," pao-yü observed, "to pour it, she wouldn't be as ready
 as she would were you to tell her about it."
 
ch'in chung had help but to speak. "neng erh!" said, "bring cup
 of tea."
 
this neng erh had, since her youth, been in and out of the jung mansion,
 so that there was one that she did not know; and she had also, time
 after time, romped and laughed with pao-yü and ch'in chung. being now
 grown up she gradually came to know the import of love, and she readily
 took fancy to ch'in chung, who was an amorous being. ch'in chung too
 returned her affection, on account of her good looks; and, although he
 and she had not had any very affectionate tête-à-têtes, they had,
 however, long ago come to understand each other's feelings and wishes.
 
chih neng walked away and returned after having poured the tea.
 
"give it to me," ch'in chung cried out smirkingly; while pao-yü likewise
 shouted: "give it to me."
 
chih neng compressed her lips and sneeringly rejoined, "are you going to
 have fight even over cup of tea? is it forsooth likely that there's
 honey in my hand?"
 
pao-yü was the first to grasp and take over the cup, but while drinking
 it, was about to make some inquiry, when caught sight of chih
 shan, who came and called chih neng away to go and lay the plates with
 fruit on the table. not much time elapsed before she came round to
 request the two lads to go and have tea and refreshments; but would they
 eat such things as were laid before them? they simply sat for while
 and came out again and resumed their play.
 
lady feng too stayed for few moments, and then returned, with the old
 nun as her escort, into the "unsullied" rooms to lie down. by this time,
 all the matrons and married women discovered that there was nothing else
 to be done, and they dispersed in succession, retiring each to rest.
 there only remained in attendance several young girls who enjoyed her
 confidence, and the old nun speedily availed herself of the opportunity
 to speak. "i've got something," she said, "about which i mean to go to
 your mansion to beg of madame wang; but i'll first request you, my lady,
 to tell how to set to work."
 
"what's it?" ascertained lady feng.
 
"o-mi-to-fu!" exclaimed the old nun, "it's this; in days gone by, i
 first lived in the ch'ang an district. when i became nun and entered
 the monastery of excellent merit, there lived, at that time, a
 subscriber, chang by surname, very wealthy man. had daughter,
 whose infant name was chin ko; the whole family came in the course of
 that year to the convent i was in, to offer incense, and as luck would
 have it they met li ya-nei, brother of secondary wife of the prefect
 of the ch'ang an prefecture. this li ya-nei fell in love at first sight
 with her, and would wed chin ko as his wife. sent go-betweens to ask
 her in marriage, but, contrary to his expectations, chin ko had already
 received the engagement presents of the of the ex-major of the
 ch'ang an prefecture. the chang family, on the other hand, were afraid
 that if they withdrew from the match, the major would not give up his
 claim, and they therefore replied that she was already promised to
 another. but, who would have thought it, this mr. li was seriously bent
 upon marrying the young lady. but while the chang family were at loss
 what plan to devise, and both parties were in dilemma, the family of
 the major came unexpectedly to hear of the news; and without even
 looking thoroughly into the matter, they there and then had recourse to
 insult and abuse. 'is girl,' they insinuated, 'to be promised to the
 sons of several families!' and obstinately refusing to allow the
 restitution of the betrothal presents, they at once had recourse to
 litigation and brought an action (against the girl's people.) that
 family was at their wits' end, and had alternative but to find some
 one to go to the capital to obtain means of assistance; and, losing all
 patience, they insisted upon the return of the presents. i believe that
 the present commander of the troops at ch'ang an, mr. yün, is on
 friendly terms with your honourable family, and could one solicit madame
 wang to put in word with mr. chia cheng to send letter and ask mr.
 yün to speak to that major, i have fear that will not agree.
 should (your ladyship) be willing to take action, the chang family are
 even ready to present all they have, though it may entail the ruin of
 their estate."
 
"this affair is, it's true, of great moment," lady feng replied
 smiling, after hearing this appeal; "but the only thing is that madame
 wang does longer attend to matters of this nature."
 
"if madame doesn't heed them," suggested the old nun, "you, my lady, can
 safely assume the direction."
 
"i'm neither in need of any money to spend," added lady feng with a
 smirk, "nor do i undertake such matters!"
 
these words did not escape ching hsü's ear; they scattered to the winds
 her vain hopes. after minute or so she heaved sigh.
 
"what you say may be true enough," she remarked; "but the chang family
 are also aware that i mean to come and make my appeal to your mansion;
 and were you now not to manage this affair, the chang family having no
 idea that the lack of time prevents any steps being taken and that no
 importance is attached to their presents, it will appear, on the
 contrary, as if there were not even this little particle of skill in
 your household."
 
at these words lady feng felt at once inspirited. "you've known of old,"
 she added, "that i've never had any faith in anything concerning
 retribution in the court of judgment in the unseen or in hell; and that
 whatever i say that i shall do, that i do; tell them therefore to bring
 three thousand taels; and i shall then remedy this grievance of theirs."
 
the old nun upon hearing this remark was so exceedingly delighted, that
 she precipitately exclaimed, "they've got it, they've got it! there will
 be difficulty about it."
 
"i'm not," lady feng went on to add, "like those people, who afford help
 and render assistance with an eye to money; these three thousand taels
 will be exclusively devoted for the travelling expenses of those youths,
 who will be sent to deliver messages and for them to make few cash for
 their trouble; but as for i don't want even so much as cash. in
 fact i'm able at this very moment to produce as much as thirty thousand
 taels."
 
the old nun assented with alacrity, and said by way of reply, "if that
 be so, my lady, do display your charitable bounty at once to-morrow and
 bring things to an end."
 
"just see," remarked lady feng, "how hard pressed i am; which place can
 do without me? but since i've given you my word, i shall, needless to
 say, speedily bring the matter to close."
 
"a small trifle like this," hinted the old nun, "would, if placed in the
 hands of any one else, flurry her to such an extent that she would be
 quite at loss what to do; but in your hands, my lady, even if much
 more were superadded, it wouldn't require as much exertion as wave of
 your hand. but the proverb well says: 'that those who are able have much
 to do;' for madame wang, seeing that your ladyship manages all concerns,
 whether large or small, properly, has still more shoved the burden of
 everything on your shoulders, my lady; but you should, it's but right,
 also take good care of your precious health."
 
this string of flattery pleased lady feng more and more, so that
 heedless of fatigue she went on to chat with still greater zest.
 
but, thing unthought of, ch'in chung availed himself of the darkness, as
 well as of the absence of any one about, to come in quest of chih neng.
 as soon as reached the room at the back, espied chih neng all
 alone inside washing the tea cups; and ch'in chung forthwith seized her
 in his arms and implanted kisses on her cheek. chih neng got in a
 dreadful state, and stamping her feet, cried, "what are you up to?" and
 she was just on the point of shouting out, when ch'in chung rejoined:
 "my dear girl! i'm nearly dead from impatience, and if you don't again
 to-day accept my advances, i shall this very moment die on this spot."
 
"what you're bent upon," added chih neng, "can't be effected; not unless
 you wait until i've left this den and parted company from these people,
 when it will be safe enough."
 
"this is of course easy enough!" remonstrated ch'in chung; "but the
 distant water cannot extinguish the close fire!"
 
as spoke, with one puff, put out the light, plunging the whole
 room in pitch darkness; and seizing chih neng, pushed her on to the
 stove-couch and started violent love affair. chih neng could not,
 though she strained every nerve, escape his importunities; nor could she
 very well shout, so that she felt compelled to humour him; but while he
 was in the midst of his ecstatic joy, they perceived person walk in,
 who pressed both of them down, without uttering even so much as sound,
 and plunged them both in such fright that their very souls flew away
 and their spirits wandered from their bodies; and it was after the third
 party had burst out laughing with spurting sound that they eventually
 became aware that it was pao-yü; when, springing to his feet
 impetuously, ch'in chung exclaimed full of resentment, "what's this that
 you're up to!"
 
"if you get your monkey up," retorted pao-yü, "why, then let you and i
 start bawling out;" which so abashed chih neng that she availed herself
 of the gloomy light to make her escape; while pao-yü had dragged ch'in
 chung out of the room and asked, "now then, do you still want to play
 the bully!"
 
"my dear fellow," pleaded ch'in chung smilingly, "whatever you do don't
 shout out and let every one know; and all you want, i'll agree to."
 
"we needn't argue just now," pao-yü observed with grin; "wait while,
 and when all have gone to sleep, we can minutely settle accounts
 together."
 
soon it was time to ease their clothes, and go to bed; and lady feng
 occupied the inner room; ch'in chung and pao-yü the outer; while the
 whole ground was covered with matrons of the household, who had spread
 their bedding, and sat watching. as lady feng entertained fears that the
 jade of spiritual perception might be lost, she waited until pao-yü fell
 asleep, when having directed servant to bring it to her, she placed it
 under the side of her own pillow.
 
what accounts pao-yü settled with ch'in chung cannot be ascertained; and
 as in the absence of any positive proof what is known is based upon
 surmises, we shall not venture to place it on record.
 
nothing worth noticing occurred the whole night; but the next day, as
 soon as the morning dawned, dowager lady chia and madame wang promptly
 despatched servants to come and see how pao-yü was getting on; and to
 tell him likewise to put on two pieces of extra clothing, and that if
 there was nothing to be done it would be better for him to go back.
 
but was it likely that pao-yü would be willing to go back? besides ch'in
 chung, in his inordinate passion for chih neng, instigated pao-yü to
 entreat lady feng to remain another day. lady feng pondered in her own
 mind that, although the most important matters connected with the
 funeral ceremonies had been settled satisfactorily, there were still a
 few minor details, for which provision had been made, so that could
 she avail herself of this excuse to remain another day would she not win
 from chia chen greater degree of approbation, in the second place,
 would she not be able further to bring ch'ing hsü's business to an
 issue, and, in the third place, to humour pao-yü's wish? in view of
 these three advantages, which would accrue, "all that i had to do, i
 have done," she readily signified to pao-yü, "and if you be bent upon
 running about in here, you'll unavoidably place in still greater
 trouble; so that we must for certain start homewards to-morrow."
 
"my dear cousin, my own dear cousin," urgently entreated pao-yü, when he
 heard these words, "let's stay only this one day, and to-morrow we can
 go back without fail."
 
they actually spent another night there, and lady feng availed herself
 of their stay to give directions that the case which had been entrusted
 to her the previous day by the old nun should be secretly communicated
 to lai wang erh. lai wang's mind grasped the import of all that was said
 to him, and, having entered the city with all despatch, went in
 search of the gentleman, who acted as secretary (in mr. yün's office),
 pretending that had been directed by mr. chia lien to come and ask
 him to write letter and to send it that very night to the ch'ang an
 magistrate. the distance amounted to more than one hundred li, so
 that in the space of two days everything was brought to satisfactory
 settlement. the general, whose name was yün kuang, had been for long
 time under obligations to the chia family, so that naturally could
 not refuse his co-operation in such small trifles. when had handed
 his reply, wang erh started on his way back; where we shall leave him
 and return to lady feng.
 
having spent another day, she on the morrow took leave of the old nun,
 whom she advised to come to the mansion after the expiry of three days
 to fetch reply.
 
ch'in chung and chih neng could not, by any means, brook the separation,
 and they secretly agreed to clandestine assignation; but to these
 details we need not allude with any minuteness; sufficient to say that
 they had alternative but to bear the anguish and to part.
 
lady feng crossed over again to the temple of the iron fence and
 ascertained how things were progressing. but as pao chu was obstinate in
 her refusal to return home, chia chen found himself under the necessity
 of selecting few servants to act as her companions. but the reader
 must listen to what is said in the next chapter by way of explanation.
 



chapter xvi.
 
chia yuan-ch'un is, on account of her talents, selected to enter the
 feng ts'ao palace.
 ch'in ching-ch'ing departs, in the prime of life, by the yellow spring
 road.
 

but we must now return to the two lads, ch'in chung and pao-yü. after
 they had passed, along with lady feng from the temple of the iron fence,
 whither she had gone to see how things were getting on, they entered the
 city in their carriages. on their arrival at home, they paid their
 obeisance to dowager lady chia, madame wang and the other members of the
 family, whence they returned to their own quarters, where nothing worth
 mentioning transpired during the night.
 
on the next day, pao-yü perceiving that the repairs to the outer
 schoolroom had been completed, settled with ch'in chung that they should
 have evening classes. but as it happened that ch'in chung, who was
 naturally of an extremely delicate physique, caught somewhat of chill
 in the country and clandestinely indulged, besides, in an intimacy with
 chih neng, which unavoidably made him fail to take good care of himself,
 was, shortly after his return, troubled with cough and feverish
 cold, with nausea for drink and food, and fell into such an extremely
 poor state of health that simply kept indoors and nursed himself, and
 was not in fit condition to go to school. pao-yü's spirits were
 readily damped, but as there was likewise remedy had other
 course than to wait until his complete recovery, before could make
 any arrangements.
 
lady feng had meanwhile received reply from yün kuang, in which he
 informed her that everything had been satisfactorily settled, and the
 old nun apprised the chang family that the major had actually suppressed
 his indignation, hushed his complaints, and taken back the presents of
 the previous engagement. but who would have ever anticipated that a
 father and mother, whose hearts were set upon position and their
 ambition upon wealth, could have brought up daughter so conscious of
 propriety and so full of feeling as to seize the first opportunity,
 after she had heard that she had been withdrawn from her former
 intended, and been promised to the li family, to stealthily devise way
 to commit suicide, by means of handkerchief. the of the major,
 upon learning that chin ko had strangled herself, there and then jumped
 into the river and drowned himself, as too was being full of love.
 the chang and li families were, sad to relate, very much cut up, and, in
 very truth, two lives and money had been sacrificed all to use.
 
lady feng, however, during this while, quietly enjoyed the three
 thousand taels, and madame wang did not have even so much as the
 faintest idea of the whole matter. but ever since this occasion, lady
 feng's audacity acquired more and more strength; and the actions of this
 kind, which she, in after days, performed, defy enumeration.
 
one day, the very day on which chia cheng's birthday fell, while the
 members of the two households of ning and jung were assembled together
 offering their congratulations, and unusual bustle and stir prevailed, a
 gatekeeper came in, at quite an unexpected moment, to announce that mr.
 hsia, metropolitan head eunuch of the six palaces, had come with the
 special purpose of presenting an edict from his majesty; bit of news
 which plunged chia she, chia cheng and the whole company into great
 consternation, as they could not make out what was up. speedily
 interrupting the theatrical performance, they had the banquet cleared,
 and the altar laid out with incense, and opening the centre gate they
 fell on their knees to receive the edict.
 
soon they caught sight of the head eunuch, hsia ping-chung, advancing on
 horseback, and besides himself, considerable retinue of eunuchs. the
 eunuch hsia did not, in fact, carry any mandate or present any decree;
 but straightway advancing as far as the main hall, dismounted, and,
 with face beaming with smiles, walked into the hall and took his
 stand on the southern side.
 
"i have had the honour," said, "of receiving special order to at
 once summon chia cheng to present himself at court and be admitted in
 his majesty's presence in the lin ching hall."
 
when had delivered this message, did not so much as take any tea,
 but forthwith mounted his horse and took his leave.
 
chia cheng and the others could not even conceive what omen this summons
 implied, but had alternative but to change his clothes with all
 haste and to present himself at court, while dowager lady chia and the
 inmates of the whole household were, in their hearts, prey to such
 perplexity and uncertainty that they incessantly despatched messengers
 on flying steeds to go and bring the news.
 
after the expiry of four hours, they suddenly perceived lai ta and three
 or four other butlers run in, quite out of breath, through the
 ceremonial gate and report the glad tidings. "we have received," they
 added, "our master's commands, to hurriedly request her venerable
 ladyship to take madame wang and the other ladies into the palace, to
 return thanks for his majesty's bounty;" and other words to the same
 purport.
 
dowager lady chia was, at this time, standing, with agitated heart,
 under the verandah of the large hall waiting for tidings, whilst the two
 ladies, mesdames hsing and wang, mrs. yu, li wan, lady feng, ying ch'un
 and her sisters, even up to mrs. hsüeh and the rest, were congregated in
 one place ascertaining what was the news. old lady chia likewise called
 lai ta in and minutely questioned him as to what had happened. "your
 servants," replied lai ta, "simply stood waiting outside the lin chuang
 gate, so that we were in total ignorance of what was going on inside,
 when presently the eunuch hsia came out and imparted to us the glad
 tidings; telling us that the eldest of the young ladies in our household
 had been raised, by his majesty, to be an overseer in the feng ts'ao
 palace, and that had, in addition, conferred upon her the rank of
 worthy and virtuous secondary consort. by and by, mr. chia cheng came
 out and also told us the same thing. master is now gone back again to
 the eastern palace, whither requests your venerable ladyship to go at
 once and offer thanks for the imperial favour."
 
when old lady chia and the other members of the family heard these
 tidings they were at length reassured in their minds, and so elated were
 they all in one moment that joy was visible in their very faces. without
 loss of time, they commenced to don the gala dresses suitable to their
 rank; which done, old lady chia led the way for the two ladies, mesdames
 hsing and wang, as well as for mrs. yu; and their official chairs, four
 of them in all, entered the palace like trail of fish; while chia she
 and chia chen, who had likewise changed their clothes for their court
 dress, took chia and chia jung along and proceeded in attendance upon
 dowager lady chia.
 
indeed, of the two households of ning and jung, there was not one,
 whether high or low, woman or man, who was not in high state of
 exultation, with the exception of pao-yü, who behaved just as if the
 news had not reached his ears; and can you, reader, guess why? the fact
 is that chih neng, of the water moon convent, had recently entered the
 city in surreptitious manner in search of ch'in chung; but, contrary
 to expectation, her visit came to be known by ch'in yeh, who drove chih
 neng away and laid hold of ch'in chung and gave him flogging. but this
 outburst of temper of his brought about relapse of his old complaint,
 with the result that in three or five days, he, sad to say, succumbed.
 ch'in chung had himself ever been in delicate state of health and had
 besides received caning before had got over his sickness, so that
 when now saw his aged father pass away from the consequences of fit
 of anger, felt, at this stage, so full of penitence and distress that
 the symptoms of his illness were again considerably aggravated. hence it
 was that pao-yü was downcast and unhappy at heart, and that nothing
 could, in spite of the promotion of yuan ch'un by imperial favour,
 dispel the depression of his spirits.
 
dowager lady chia and the rest in due course offered thanks and returned
 home, the relatives and friends came to present their congratulations,
 great stir and excitement prevailed during these few days in the two
 mansions of ning and jung, and every one was in high glee; but alone
 looked upon everything as if it were nothing; taking not the least
 interest in anything; and as this reason led the whole family to sneer
 at him, the result was that got more and more doltish.
 
luckily, however, chia lien and tai-yü were on their way back, and had
 despatched messengers, in advance, to announce the news that they would
 be able to reach home the following day, so that when pao-yü heard the
 tidings, was at length somewhat cheered. and when came to
 institute minute inquiries, eventually found out: "that chia yü-ts'un
 was also coming to the capital to have an audience with his majesty,
 that it was entirely because wang tzu-t'eng had repeatedly laid before
 the throne memorials recommending him that was coming on this
 occasion to wait in the metropolis for vacancy which could fill up;
 that as was kinsman of chia lien's, acknowledging the same
 ancestors as did, and stood, on the other hand, with tai-yü, in
 the relationship of tutor and pupil, was in consequence following the
 same road and coming as their companion; that lin ju-hai had already
 been buried in the ancestral vault, and that every requirement had been
 attended to with propriety; that chia lien, on this voyage to the
 capital, would, had progressed by the ordinary stages, have been over
 month before could reach home, but that when came to hear the
 good news about yuan ch'un, pressed on day and night to enter the
 capital; and that the whole journey had been throughout, in every
 respect, both pleasant and propitious."
 
but pao-yü merely ascertained whether tai-yü was all right, and did not
 even so much as trouble his mind with the rest of what heard; and he
 remained on the tiptoe of expectation, till noon of the morrow; when, in
 point of fact, it was announced that mr. lien, together with miss lin,
 had made their entrance into the mansion. when they came face to face,
 grief and joy vied with each other; and they could not help having a
 good cry for while; after which followed again expressions of sympathy
 and congratulations; while pao-yü pondered within himself that tai-yü
 had become still more surpassingly handsome.
 
tai-yü had also brought along with her good number of books, and she
 promptly gave orders that the sleeping rooms should be swept, and that
 the various nicknacks should be put in their proper places. she further
 produced certain quantity of paper, pencils and other such things, and
 distributed them among pao ch'ai, ying ch'un, pao-yü and the rest; and
 pao-yü also brought out, with extreme care, the string of ling-ling
 scented beads, which had been given to him by the prince of pei ching,
 and handed them, in his turn, to tai-yü as present.
 
"what foul man has taken hold of them?" exclaimed tai-yü. "i don't want
 any such things;" and as she forthwith dashed them down, and would not
 accept them, pao-yü was under the necessity of taking them back. but for
 the time being we will not allude to them, but devote our attention to
 chia lien.
 
having, after his arrival home, paid his salutations to all the inmates,
 retired to his own quarters at the very moment that lady feng had
 multifarious duties to attend to, and had not even minute to spare;
 but, considering that chia lien had returned from distant journey, she
 could not do otherwise than put by what she had to do, and to greet him
 and wait on him.
 
"imperial uncle," she said, in jocose manner, when she realised that
 there was outsider present in the room, "i congratulate you! what
 fatigue and hardship you, imperial uncle, have had to bear throughout
 the whole journey, your humble servant heard yesterday, when the courier
 sent ahead came and announced that your highness would this day reach
 this mansion. i have merely got ready glass of mean wine for you to
 wipe down the dust with, but i wonder, whether your highness will deign
 to bestow upon it the lustre of your countenance, and accept it."
 
chia lien smiled. "how dare i presume to such an honour," added by
 way of rejoinder; "i'm unworthy of such attention! many thanks, many
 thanks."
 
p'ing erh and the whole company of waiting-maids simultaneously paid
 their obeisance to him, and this ceremony concluded, they presented tea.
 chia lien thereupon made inquiries about the various matters, which had
 transpired in their home after his departure, and went on to thank lady
 feng for all the trouble she had taken in the management of them.
 
"how could i control all these manifold matters," remarked lady feng;
 "my experience is so shallow, my speech so dull and my mind so simple,
 that if any one showed club, i would mistake it for pin. besides,
 i'm so tender-hearted that were any one to utter couple of glib
 remarks, i couldn't help feeling my heart give way to compassion and
 sympathy. i've had, in addition, experience in any weighty questions;
 my pluck is likewise so very small that when madame wang has felt in the
 least displeased, i have not been able to close my eyes and sleep.
 urgently did i more than once resign the charge, but her ladyship
 wouldn't again agree to it; maintaining, on the contrary, that my object
 was to be at ease, and that i was not willing to reap experience.
 leaving aside that she doesn't know that i take things so much to heart,
 that i can scoop the perspiration in handfuls, that i daren't utter one
 word more than is proper, nor venture to recklessly take one step more
 than i ought to, you know very well which of the women servants, in
 charge of the menage in our household, is easy to manage! if ever i make
 the slightest mistake, they laugh at and poke fun at me; and if i
 incline little one way, they show their displeasure by innuendoes;
 they sit by and look on, they use every means to do harm, they stir up
 trouble, they stand by on safe ground and look on and don't give a
 helping hand to lift any one they have thrown over, and they are, one
 and all of them, old hands in such tricks. i'm moreover young in years
 and not able to keep people in check, so that they naturally don't show
 any regard for me! what is still more ridiculous is that after the death
 of jung erh's wife in that mansion, brother chen, time and again, begged
 madame wang, on his very knees, to do him the favour to ask to lend
 him hand for several days. i repeatedly signified my refusal, but her
 ladyship gave her consent in order to oblige him, so that i had help
 but to carry out her wish; putting, as is my wont, everything
 topsy-turvey, and making matters worse than they were; with the result
 that brother chen up to this day bears grudge and regrets having
 asked for my assistance. when you see him to-morrow, do what you can to
 excuse by him. 'young as she is,' tell him, 'and without experience
 of the world, who ever could have instigated mr. chia cheng to make such
 mistake as to choose her.'"
 
while they were still chatting, they heard people talking in the outer
 apartments, and lady feng speedily inquired who it was. p'ing erh
 entered the room to reply. "lady hsüeh," she said, "has sent sister
 hsiang ling over to ask something; but i've already given her my
 answer and sent her back."
 
"quite so," interposed chia lien with smile. "a short while ago i went
 to look up mrs. hsüeh and came face to face with young girl, whose
 features were supremely perfect, and as i suspected that, in our
 household, there was such person, i asked in the course of
 conversation, mrs. hsüeh about her, and found out eventually that this
 was the young waiting-maid they had purchased on their way to the
 capital, hsiang ling by name, and that she had after all become an
 inmate of the household of that big fool hsüeh. since she's had her hair
 dressed as married woman she does look so much more pre-eminently
 beautiful! but that big fool hsüeh has really brought contamination upon
 her."
 
"ai!" exclaimed lady feng, "here you are back from trip to suchow and
 hang chow, where you should have seen something of the world! and have
 you still an eye as envious and heart so covetous? well, if you wish
 to bestow your love on her, there's difficulty worth speaking of.
 i'll take p'ing erh over and exchange her for her; what do you say to
 that? that old brother hsüeh is also one of those men, who, while eating
 what there is in the bowl, keeps an eye on what there is in the pan! for
 the last year or so, as couldn't get hsiang ling to be his, made
 ever so many distressing appeals to mrs. hsüeh; and mrs. hsüeh while
 esteeming hsiang ling's looks, though fine, as after all small matter,
 (thought) her deportment and conduct so far unlike those of other girls,
 so gentle and so demure that almost the very daughters of masters and
 mistresses couldn't attain her standard, that she therefore went to the
 trouble of spreading banquet, and of inviting guests, and in open
 court, and in the legitimate course, she gave her to him for secondary
 wife. but half month had scarcely elapsed before looked upon her
 also as good-for-nothing person as did upon large number of them!
 i can't however help feeling pity for her in my heart."
 
scarcely had she time to conclude what she had to say when youth, on
 duty at the second gate, transmitted the announcement that mr. chia
 cheng was in the library waiting for mr. secundus. at these words, chia
 lien speedily adjusted his clothes, and left the apartment; and during
 his absence, lady feng inquired of p'ing erh what mrs. hsüeh wanted a
 few minutes back, that she sent hsiang ling round in such hurry.
 
"what hsiang ling ever came?" replied p'ing erh. "i simply made use of
 her name to tell lie for the occasion. tell me, my lady, (what's come
 to) wang erh's wife? why she's got so bad that there's even common
 sense left in her!" saying this she again drew near lady feng's side,
 and in soft tone of voice, she continued: "that interest of yours, my
 lady, she doesn't send later, nor does she send it sooner; but she must
 send it round the very moment when master secundus is at home! but as
 luck would have it, i was in the hall, so that i came across her;
 otherwise, she would have walked in and told your ladyship, and mr.
 secundus would naturally have come to know about it! and our master
 would, with that frame of mind of his, have fished it out and spent it,
 had the money even been at the bottom of pan full of oil! and were he
 to have heard that my lady had private means, would not have been
 still more reckless in spending? hence it was that, losing time in
 taking the money over, i had to tell her few words which, who would
 have thought, happened to be overheard by your ladyship; that's why, in
 the presence of master secundus, i simply explained that hsiang ling had
 come!"
 
these words evoked smile from lady feng. "mrs. hsueh, i thought to
 myself," she observed, "knows very well that your mr. secundus has come,
 and yet, regardless of propriety, she, instead (of keeping her at home),
 sends some one over from her inner rooms! and it was you after all, you
 vixen, playing these pranks!"
 
as she uttered this remark, chia lien walked in, and lady feng issued
 orders to serve the wine and the eatables, and husband and wife took
 their seats opposite to each other; but notwithstanding that lady feng
 was very partial to drink, she nevertheless did not have the courage to
 indulge her weakness, but merely partook of some to keep him company.
 chia lien's nurse, dame chao, entered the room, and chia lien and lady
 feng promptly pressed her to have glass of wine, and bade her sit on
 the stove-couch, but dame chao was obstinate in her refusal. p'ing erh
 and the other waiting-maids had at an early hour placed square stool
 next to the edge of the couch, where was likewise small footstool, and
 on this footstool dame chao took seat, whereupon chia lien chose two
 dishes of delicacies from the table, which handed her to place on the
 square stool for her own use.
 
"dame chao," lady feng remarked, "couldn't very well bite through that,
 for mind it might make her teeth drop! this morning," she therefore
 asked of p'ing erh, "i suggested that that shoulder of pork stewed with
 ham was so tender as to be quite the thing to be given to dame chao to
 eat; and how is it you haven't taken it over to her? but go at once and
 tell them to warm it and bring it in! dame chao," she went on, "just you
 taste this hui ch'üan wine brought by your foster-son."
 
"i'll drink it," replied dame chao, "but you, my lady, must also have a
 cup: what's there to fear? the one thing to guard against is any excess,
 that's all! but i've now come over, not for any wine or eatables; on the
 contrary, there's serious matter, which i would ask your ladyship to
 impress on your mind, and to show some regard, for this master of
 ours is only good to utter fine words, but when the time (to act) does
 come, forgets all about us! as i have had the good fortune to nurse
 him in his infancy and to bring him up to this age, 'i too have grown
 old in years,' i said to him, 'and all that belong to are those two
 sons, and do look upon them with some particular favour!' with any one
 else i shouldn't have ventured to open my mouth, but him i anyway
 entreated time and again on several occasions. his assent was of course
 well and good, but up to this very moment still withholds his help.
 now besides from the heavens has dropped such mighty piece of good
 luck; and in what place will there be need of servants? that's why i
 come to tell you, my lady, as is but right, for were i to depend upon
 our master, i fear i shall even die of starvation."
 
lady feng laughed. "you'd better," she suggested, "put those two elder
 foster brothers of his both under my charge! but you've nursed that
 foster-son from his babyhood, and don't you yet know that disposition of
 his, how that takes his skin and flesh and sticks it, (not on the
 body of relative), but, on the contrary, on that of an outsider and
 stranger? (to chia lien.) which of those foster brothers whom you have
 now discarded, isn't clearly better than others? and were you to have
 shown them some favour and consideration, who would have ventured to
 have said 'don't?' instead of that, you confer benefits upon thorough
 strangers, and all to purpose whatever! but these words of mine are
 also incorrect, eh? for those whom we regard as strangers you,
 contrariwise, will treat just as if they were relatives!"
 
at these words every one present in the room burst out laughing; even
 nurse chao could not repress herself; and as she invoked buddha,--"in
 very truth," she exclaimed, "in this room has sprung up kind-hearted
 person! as regards relatives and strangers, such foolish distinctions
 aren't drawn by our master; and it's simply because he's full of pity
 and is tenderhearted that can't put off any one who gives vent to a
 few words of entreaty, and nothing else!"
 
"that's quite it!" rejoined lady feng smiling sarcastically, "to those
 whom looks upon as relatives, he's kindhearted, but with and his
 mother he's as hard as steel."
 
"what you say, my lady, is very considerate," remarked nurse chao, "and
 i'm really so full of delight that i'll have another glass of good wine!
 and, if from this time forward, your ladyship will act as you think
 best, i'll have then nothing to be sorry for!"
 
chia lien did not at this juncture feel quite at his ease, but could
 do more than feign smile. "you people," said, "should leave off
 talking nonsense, and bring the eatables at once and let us have our
 meal, as i have still to go on the other side and see mr. chia chen, to
 consult with him about business."
 
"to be sure you have," ventured lady feng, "and you shouldn't neglect
 your legitimate affairs; but what did mr. chia chen tell you when he
 sent for you just while back?"
 
"it was about the visit (of yuan ch'un) to her parents," chia lien
 explained.
 
"has after all permission for the visit been granted?" lady feng
 inquired with alacrity.
 
"though not quite granted," chia lien replied joyously, "it's
 nevertheless more or less an accomplished fact."
 
"this is indeed evidence of the great bounty of the present emperor!"
 lady feng observed smirkingly; "one doesn't hear in books, or see in
 plays, written from time to time, any mention of such an instance, even
 so far back as the days of old!"
 
dame chao took up again the thread of the conversation. "indeed it's
 so!" she interposed; "but i'm in very truth quite stupid from old age,
 for i've heard every one, high and low, clamouring during these few
 days, something or other about 'hsing ch'in' or 'hsing ch'in,' but i
 didn't really pay any heed to it; and now again, here's something more
 about this 'hsing ch'in,' but what's it all about, i wonder?"
 
"the emperor at present on the throne," explained chia lien, "takes into
 consideration the feelings of his people. in the whole world, there is
 (in his opinion), more essential thing than filial piety; maintaining
 that the feelings of father, mother, and daughter are
 indiscriminately subject to one principle, without any distinction
 between honorable and mean. the present emperor himself day and night
 waits upon their majesties his father and the empress dowager, and yet
 cannot, in the least degree, carry out to the full his ideal of filial
 piety. the secondary consorts, meritorious persons and other inmates of
 the palace, remembered, had entered within its precincts many years
 back, casting aside fathers and mothers, so how could they not help
 thinking of them? besides, the fathers and mothers, who remain at home
 must long for their daughters, of whom they cannot get even so much as a
 glimpse, and if, through this solicitude, they were to contract any
 illness, the harmony of heaven would also be seriously impaired, so for
 this reason, memorialised the emperor, his father, and the empress
 dowager that every month, on the recurrence of the second and sixth
 days, permission should be accorded to the relatives of the imperial
 consorts to enter the palace and make application to see their
 daughters. the emperor, his father, and empress dowager were, forthwith,
 much delighted by this representation, and eulogised, in high terms, the
 piety and generosity of the present emperor, his regard for the will of
 heaven and his research into the nature of things. both their sacred
 majesties consequently also issued decree to the effect: that the
 entrance of the relatives of the imperial consorts into the palace could
 not but interfere with the dignity of the state, and the rules of
 conventional rites, but that as the mothers and daughters could not
 gratify the wishes of their hearts, their majesties would, after all,
 show high proof of expedient grace, and issue special command that:
 'exclusive of the generous bounty, by virtue of which the worthy
 relations of the imperial consorts could enter the palace on the second
 and sixth days, any family, having extensive accommodation and separate
 courts suitable for the cantonment of the imperial body-guard, could,
 without any detriment, make application to the inner palace, for the
 entrance of the imperial chair into the private residences, to the end
 that the personal feelings of relations might be gratified, and that
 they should collectively enjoy the bliss of family reunion.' after the
 issue of this decree, who did not leap from grateful joy! the father of
 the honourable secondary consort chou has now already initiated works,
 in his residence, for the repairs to the separate courts necessary for
 the visiting party. wu t'ien-yu too, the father of wu, the distinguished
 consort, has likewise gone outside the city walls in search of a
 suitable plot of ground; and don't these amount to well-nigh
 accomplished facts?"
 
"o-mi-to-fu!" exclaimed dame chao. "is it really so? but from what you
 say, our family will also be making preparations for the reception of
 the eldest young lady!"
 
"that goes without saying," added chia lien, "otherwise, for what
 purpose could we be in such stir just now?"
 
"it's of course so!" interposed lady feng smiling, "and i shall now have
 an opportunity of seeing something great of the world. my misfortune is
 that i'm young by several years; for had i been born twenty or thirty
 years sooner, all these old people wouldn't really be now treating me
 contemptuously for not having seen the world! to begin with, the emperor
 tai tsu, in years gone by, imitated the old policy of shun, and went on
 tour, giving rise to more stir than any book could have ever produced;
 but i happen to be devoid of that good fortune which could have enabled
 to come in time."
 
"ai ya, ya!" ejaculated dame chao, "such thing is rarely met with in a
 thousand years! i was old enough at that time to remember the
 occurrence! our chia family was then at ku su, yangchow and all along
 that line, superintending the construction of ocean vessels, and the
 repairs to the seaboard. this was the only time in which preparations
 were made for the reception of the emperor, and money was lavished in
 quantities as great as the billowing waters of the sea!"
 
this subject once introduced, lady feng took up the thread of the
 conversation with vehemence. "our wang family," she said, "did also make
 preparations on one occasion. at that time my grandfather was in sole
 charge of all matters connected with tribute from various states, as
 well as with general levées, so that whenever any foreigners arrived,
 they all came to our house to be entertained, while the whole of the
 goods, brought by foreign vessels from the two kuang provinces, from
 fukien, yunnan and chekiang, were the property of our family."
 
"who isn't aware of these facts?" ventured dame chao; "there is up to
 this day saying that, 'in the eastern sea, there was white jade bed
 required, and the dragon prince came to request mr. wang of chin ling
 (to give it to him)!' this saying relates to your family, my lady, and
 remains even now in vogue. the chen family of chiang nan has recently
 held, oh such fine old standing! it alone has entertained the emperor
 on four occasions! had we not seen these things with our own eyes, were
 we to tell matter whom, they wouldn't surely ever believe them! not
 to speak of the money, which was as plentiful as mud, all things,
 whether they were to be found in the world or not, were they not heaped
 up like hills, and collected like the waters of the sea? but with the
 four characters representing and pity they didn't however trouble
 their minds."
 
"i've often heard," continued lady feng, "my eldest uncle say that
 things were in such state, and how couldn't i believe? but what
 surprises is how it ever happened that this family attained such
 opulence and honour!"
 
"i'll tell your ladyship and all in one sentence," replied nurse chao.
 "why they simply took the emperor's money and spent it for the emperor's
 person, that's all! for what family has such lot of money as to
 indulge in this useless extravagance?"
 
while they were engaged in this conversation, servant came second
 time, at the instance of madame wang, to see whether lady feng had
 finished her meal or not; and lady feng forthwith concluding that there
 must be something waiting for her to attend to, hurriedly rushed through
 her repast. she had just rinsed her mouth and was about to start when
 the youths, on duty at the second gate, also reported that the two
 gentlemen, mr. chia jung and mr. chia se, belonging to the eastern
 mansion, had arrived.
 
chia lien had, at length, rinsed his mouth; but while p'ing erh
 presented basin for him to wash his hands, perceived the two young
 men walk in, and readily inquired of them what they had to say.
 
lady feng was, on account (of their arrival), likewise compelled to
 stay, and she heard chia jung take the lead and observe: "my father has
 sent to tell you, uncle, that the gentlemen, have already decided
 that the whole extent of ground, starting from the east side, borrowing
 (for the occasion) the flower garden of the eastern mansion, straight up
 to the north west, had been measured and found to amount in all to three
 and half li; that it will be suitable for the erection of extra
 accommodation for the visiting party; that they have already
 commissioned an architect to draw plan, which will be ready by
 to-morrow; that as you, uncle, have just returned home, and must
 unavoidably feel fatigued, you need not go over to our house, but that
 if you have anything to say you should please come tomorrow morning, as
 early as you can, and consult verbally with him."
 
"thank uncle warmly," chia lien rejoined smilingly, "for the trouble he
 has taken in thinking of me; i shall, in that case, comply with his
 wishes and not go over. this plan is certainly the proper one, for while
 trouble will thus be saved, the erection of the quarters will likewise
 be an easy matter; for had distinct plot to be selected and to be
 purchased, it would involve far greater difficulties. what's more,
 things wouldn't, after all, be what they properly should be. when you
 get back, tell your father that this decision is the right one, and that
 should the gentlemen have any further wish to introduce any change in
 their proposals, it will rest entirely with my uncle to prevent them, as
 it's on account advisable to go and cast one's choice on some other
 plot; that to-morrow as soon as it's daylight, i'll come and pay my
 respects to uncle, when we can enter into further details in our
 deliberations!"
 
chia jung hastily signified his assent by several yes's, and chia se
 also came forward to deliver his message. "the mission to ku su," he
 explained, "to find tutors, to purchase servant girls, and to obtain
 musical instruments, and theatrical properties and the like, my uncle
 has confided to me; and as i'm to take along with the two sons of a
 couple of majordomos, and two companions of the family, besides, tan
 p'ing-jen and pei ku-hsiu, has, for this reason, enjoined to come
 and see you, uncle."
 
upon hearing this, chia lien scrutinised chia se. "what!" asked, "are
 you able to undertake these commissions? these matters are, it's true,
 of great moment; but there's something more hidden in them!"
 
chia smiled. "the best thing i can do," remarked, "will be to
 execute them in my novice sort of way, that's all."
 
chia jung was standing next to lady feng, out of the light of the lamp,
 and stealthily pulled the lapel of her dress. lady feng understood the
 hint, and putting on smiling expression, "you are too full of fears!"
 she interposed. "is it likely that our uncle chen doesn't, after all,
 know better than we do what men to employ, that you again give way to
 apprehensions that isn't up to the mark! but who are those who are,
 in every respect, up to the mark? these young fellows have grown up
 already to this age, and if they haven't eaten any pork, they have
 nevertheless seen pig run. if mr. chen has deputed him to go, is
 simply meant to sit under the general's standard; and do you imagine,
 forsooth, that has, in real earnest, told him to go and bargain about
 the purchase money, and to interview the brokers himself? my own idea is
 that (the choice) is very good one."
 
"of course it is!" observed chia lien; "but it isn't that i entertain
 any wish to be factious; my only object is to devise some plan or other
 for him. whence will," therefore went on to ask, "the money required
 for this purpose come from?"
 
"a little while ago the deliberations reached this point," rejoined chia
 se; "and mr. lai suggested that there was necessity at all to take
 any funds from the capital, as the chen family, in chiang nan, had still
 in their possession tls. 50,000 of our money. that would to-morrow
 write letter of advice and draft for us to take along, and that we
 should, first of all, obtain cash to the amount of tls. 30,000, and let
 the balance of tls. 20,000 remain over, for the purchase of painted
 lanterns, and coloured candles, as well as for the outlay for every kind
 of portieres, banners, curtains and streamers."
 
chia lien nodded his head. "this plan is first-rate!" added.
 
"since that be so," observed lady feng, as she addressed herself to chia
 se, "i've two able and reliable men; and if you would take them with
 you, to attend to these matters, won't it be to your convenience?"
 
chia forced smile. "i was just on the point," rejoined, "of
 asking you, aunt, for the loan of two men, so that this suggestion is a
 strange coincidence."
 
as went on to ascertain what were their names, lady feng inquired
 what they were of nurse chao. but nurse chao had, by this time, become
 quite dazed from listening to the conversation, and p'ing erh had to
 give her push, as she smiled, before she returned to consciousness.
 "the one," she hastened to reply, "is called chao t'ien-liang and the
 other chao t'ien-tung."
 
"whatever you do," suggested lady feng, "don't forget them; but now i'm
 off to look after my duties."
 
with these words, she left the room, and chia jung promptly followed her
 out, and with gentle voice said to her: "of whatever you want, aunt,
 issue orders that list be drawn up, and i'll give it to my brother to
 take with him, and he'll carry out your commissions according to the
 list."
 
"don't talk nonsense!" replied lady feng laughing; "i've found place,
 as yet, where i could put away all my own things; and do the stealthy
 practices of you people take my fancy?"
 
as she uttered these words she straightway went her way.
 
chia se, at this time, likewise, asked chia lien: "if you want anything
 (in the way of curtains), i can conveniently have them woven for you,
 along with the rest, and bring them as present to you."
 
"don't be in such high glee!" chia lien urged with grin, "you've but
 recently been learning how to do business, and have you come first and
 foremost to excel in tricks of this kind? if i require anything, i'll of
 course write and tell you, but we needn't talk about it."
 
having finished speaking, dismissed the two young men; and, in quick
 succession, servants came to make their business reports, not limited to
 three and five companies, but as chia lien felt exhausted, forthwith
 sent word to those on duty at the second gate not to allow any one at
 all to communicate any reports, and that the whole crowd should wait
 till the next day, when would give his mind to what had to be done.
 
lady feng did not come to retire to rest till the third watch; but
 nothing need be said about the whole night.
 
the next morning, at an early hour, chia lien got up and called on chia
 she and chia cheng; after which, came over to the ning kuo mansion;
 when, in company with the old major-domos and other servants, as well as
 with several old family friends and companions, inspected the grounds
 of the two mansions, and drew plans of the palatial buildings (for the
 accommodation of the imperial consort and her escort) on her visit to
 her parents; deliberating at the same time, on the subject of the works
 and workmen.
 
from this day the masons and workmen of every trade were collected to
 the full number; and the articles of gold, silver, copper, and pewter,
 as well as the earth, timber, tiles, and bricks, were brought over, and
 carried in, in incessant supplies. in the first place, orders were
 issued to the workmen to demolish the wall and towers of the garden of
 concentrated fragrance, and extend passage to connect in straight
 line with the large court in the east of the jung mansion; for the whole
 extent of servants' quarters on the eastern side of the jung mansion had
 previously been pulled down.
 
the two residences of ning and jung were, in these days, it is true,
 divided by small street, which served as boundary line, and there
 was communication between them, but this narrow passage was also
 private property, and not in any way government street, so that they
 could easily be connected, and as in the garden of concentrated
 fragrance, there was already stream of running water, which had been
 introduced through the corner of the northern wall, there was further
 need now of going to the trouble of bringing in another. although the
 rockeries and trees were not sufficient, the place where chia she lived,
 was an old garden of the jung mansion, so that the bamboos, trees, and
 rockeries in that compound, as well as the arbours, railings and other
 such things could all be very well removed to the front; and by these
 means, these two grounds, situated as they were besides so very near to
 each other, could, by being thrown into one, conduce to the saving of
 considerable capital and labour; for, in spite of some deficiency, what
 had to be supplied did not amount to much. and it devolved entirely upon
 certain old hu, man of note, styled shan tzu-yeh, to deliberate upon
 one thing after another, and to initiate its construction.
 
chia cheng was not up to these ordinary matters, so that it fell to chia
 she, chia chen, chia lien, lai ta, lai sheng, lin chih-hsiao, wu
 hsin-teng, chan kuang, ch'eng jih-hsing and several others to allot the
 sites, to set things in order, (and to look after) the heaping up of
 rockeries, the digging of ponds, the construction of two-storied
 buildings, the erection of halls, the plantation of bamboos and the
 cultivation of flowers, everything connected with the improvement of the
 scenery devolving, on the other hand, upon shan tzu-yeh to make
 provision for, and after leaving court, would devote such leisure
 moments as had to merely going everywhere to give look at the most
 important spots, and to consult with chia she and the others; after
 which troubled his mind more with anything. and as chia she did
 nothing else than stay at home and lie off, whenever any matter turned
 up, trifling though it may have been as grain of mustard seed or a
 bean, chia chen and his associates had either to go and report it in
 person or to write memorandum of it. or if had anything to say, he
 sent for chia lien, lai ta and others to come and receive his
 instructions. chia jung had the sole direction of the manufacture of the
 articles in gold and silver; and as for chia se, had already set out
 on his journey to ku su. chia chen, lai ta and the rest had also to call
 out the roll with the names of the workmen, to superintend the works and
 other duties relative thereto, which could not be recorded by one pen
 alone; sufficient to say that great bustle and stir prevailed, but to
 this subject we shall not refer for time, but allude to pao-yü.
 
as of late there were in the household concerns of this magnitude to
 attend to, chia cheng did not come to examine him in his lessons, so
 that was, of course, in high spirits, but, as unfortunately ch'in
 chung's complaint became, day by day, more serious, was at the same
 time really so very distressed at heart on his account, that enjoyment
 was for him out of the question.
 
on this day, got up as soon as it was dawn, and having just combed
 his hair and washed his face and hands, was bent upon going to ask
 dowager lady chia to allow him to pay visit to ch'in chung, when he
 suddenly espied ming yen peep round the curtain-wall at the second gate,
 and then withdraw his head. pao-yü promptly walked out and inquired what
 was up to.
 
"mr. ch'in chung," observed ming yen, "is not well at all."
 
pao-yü at these words was quite taken aback. "it was only yesterday," he
 hastily added, "that i saw him, and was still bright and cheery; and
 how is it that he's anything but well now?"
 
"i myself can't explain," replied ming yen; "but just few minutes ago
 an old man belonging to his family came over with the express purpose of
 giving the tidings."
 
upon hearing this news, pao-yü there and then turned round and told
 dowager lady chia; and the old lady issued directions to depute some
 trustworthy persons to accompany him. "let him go," (she said), "and
 satisfy his feelings towards his fellow-scholar; but as soon as has
 done, must come back; and don't let him tarry too long."
 
pao-yü with hurried step left the room and came and changed his clothes.
 but as on his arrival outside, the carriage had not as yet been got
 ready, fell into such state of excitement, that went round and
 round all over the hall in quite an erratic manner. in short while,
 after pressure had been brought to bear, the carriage arrived, and
 speedily mounting the vehicle, drove up to the door of ch'in chung's
 house, followed by li kuei, ming yen and the other servants. everything
 was quiet. not soul was about. like hive of bees they flocked into
 the house, to the astonishment of two distant aunts, and of several male
 cousins of ch'in chung, all of whom had time to effect their retreat.
 
ch'in chung had, by this time, had two or three fainting fits, and had
 already long ago been changed his mat. as soon as pao-yü realised the
 situation, felt unable to repress himself from bursting forth aloud.
 li kuei promptly reasoned with him. "you shouldn't go on in this way,"
 urged, "you shouldn't. it's because mr. ch'in is so weak that lying
 flat on the stove-couch naturally made his bones feel uncomfortable; and
 that's why has temporarily been removed down here to ease him a
 little. but if you, sir, go on in this way, will you not, instead of
 doing him any good, aggravate his illness?"
 
at these words, pao-yü accordingly restrained himself, and held his
 tongue; and drawing near, gazed at ch'in chung's face, which was as
 white as wax, while with closed eyes, gasped for breath, rolling
 about on his pillow.
 
"brother ching," speedily exclaimed pao-yü, "pao-yü is here!" but though
 shouted out two or three consecutive times, ch'in chung did not heed
 him.
 
"pao-yü has come!" pao-yü went on again to cry. but ch'in chung's spirit
 had already departed from his body, leaving behind only faint breath
 of superfluous air in his lungs.
 
had just caught sight of number of recording devils, holding a
 warrant and carrying chains, coming to seize him, but ch'in chung's soul
 would on account go along with them; and remembering how that there
 was in his home one to assume the direction of domestic affairs, and
 feeling concerned that chih neng had as yet home, consequently
 used hundreds of arguments in his entreaties to the recording devils;
 but alas! these devils would, none of them, show him any favour. on the
 contrary, they heaped invectives upon ch'in chung.
 
"you're fortunate enough to be man of letters," they insinuated, "and
 don't you know the common saying that: 'if the prince of hell call upon
 you to die at the third watch, who can presume to retain you, human
 being, up to the fifth watch?' in our abode, in the unseen, high as well
 as low, have all alike face made of iron, and heed not selfish
 motives; unlike the mortal world, where favouritism and partiality
 prevail. there exist therefore many difficulties in the way (to our
 yielding to your wishes)."
 
while this fuss was going on, ch'in chung's spirit suddenly grasped the
 four words, "pao-yü has come," and without loss of time, it went on
 again to make further urgent appeals. "gentlemen, spiritual deputies,"
 it exclaimed; "show little mercy and allow to return to make
 just one remark to an intimate friend of mine, and i'll be back again."
 
"what intimate friend is this again?" the devils observed with one
 voice.
 
"i'm not deceiving you, gentlemen," rejoined ch'in chung; "it's the
 grandson of the duke of jung kuo, whose infant name is pao-yü."
 
the decider of life was, at first, upon hearing these words, so seized
 with dismay that vehemently abused the devils sent on the errand.
 
"i told you," shouted, "to let him go back for turn; but you would
 by means comply with my words! and now do you wait until has
 summoned man of glorious fortune and prosperous standing to at last
 desist?"
 
when the company of devils perceived the manner of the decider of life,
 they were all likewise so seized with consternation that they bustled
 with hand and feet; while with hearts also full of resentment: "you,
 sir," they replied, "were at one time such terror, formidable as
 lightning; and are you not forsooth able to listen with equanimity to
 the two sounds of 'pao-yü?' our humble idea is that mortal as is, and
 immortal as we are, it wouldn't be to our credit if we feared him!"
 
but whether ch'in chung, after all, died or survived, the next chapter
 will explain.
 



chapter xvii.
 
in the ta kuan garden, (broad vista,) the merits of pao-yü are put to
 the test, by his being told to write devices for scrolls and
 tablets.
 yuan ch'un returns to the jung kuo mansion, on visit to her parents,
 and offers her congratulations to them on the feast of lanterns,
 on the fifteenth of the first moon.
 

ch'in chung, to resume our story, departed this life, and pao-yü went on
 so unceasingly in his bitter lamentations, that li kuei and the other
 servants had, for ever so long, an arduous task in trying to comfort him
 before desisted; but on his return home was still exceedingly
 disconsolate.
 
dowager lady chia afforded monetary assistance to the amount of several
 tens of taels; and exclusive of this, she had sacrificial presents
 likewise got ready. pao-yü went and paid visit of condolence to the
 family, and after seven days the funeral and burial took place, but
 there are particulars about them which could be put on record.
 
pao-yü, however, continued to mourn (his friend) from day to day, and
 was incessant in his remembrance of him, but there was likewise help
 for it. neither is it known after how many days got over his grief.
 
on this day, chia chen and the others came to tell chia cheng that the
 works in the garden had all been reported as completed, and that mr.
 chia she had already inspected them. "it only remains," (they said),
 "for you, sir, to see them; and should there possibly be anything which
 is not proper, steps will be at once taken to effect the alterations, so
 that the tablets and scrolls may conveniently be written."
 
after chia cheng had listened to these words, pondered for while.
 "these tablets and scrolls," remarked, "present however difficult
 task. according to the rites, we should, in order to obviate any
 shortcoming, request the imperial consort to deign and compose them; but
 if the honourable consort does not gaze upon the scenery with her own
 eyes, it will also be difficult for her to conceive its nature and
 indite upon it! and were we to wait until the arrival of her highness,
 to request her to honour the grounds with visit, before she composes
 the inscriptions, such wide landscape, with so many pavilions and
 arbours, will, without one character in the way of motto, albeit it
 may abound with flowers, willows, rockeries, and streams, nevertheless
 in way be able to show off its points of beauty to advantage."
 
the whole party of family companions, who stood by, smiled. "your views,
 remarkable sir," they ventured, "are excellent; but we have now a
 proposal to make. tablets and scrolls for every locality cannot, on any
 account, be dispensed with, but they could not likewise, by any means,
 be determined upon for good! were now, for the time being, two, three or
 four characters fixed upon, harmonising with the scenery, to carry out,
 for form's sake, the idea, and were they provisionally utilised as
 mottoes for the lanterns, tablets and scrolls, and hung up, pending the
 arrival of her highness, and her visit through the grounds, when she
 could be requested to decide upon the devices, would not two exigencies
 be met with satisfactorily?"
 
"your views are perfectly correct," observed chia cheng, after had
 heard their suggestion; "and we should go to-day and have look at the
 place so as then to set to work to write the inscriptions; which, if
 suitable, can readily be used; and, if unsuitable, yü-ts'un can then be
 sent for, and asked to compose fresh ones."
 
the whole company smiled. "if you, sir, were to compose them to-day,"
 they ventured, "they are sure to be excellent; and what need will there
 be again to wait for yü-ts'un!"
 
"you people are not aware," chia cheng added with smiling countenance,
 "that i've been, even in my young days, very mediocre in the composition
 of stanzas on flowers, birds, rockeries and streams; and that now that
 i'm well up in years and have moreover the fatigue and trouble of my
 official duties, i've become in literary compositions like these, which
 require light heart and gladsome mood, still more inapt. were i even
 to succeed in composing any, they will unavoidably be so doltish and
 forced that they would contrariwise be instrumental in making the
 flowers, trees, garden and pavilions, through their demerits, lose in
 beauty, and present instead pleasing feature."
 
"this wouldn't anyhow matter," remonstrated all the family companions,
 "for after perusing them we can all decide upon them together, each one
 of us recommending those thinks best; which if excellent can be kept,
 and if faulty can be discarded; and there's nothing unfeasible about
 this!"
 
"this proposal is most apposite," rejoined chia cheng. "what's more, the
 weather is, i rejoice, fine to-day; so let's all go in company and
 have look."
 
saying this, stood up and went forward, at the head of the whole
 party; while chia chen betook himself in advance into the garden to let
 every one know of their coming. as luck would have it, pao-yü--for he
 had been these last few days thinking of ch'in chung and so ceaselessly
 sad and wounded at heart, that dowager lady chia had frequently directed
 the servants to take him into the new garden to play--made his entrance
 just at this very time, and suddenly became aware of the arrival of chia
 chen, who said to him with smile, "don't you yet run away as fast as
 you can? mr. chia cheng will be coming in while."
 
at these words, pao-yü led off his nurse and the youths, and rushed at
 once out of the garden, like streak of smoke; but as turned a
 corner, came face to face with chia cheng, who was advancing towards
 that direction, at the head of all the visitors; and as had time
 to get out of the way, the only course open to him was to stand on one
 side.
 
chia cheng had, of late, heard the tutor extol him by saying that he
 displayed special ability in rhyming antithetical lines, and that
 although did not like to read his books, nevertheless possessed
 some depraved talents, and hence it was that was induced at this
 moment to promptly bid him follow him into the garden, with the intent
 of putting him to the test.
 
pao-yü could not make out what his object was, but was compelled to
 follow. as soon as they reached the garden gate, and caught sight of
 chia chen, standing on one side, along with several managers: "see that
 the garden gate is closed for time," chia cheng exclaimed, "for we'll
 first see the outside and then go in."
 
chia chen directed servant to close the gate, and chia cheng first
 looked straight ahead of him towards the gate and espied on the same
 side as the main entrance suite of five apartments. above, the
 cylindrical tiles resembled the backs of mud eels. the doors, railings,
 windows, and frames were all finely carved with designs of the new
 fashion, and were painted neither in vermilion nor in white colours. the
 whole extent of the walls was of polished bricks of uniform colour;
 while below, the white marble on the terrace and steps was engraved with
 western foreign designs; and when came to look to the right and to
 the left, everything was white as snow. at the foot of the white-washed
 walls, tiger-skin pebbles were, without regard to pattern, promiscuously
 inserted in the earth in such way as of their own selves to form
 streaks. nothing fell in with the custom of gaudiness and display so
 much in vogue, so that naturally felt full of delight; and, when he
 forthwith asked that the gate should be thrown open, all that met their
 eyes was long stretch of verdant hills, which shut in the view in
 front of them.
 
"what fine hill, what pretty hill!" exclaimed all the companions
 with one voice.
 
"were it not for this one hill," chia cheng explained, "whatever scenery
 is contained in it would clearly strike the eye, as soon as one entered
 into the garden, and what pleasure would that have been?"
 
"quite so," rejoined all of them. "but without large hills and ravines
 in one's breast (liberal capacities), how could one attain such
 imagination!"
 
after the conclusion of this remark, they cast glance ahead of them,
 and perceived white rugged rocks looking, either like goblins, or
 resembling savage beasts, lying either crossways, or in horizontal or
 upright positions; on the surface of which grew moss and lichen with
 mottled hues, or parasitic plants, which screened off the light; while,
 slightly visible, wound, among the rocks, narrow pathway like the
 intestines of sheep.
 
"if we were now to go and stroll along by this narrow path," chia cheng
 suggested, "and to come out from over there on our return, we shall have
 been able to see the whole grounds."
 
having finished speaking, asked chia chen to lead the way; and he
 himself, leaning on pao-yü, walked into the gorge with leisurely step.
 raising his head, suddenly beheld on the hill block of stone, as
 white as the surface of looking-glass, in site which was, in very
 deed, suitable to be left for an inscription, as it was bound to meet
 the eye.
 
"gentlemen," chia cheng observed, as turned his head round and
 smiled, "please look at this spot. what name will it be fit to give it?"
 
when the company heard his remark, some maintained that the two words
 "heaped verdure" should be written; and others upheld that the device
 should be "embroidered hill." others again suggested: "vying with the
 hsiang lu;" and others recommended "the small chung nan." and various
 kinds of names were proposed, which did not fall short of several tens.
 
all the visitors had been, it must be explained, aware at an early
 period of the fact that chia cheng meant to put pao-yü's ability to the
 test, and for this reason they merely proposed few combinations in
 common use. but of this intention, pao-yü himself was likewise
 cognizant.
 
after listening to the suggestions, chia cheng forthwith turned his head
 round and bade pao-yü think of some motto.
 
"i've often heard," pao-yü replied, "that writers of old opine that it's
 better to quote an old saying than to compose new one; and that an old
 engraving excels in every respect an engraving of the present day.
 what's more, this place doesn't constitute the main hill or the chief
 feature of the scenery, and is really site where any inscription
 should be put, as it more than constitutes the first step in the
 inspection of the landscape. won't it be well to employ the exact text
 of an old writer consisting of 'a tortuous path leading to secluded
 (nook).' this line of past days would, if inscribed, be, in fact,
 liberal to boot."
 
after listening to the proposed line, they all sang its praise.
 "first-rate! excellent!" they cried, "the natural talents of your second
 son, dear friend, are lofty; his mental capacity is astute; is unlike
 ourselves, who have read books but are simple fools."
 
"you shouldn't," urged chia cheng smilingly, "heap upon him excessive
 praise; he's young in years, and merely knows one thing which turns
 to the use of ten purposes; you should laugh at him, that's all; but we
 can by and by choose some device."
 
as spoke, entered the cave, where perceived beautiful trees
 with thick foliage, quaint flowers in lustrous bloom, while line of
 limpid stream emanated out of deep recess among the flowers and trees,
 and oozed down through the crevice of the rock. progressing several
 steps further in, they gradually faced the northern side, where a
 stretch of level ground extended far and wide, on each side of which
 soared lofty buildings, intruding themselves into the skies, whose
 carved rafters and engraved balustrades nestled entirely among the
 depressions of the hills and the tops of the trees. they lowered their
 eyes and looked, and beheld pure stream flowing like jade, stone steps
 traversing the clouds, balustrade of white marble encircling the pond
 in its embrace, and stone bridge with three archways, the animals upon
 which had faces disgorging water from their mouths. pavilion stood on
 the bridge, and in this pavilion chia chen and the whole party went and
 sat.
 
"gentlemen," inquired, "what shall we write about this?"
 
"in the record," they all replied, "of the 'drunken old man's pavilion,'
 written in days of old by ou yang, appears this line: 'there is a
 pavilion pinioned-like,' so let us call this 'the pinioned-like
 pavilion,' and finish."
 
"pinioned-like," observed chia cheng smiling, "is indeed excellent; but
 this pavilion is constructed over the water, and there should, after
 all, be some allusion to the water in the designation. my humble opinion
 is that of the line in ou yang's work, '(the water) drips from between
 the two peaks,' we should only make use of that single word 'drips.'"
 
"first-rate!" rejoined one of the visitors, "capital! but what would
 really be appropriate are the two characters 'dripping jadelike.'"
 
chia chen pulled at his moustache, as gave way to reflection; after
 which, asked pao-yü to also propose one himself.
 
"what you, sir, suggested while back," replied pao-yü, "will do very
 well; but if we were now to sift the matter thoroughly, the use of the
 single word 'drip' by ou yang, in his composition about the niang
 spring, would appear quite apposite; while the application, also on this
 occasion, to this spring, of the character 'drip' would be found not
 quite suitable. moreover, seeing that this place is intended as a
 separate residence (for the imperial consort), on her visit to her
 parents, it is likewise imperative that we should comply with all the
 principles of etiquette, so that were words of this kind to be used,
 they would besides be coarse and inappropriate; and may it please you to
 fix upon something else more recondite and abstruse."
 
"what do you, gentlemen, think of this argument?" chia cheng remarked
 sneeringly. "a little while ago, when the whole company devised
 something original, you observed that it would be better to quote an old
 device; and now that we have quoted an old motto, you again maintain
 that it's coarse and inappropriate! but you had better give us one of
 yours."
 
"if two characters like 'dripping jadelike' are to be used," pao-yü
 explained, "it would be better then to employ the two words 'penetrating
 fragrance,' which would be unique and excellent, wouldn't they?"
 
chia cheng pulled his moustache, nodded his head and did not utter a
 word; whereupon the whole party hastily pressed forward with one voice
 to eulogize pao-yü's acquirements as extraordinary.
 
"the selection of two characters for the tablet is an easy matter,"
 suggested chia cheng, "but now go on and compose pair of antithetical
 phrases with seven words in each."
 
pao-yü cast glance round the four quarters, when an idea came into his
 head, and went on to recite:
 
the willows, which enclose the shore, the green borrow from three
 bamboos;
 on banks apart, the flowers asunder grow, yet one perfume they give.
 
upon hearing these lines, chia cheng gave faint smile, as nodded
 his head, whilst the whole party went on again to be effusive in their
 praise. but forthwith they issued from the pavilions, and crossed the
 pond, contemplating with close attention each elevation, each stone,
 each flower, or each tree. and as suddenly they raised their heads, they
 caught sight, in front of them, of line of white wall, of numbers of
 columns, and beautiful cottages, where flourished hundreds and thousands
 of verdant bamboos, which screened off the rays of the sun.
 
"what lovely place!" they one and all exclaimed.
 
speedily the whole company penetrated inside, perceiving, as soon as
 they had entered the gate, zigzag arcade, below the steps of which was
 raised pathway, laid promiscuously with stones, and on the furthest
 part stood diminutive cottage with three rooms, two with doors leading
 into them and one without. everything in the interior, in the shape of
 beds, teapoys, chairs and tables, were made to harmonise with the space
 available. leading out of the inner room of the cottage was small door
 from which, as they egressed, they found back-court with lofty pear
 trees in blossom and banana trees, as well as two very small retiring
 back-courts. at the foot of the wall, unexpectedly became visible an
 aperture where was spring, for which channel had been opened
 scarcely foot or so wide, to enable it to run inside the wall. winding
 round the steps, it skirted the buildings until it reached the front
 court, where it coiled and curved, flowing out under the bamboos.
 
"this spot," observed chia cheng full of smiles, "is indeed pleasant!
 and could one, on moonlight night, sit under the window and study, one
 would not spend whole lifetime in vain!"
 
as said this, quickly cast glance at pao-yü, and so terrified
 did pao-yü feel that hastily drooped his head. the whole company lost
 time in choosing some irrelevant talk to turn the conversation, and
 two of the visitors prosecuted their remarks by adding that on the
 tablet, in this spot, four characters should be inscribed.
 
"which four characters?" chia cheng inquired, laughingly.
 
"the bequeathed aspect of the river ch'i!" suggested one of them.
 
"it's commonplace," observed chia cheng.
 
another person recommended "the remaining vestiges of the chü garden."
 
"this too is commonplace!" replied chia cheng.
 
"let brother pao-yü again propound one!" interposed chia chen, who stood
 by.
 
"before composes any himself," chia cheng continued, "his wont is to
 first discuss the pros and cons of those of others; so it's evident that
 he's an impudent fellow!"
 
"he's most reasonable in his arguments," all the visitors protested,
 "and why should be called to task?"
 
"don't humour him so much!" chia cheng expostulated. "i'll put up for
 to-day," however felt constrained to tell pao-yü, "with your haughty
 manner, and your rubbishy speech, so that after you have, to begin with,
 given us your opinion, you may next compose device. but tell me, are
 there any that will do among the mottoes suggested just now by all the
 gentlemen?"
 
"they all seem to unsuitable!" pao-yü did not hesitate to say by way
 of reply to this question.
 
chia cheng gave sardonic smile. "how all unsuitable?" exclaimed.
 
"this," continued pao-yü, "is the first spot which her highness will
 honour on her way, and there should be inscribed, so that it should be
 appropriate, something commending her sacred majesty. but if tablet
 with four characters has to be used, there are likewise devices ready at
 hand, written by poets of old; and what need is there to compose any
 more?"
 
"are forsooth the devices 'the river ch'i and the chu garden' not those
 of old authors?" insinuated chia cheng.
 
"they are too stiff," replied pao-yü. "would not the four characters: 'a
 phoenix comes with dignified air,' be better?"
 
with clamorous unanimity the whole party shouted: "excellent:" and chia
 cheng nodding his head; "you beast, you beast!" ejaculated, "it may
 well be said about you that you see through thin tube and have more
 judgment than an insect! compose another stanza," consequently bade
 him; and pao-yü recited:
 
in the precious tripod kettle, tea is brewed, but green is still the
 smoke!
 o'er is the game of chess by the still window, but the fingers are yet
 cold.
 
chia cheng shook his head. "neither does this seem to good!" said;
 and having concluded this remark was leading the company out, when
 just as was about to proceed, suddenly bethought himself of
 something.
 
"the several courts and buildings and the teapoys, sideboards, tables
 and chairs," added, "may be said to be provided for. but there are
 still all those curtains, screens and portieres, as well as the
 furniture, nicknacks and curios; and have they too all been matched to
 suit the requirements of each place?"
 
"of the things that have to be placed about," chia chen explained, a
 good number have, at an early period, been added, and of course when the
 time comes everything will be suitably arranged. as for the curtains,
 screens, and portieres, which have to be hung up, i heard yesterday
 brother lien say that they are not as yet complete, that when the works
 were first taken in hand, the plan of each place was drawn, the
 measurements accurately calculated and some one despatched to attend to
 the things, and that thought that yesterday half of them were bound
 to come in.
 
chia cheng, upon hearing this explanation, readily remembered that with
 all these concerns chia chen had nothing to do; so that speedily sent
 some one to go and call chia lien.
 
having arrived in short while, "how many sorts of things are there in
 all?" chia cheng inquired of him. "of these how many kinds have by this
 time been got ready? and how many more are short?"
 
at this question, chia lien hastily produced, from the flaps of his
 boot, paper pocket-book, containing list, which kept inside the
 tops of his boot. after perusing it and reperusing it, made suitable
 reply. "of the hundred and twenty curtains," proceeded, "of stiff
 spotted silks, embroidered with dragons in relief, and of the curtains
 large and small, of every kind of damask silk, eighty were got
 yesterday, so that there still remain forty of them to come. the two
 portieres were both received yesterday; and besides these, there are the
 two hundred red woollen portieres, two hundred portieres of hsiang fei
 bamboo; two hundred door-screens of rattan, with gold streaks, and of
 red lacquered bamboo; two hundred portieres of black lacquered rattan;
 two hundred door-screens of variegated thread-netting with clusters of
 flowers. of each of these kinds, half have come in, but the whole lot of
 them will be complete later than autumn. antimacassars, table-cloths,
 flounces for the beds, and cushions for the stools, there are thousand
 two hundred of each, but these likewise are ready and at hand."
 
as spoke, they proceeded outwards, but suddenly they perceived hill
 extending obliquely in such way as to intercept the passage; and as
 they wound round the curve of the hill faintly came to view line of
 yellow mud walls, the whole length of which was covered with paddy
 stalks for the sake of protection, and there were several hundreds of
 apricot trees in bloom, which presented the appearance of being fire,
 spurted from the mouth, or russet clouds, rising in the air. inside this
 enclosure, stood several thatched cottages. outside grew, on the other
 hand, mulberry trees, elms, mallows, and silkworm oaks, whose tender
 shoots and new twigs, of every hue, were allowed to bend and to
 intertwine in such way as to form two rows of green fence. beyond this
 fence and below the white mound, was well, by the side of which stood
 well-sweep, windlass and such like articles; the ground further down
 being divided into parcels, and apportioned into fields, which, with the
 fine vegetables and cabbages in flower, presented, at the first glance,
 the aspect of being illimitable.
 
"this is," chia cheng observed chuckling, "the place really imbued with
 certain amount of the right principle; and laid out, though it has
 been by human labour, yet when it strikes my eye, it so moves my heart,
 that it cannot help arousing in the wish to return to my native place
 and become farmer. but let us enter and rest while."
 
as concluded these words, they were on the point of walking in, when
 they unexpectedly discerned stone, outside the trellis gate, by the
 roadside, which had also been left as place on which to inscribe a
 motto.
 
"were tablet," argued the whole company smilingly, "put up high in a
 spot like this, to be filled up by and by, the rustic aspect of farm
 would in that case be completely done away with; and it will be better,
 yea far better to erect this slab on the ground, as it will further make
 manifest many points of beauty. but unless motto could be composed of
 the same excellence as that in fan shih-hu's song on farms, it will not
 be adequate to express its charms!"
 
"gentlemen," observed chia cheng, "please suggest something."
 
"a short while back," replied the whole company, "your son, venerable
 brother, remarked that devising new motto was not equal to quoting an
 old one, and as sites of this kind have been already exhausted by
 writers of days of old, wouldn't it be as well that we should
 straightway call it the 'apricot blossom village?' and this will do
 splendidly."
 
when chia cheng heard this remark, smiled and said, addressing
 himself to chia chen: "this just reminds that although this place is
 perfect in every respect, there's still one thing wanting in the shape
 of wine board; and you had better then have one made to-morrow on the
 very same pattern as those used outside in villages; and it needn't be
 anything gaudy, but hung above the top of tree by means of bamboos."
 
chia chen assented. "there's necessity," went on to explain, "to
 keep any other birds in here, but only to rear few geese, ducks, fowls
 and such like; as in that case they will be in perfect keeping with the
 place."
 
"a splendid idea!" chia cheng rejoined, along with all the party.
 
"'apricot blossom village' is really first-rate," continued chia cheng
 as again addressed himself to the company; "but the only thing is
 that it encroaches on the real designation of the village; and it will
 be as well to wait (until her highness comes), when we can request her
 to give it name."
 
"certainly!" answered the visitors with one voice; "but now as far as a
 name goes, for mere form, let us all consider what expressions will be
 suitable to employ."
 
pao-yü did not however give them time to think; nor did wait for chia
 cheng's permission, but suggested there and then: "in old poetical works
 there's this passage: 'at the top of the red apricot tree hangs the flag
 of an inn,' and wouldn't it be advisable, on this occasion, to
 temporarily adopt the four words: 'the sign on the apricot tree is
 visible'?"
 
"'is visible' is excellent," suggested the whole number of them, "and
 what's more it secretly accords with the meaning implied by 'apricot
 blossom village.'"
 
"were the two words 'apricot blossom' used for the name of the village,
 they would be too commonplace and unsuitable;" added pao-yü with a
 sardonic grin, "but there's another passage in the works of poet of
 the t'ang era: 'by the wooden gate near the water the corn-flower emits
 its fragrance;' and why not make use of the motto 'corn fragrance
 village,' which will be excellent?"
 
when the company heard his proposal, they, with still greater vigour,
 unanimously combined in crying out "capital!" as they clapped their
 hands.
 
chia cheng, with one shout, interrupted their cries, "you ignorant child
 of wrath!" ejaculated; "how many old writers can you know, and how
 many stanzas of ancient poetical works can you remember, that you will
 have the boldness to show off in the presence of all these experienced
 gentlemen? (in allowing you to give vent to) all the nonsense you
 uttered my object was other than to see whether your brain was clear
 or muddled; and all for fun's sake, that's all; and lo, you've taken
 things in real earnest!"
 
saying this, led the company into the interior of the hall with the
 mallows. the windows were pasted with paper, and the bedsteads made of
 wood, and all appearance of finery had been expunged, and chia cheng's
 heart was naturally much gratified; but nevertheless, scowling angrily
 at pao-yü, "what do you think of this place?" asked.
 
when the party heard this question, they all hastened to stealthily give
 nudge to pao-yü, with the express purpose of inducing him to say it
 was nice; but pao-yü gave ear to what they all urged. "it's by far
 below the spot," readily replied, "designated 'a phoenix comes with
 dignified air.'"
 
"you ignorant stupid thing!" exclaimed chia cheng at these words; "what
 you simply fancy as exquisite, with that despicable reliance of yours
 upon luxury and display, are two-storied buildings and painted pillars!
 but how can you know anything about this aspect so pure and unobtrusive,
 and this is all because of that failing of not studying your books!"
 
"sir," hastily answered pao-yü, "your injunctions are certainly correct;
 but men of old have often made allusion to 'natural;' and what is, i
 wonder, the import of these two characters?"
 
the company had perceived what perverse mind pao yü possessed, and
 they one and all were much surprised that should be so silly beyond
 the possibility of any change; and when now they heard the question he
 asked, about the two characters representing "natural," they, with one
 accord, speedily remarked, "everything else you understand, and how is
 it that on the contrary you don't know what 'natural' implies? the word
 'natural' means effected by heaven itself and not made by human labour."
 
"well, just so," rejoined pao-yü; "but the farm, which is laid out in
 this locality, is distinctly the handiwork of human labour; in the
 distance, there are neighbouring hamlets; near it, adjoin wastes;
 though it bears hill, the hill is destitute of streaks; though it be
 close to water, this water has spring; above, there is pagoda
 nestling in temple; below, there is bridge leading to market; it
 rises abrupt and solitary, and presents grand sight! the palm would
 seem to be carried by the former spot, which is imbued with the natural
 principle, and possesses the charms of nature; for, though bamboos have
 been planted in it, and streams introduced, they nevertheless do no
 violence to the works executed. 'a natural landscape,' says, an ancient
 author in four words; and why? simply because apprehended that what
 was not land, would, by forcible ways, be converted into land; and that
 what was hill would, by unnatural means, be raised into hill. and
 ingenious though these works might be in hundred and one ways, they
 cannot, after all, be in harmony."...
 
but had time to conclude, as chia cheng flew into rage. "drive
 him off," shouted; (but as pao-yü) was on the point of going out, he
 again cried out: "come back! make up," added, "another couplet, and
 if it isn't clear, i'll for all this give you slap on your mouth."
 
pao-yü had alternative but to recite as follows:
 
spot in which the "ko" fibre to bleach, as the fresh tide doth swell
 the waters green!
 beauteous halo and fragrant smell the man encompass who the cress
 did pluck!
 
chia cheng, after this recital, nodded his head. "this is still worse!"
 remarked, but as reproved him, led the company outside, and
 winding past the mound, they penetrated among flowers, and wending their
 steps by the willows, they touched the rocks and lingered by the stream.
 passing under the trellis with yellow roses, they went into the shed
 with white roses; they crossed by the pavilion with peonies, and walked
 through the garden, where the white peony grew; and entering the court
 with the cinnamon roses, they reached the island of bananas. as they
 meandered and zigzagged, suddenly they heard the rustling sound of the
 water, as it came out from stone cave, from the top of which grew
 parasitic plants drooping downwards, while at its bottom floated the
 fallen flowers.
 
"what fine sight!" they all exclaimed; "what beautiful scenery!"
 
"gentlemen," observed chia cheng, "what name do you propose for this
 place?"
 
"there's further need for deliberation," the company rejoined; "for
 this is just the very spot fit for the three words 'wu ling spring.'"
 
"this too is matter-of-fact!" chia cheng objected laughingly, "and
 likewise antiquated."
 
"if that won't do," the party smiled, "well then what about the four
 characters implying 'an old cottage of man of the ch'in dynasty?'"
 
"this is still more exceedingly plain!" interposed pao-yü. "'the old
 cottage of man of the ch'in dynasty' is meant to imply retreat from
 revolution, and how will it suit this place? wouldn't the four
 characters be better denoting 'an isthmus with smart weed, and stream
 with flowers'?"
 
when chia cheng heard these words, exclaimed: "you're talking still
 more stuff and nonsense?" and forthwith entering the grotto, chia cheng
 went on to ask of chia chen, "are there any boats or not?"
 
"there are to be," replied chia chen, "four boats in all from which to
 pick the lotus, and one boat for sitting in; but they haven't now as yet
 been completed."
 
"what pity!" chia cheng answered smilingly, "that we cannot go in."
 
"but we could also get into it by the tortuous path up the hill," chia
 chen ventured; and after finishing this remark, walked ahead to show
 the way, and the whole party went over, holding on to the creepers, and
 supporting themselves by the trees, when they saw still larger
 quantity of fallen leaves on the surface of the water, and the stream
 itself, still more limpid, gently and idly meandering along on its
 circuitous course. by the bank of the pond were two rows of weeping
 willows, which, intermingling with peach and apricot trees, screened the
 heavens from view, and kept off the rays of the sun from this spot,
 which was in real truth devoid of even grain of dust.
 
suddenly, they espied in the shade of the willows, an arched wooden
 bridge also reveal itself to the eye, with bannisters of vermilion
 colour. they crossed the bridge, and lo, all the paths lay open before
 them; but their gaze was readily attracted by brick cottage spotless
 and cool-looking; whose walls were constructed of polished bricks, of
 uniform colour; (whose roof was laid) with speckless tiles; and whose
 enclosing walls were painted; while the minor slopes, which branched off
 from the main hill, all passed along under the walls on to the other
 side.
 
"this house, in site like this, is perfectly destitute of any charm!"
 added chia cheng.
 
and as they entered the door, abruptly appeared facing them, large
 boulder studded with holes and soaring high in the skies, which was
 surrounded on all four sides by rocks of every description, and
 completely, in fact, hid from view the rooms situated in the compound.
 but of flowers or trees, there was not even one about; and all that was
 visible were few strange kinds of vegetation; some being of the
 creeper genus, others parasitic plants, either hanging from the apex of
 the hill, or inserting themselves into the base of the rocks; drooping
 down even from the eaves of the house, entwining the pillars, and
 closing round the stone steps. or like green bands, they waved and
 flapped; or like gold thread, they coiled and bent, either with seeds
 resembling cinnabar, or with blossoms like golden olea; whose fragrance
 and aroma could not be equalled by those emitted by flowers of ordinary
 species.
 
"this is pleasant!" chia cheng could not refrain from saying; "the only
 thing is that i don't know very much about flowers."
 
"what are here are lianas and ficus pumila!" some of the company
 observed.
 
"how ever can the liana and the ficus have such unusual scent?"
 questioned chia cheng.
 
"indeed they aren't!" interposed pao-yü. "among all these flowers, there
 are also ficus and liana, but those scented ones are iris, ligularia,
 and 'wu' flowers; that kind consist, for the most part, of 'ch'ih'
 flowers and orchids; while this mostly of gold-coloured dolichos. that
 species is the hypericum plant, this the 'yü lu' creeper. the red ones
 are, of course, the purple rue; the green ones consist for certain, of
 the green 'chih' plant; and, to the best of my belief, these various
 plants are mentioned in the 'li sao' and 'wen hsuan.' these rare plants
 are, some of them called something or other like 'huo na' and 'chiang
 hui;' others again are designated something like 'lun tsu' and 'tz'u
 feng;' while others there are whose names sound like 'shih fan,' 'shui
 sung' and 'fu liu,' which together with other species are to be found in
 the 'treatise about the wu city' by tso t'ai-chung. there are also those
 which go under the appellation of 'lu t'i,' or something like that;
 while there are others that are called something or other like 'tan
 chiao,' 'mi wu' and 'feng lien;' reference to which is made in the
 'treatise on the shu city.' but so many years have now elapsed, and the
 times have so changed (since these treatises were written), that people,
 being unable to discriminate (the real names) may consequently have had
 to appropriate in every case such names as suited the external aspect,
 so that they may, it is quite possible, have gradually come to be called
 by wrong designations."
 
but had time to conclude; for chia cheng interrupted him. "who has
 ever asked you about it?" shouted; which plunged pao-yü into such a
 fright, that drew back, and did not venture to utter another word.
 
chia cheng perceiving that on both sides alike were covered passages
 resembling outstretched arms, forthwith continued his steps and entered
 the covered way, when caught sight, at the upper end, of a
 five-roomed building, without spot or blemish, with folding blinds
 extending in connected line, and with corridors on all four sides; (a
 building) which with its windows so green, and its painted walls,
 excelled, in spotless elegance, the other buildings they had seen
 before, to which it presented such contrast.
 
chia cheng heaved sigh. "if one were able," observed, "to boil his
 tea and thrum his lyre in here, there wouldn't even be any need for him
 to burn any more incense. but the execution of this structure is so
 beyond conception that you must, gentlemen, compose something nice and
 original to embellish the tablet with, so as not to render such place
 of effect!"
 
"there's nothing so really pat," suggested the company smiling; "as 'the
 orchid-smell-laden breeze' and 'the dew-bedecked epidendrum!"
 
"these are indeed the only four characters," rejoined chia cheng, "that
 could be suitably used; but what's to be said as far as the scroll
 goes?"
 
"i've thought of couplet," interposed one of the party, "which you'll
 all have to criticise, and put into ship-shape; its burden is this:
 
"the musk-like epidendrum smell enshrouds the court, where shines the
 sun with oblique beams;
 the iris fragrance is wafted over the isle illumined by the moon's
 clear rays."
 
"as far as excellence is concerned, it's excellent," observed the whole
 party, "but the two words representing 'with oblique beams' are not
 felicitous."
 
and as some one quoted the line from an old poem:
 
the angelica fills the court with tears, what time the sun doth slant.
 
"lugubrious, lugubrious!" expostulated the company with one voice.
 
another person then interposed. "i also have couplet, whose merits
 you, gentlemen, can weigh; it runs as follows:
 
"along the three pathways doth float the yü hui scented breeze!
 the radiant moon in the whole hall shines on the gold orchid!"
 
chia cheng tugged at his moustache and gave way to meditation. was
 just about also to suggest stanza, when, upon suddenly raising his
 head, espied pao-yü standing by his side, too timid to give vent to a
 single sound.
 
"how is it," purposely exclaimed, "that when you should speak, you
 contrariwise don't? is it likely that you expect some one to request you
 to confer upon us the favour of your instruction?"
 
"in this place," pao-yü rejoined at these words, "there are such
 things as orchids, musk, resplendent moon or islands; and were one to
 begin quoting such specimens of allusions, to scenery, two hundred
 couplets could be readily given without, even then, having been able to
 exhaust the supply!"
 
"who presses your head down," chia cheng urged, "and uses force that you
 must come out with all these remarks?"
 
"well, in that case," added pao-yü, "there are fitter words to put on
 the tablet than the four representing: 'the fragrance pure of the
 ligularia and iris.' while the device on the scroll might be:
 
"sung is the nutmeg song, but beauteous still is the sonnet!
 near the t'u mei to sleep, makes e'en dream with fragrance full!"
 
"this is," laughed chia cheng sneeringly, "an imitation of the line:
 
"a book when it is made of plaintain leaves, the writing green is also
 bound to be!
 
"so that there's nothing remarkable about it."
 
"li t'ai-po, in his work on the phoenix terrace," protested the whole
 party, "copied, in every point, the huang hua lou. but what's essential
 is faultless imitation. now were we to begin to criticise minutely the
 couplet just cited, we would indeed find it to be, as compared with the
 line 'a book when it is made of plantain leaves,' still more elegant and
 of wider application!"
 
"what an idea?" observed chia cheng derisively.
 
but as spoke, the whole party walked out; but they had not gone very
 far before they caught sight of majestic summer house, towering high
 peak-like, and of structure rising loftily with storey upon storey;
 and completely locked in as they were on every side they were as
 beautiful as the jade palace. far and wide, road upon road coiled and
 wound; while the green pines swept the eaves, the jady epidendrum
 encompassed the steps, the animals' faces glistened like gold, and the
 dragons' heads shone resplendent in their variegated hues.
 
"this is the main hall," remarked chia cheng; "the only word against it
 is that there's little too much finery."
 
"it should be so," rejoined one and all, "so as to be what it's intended
 to be! the imperial consort has, it is true, an exalted preference for
 economy and frugality, but her present honourable position requires the
 observance of such courtesies, so that (finery) is fault."
 
as they made these remarks and advanced on their way the while, they
 perceived, just in front of them, an archway project to view,
 constructed of jadelike stone; at the top of which the coils of large
 dragons and the scales of small dragons were executed in perforated
 style.
 
"what's the device to be for this spot?" inquired chia cheng.
 
"it should be 'fairy land,'" suggested all of them, "so as to be
 apposite!"
 
chia cheng nodded his head and said nothing. but as soon as pao-yü
 caught sight of this spot something was suddenly aroused in his heart
 and began to ponder within himself. "this place really resembles
 something that i've seen somewhere or other." but could not at the
 moment recall to mind what year, moon, or day this had happened.
 
chia cheng bade him again propose motto; but pao-yü was bent upon
 thinking over the details of the scenery had seen on former
 occasion, and gave thought whatever to this place, so that the whole
 company were at loss what construction to give to his silence, and
 came simply to the conclusion that, after the bullying had had to put
 up with for ever so long, his spirits had completely vanished, his
 talents become exhausted and his speech impoverished; and that if he
 were harassed and pressed, might perchance, as the result of anxiety,
 contract some ailment or other, which would of course not be suitable
 issue, and they lost time in combining together to dissuade chia
 cheng.
 
"never mind," they said, "to-morrow will do to compose some device;
 let's drop it now."
 
chia cheng himself was inwardly afraid lest dowager lady chia should be
 anxious, so that hastily remarked as forced smile. "you beast,
 there are, after all, also occasions on which you are good! but never
 mind! i'll give you one day to do it in, and if by to-morrow you haven't
 been able to compose anything, i shall certainly not let you off. this
 is the first and foremost place and you must exercise due care in what
 you write."
 
saying this, sallied out, at the head of the company, and cast
 another glance at the scenery.
 
indeed from the time they had entered the gate up to this stage, they
 had just gone over five or six tenths of the whole ground, when it
 happened again that servant came and reported that some one had
 arrived from mr. yü-'ts'un's to deliver message. "these several places
 (which remain)," chia cheng observed with smile, "we have time to
 pass under inspection; but we might as well nevertheless go out at least
 by that way, as we shall be able, to certain degree, to have look at
 the general aspect."
 
with these words, showed the way for the family companions until they
 reached large bridge, with water entering under it, looking like a
 curtain made of crystal. this bridge, the fact is, was the dam, which
 communicated with the river outside, and from which the stream was
 introduced into the grounds.
 
"what's the name of this water-gate?" chia cheng inquired.
 
"this is," replied pao-yü, "the main stream of the hsin fang river, and
 is therefore called the hsin fang water-gate."
 
"nonsense!" exclaimed chia cheng. "the two words hsin fang must on no
 account be used!"
 
and as they speedily advanced on their way, they either came across
 elegant halls, or thatched cottages; walls made of piled-up stone, or
 gates fashioned of twisted plants; either secluded nunnery or buddhist
 fane, at the foot of some hill; or some unsullied houses, hidden in a
 grove, tenanted by rationalistic priestesses; either extensive corridors
 and winding grottoes; or square buildings, and circular pavilions. but
 chia cheng had not the energy to enter any of these places, for as he
 had not had any rest for ever so long, his legs felt shaky and his feet
 weak.
 
suddenly they also discerned ahead of them court disclose itself to
 view.
 
"when we get there," chia cheng suggested, "we must have little rest."
 straightway as uttered the remark, led them in, and winding round
 the jade-green peach-trees, covered with blossom, they passed through
 the bamboo fence and flower-laden hedge, which were twisted in such a
 way as to form circular, cavelike gateway, when unexpectedly appeared
 before their eyes an enclosure with whitewashed walls, in which verdant
 willows drooped in every direction.
 
chia cheng entered the gateway in company with the whole party. along
 the whole length of both sides extended covered passages, connected with
 each other; while in the court were laid out several rockeries. in one
 quarter were planted number of banana trees; on the opposite stood a
 plant of begonia from hsi fu. its appearance was like an open umbrella.
 the gossamer hanging (from its branches) resembled golden threads. the
 corollas (seemed) to spurt out cinnabar.
 
"what beautiful flower! what beautiful flower!" ejaculated the whole
 party with one voice; "begonias are verily to be found; but never before
 have we seen anything the like of this in beauty."
 
"this is called the maiden begonia and is, in fact, foreign species,"
 chia cheng observed. "there's homely tradition that it is because it
 emanates from the maiden kingdom that its flowers are most prolific; but
 this is likewise erratic talk and devoid of common sense."
 
"they are, after all," rejoined the whole company, "so unlike others (we
 have seen), that what's said about the maiden kingdom is, we are
 inclined to believe, possibly fact."
 
"i presume," interposed pao-yü, "that some clever bard or poet,
 (perceiving) that this flower was red like cosmetic, delicate as if
 propped up in sickness, and that it closely resembled the nature of a
 young lady, gave it, consequently, the name of maiden! people in the
 world will propagate idle tales, all of which are unavoidably treated as
 gospel!"
 
"we receive (with thanks) your instructions; what excellent
 explanation!" they all remarked unanimously, and as they expressed these
 words, the whole company took their seats on the sofas under the
 colonnade.
 
"let's think of some original text or other for motto," chia cheng
 having suggested, one of the companions opined that the two characters:
 "banana and stork" would be felicitous; while another one was of the
 idea that what would be faultless would be: "collected splendour and
 waving elegance!"
 
"'collected splendour and waving elegance' is excellent," chia cheng
 observed addressing himself to the party; and pao-yü himself, while also
 extolling it as beautiful, went on to say: "there's only one thing
 however to be regretted!"
 
"what about regret?" the company inquired.
 
"in this place," pao-yü explained, "are set out both bananas as well as
 begonias, with the intent of secretly combining in them the two
 properties of red and green; and if mention of one of them be made, and
 the other be omitted, (the device) won't be good enough for selection."
 
"what would you then suggest?" chia cheng asked.
 
"i would submit the four words, 'the red (flowers) are fragrant, the
 green (banana leaves) like jade,' which would render complete the
 beauties of both (the begonias and bananas)."
 
"it isn't good! it isn't good!" chia cheng remonstrated as shook his
 head; and while passing this remark, conducted the party into the
 house, where they noticed that the internal arrangements effected
 differed from those in other places, as partitions could, in fact, be
 discerned. indeed, the four sides were all alike covered with boards
 carved hollow with fretwork, (in designs consisting) either of rolling
 clouds and hundreds of bats; or of the three friends of the cold season
 of the year, (fir, bamboo and almond); of scenery and human beings, or
 of birds or flowers; either of clusters of decoration, or of relics of
 olden times; either of ten thousand characters of happiness or of ten
 thousand characters of longevity. the various kinds of designs had been
 all carved by renowned hands, in variegated colours, inlaid with gold,
 and studded with precious gems; while on shelf upon shelf were either
 arranged collections of books, or tripods were laid out; either pens and
 inkslabs were distributed about, or vases with flowers set out, or
 figured pots were placed about; the designs of the shelves being either
 round or square; or similar to sunflowers or banana leaves; or like
 links, half overlapping each other. and in very truth they resembled
 bouquets of flowers or clusters of tapestry, with all their fretwork so
 transparent. suddenly (the eye was struck) by variegated gauzes pasted
 (on the wood-work), actually forming small windows; and of sudden by
 fine thin silks lightly overshadowing (the fretwork) just as if there
 were, after all, secret doors. the whole walls were in addition traced,
 with regard to symmetry, with outlines of the shapes of curios and
 nick-nacks in imitation of lutes, double-edged swords, hanging bottles
 and the like, the whole number of which, though (apparently) suspended
 on the walls, were all however on same level with the surface of the
 partition walls.
 
"what fine ingenuity!" they all exclaimed extollingly; "what labour
 they must have been to carry out!"
 
chia cheng had actually stepped in; but scarcely had they reached the
 second stage, before the whole party readily lost sight of the way by
 which they had come in. they glanced on the left, and there stood a
 door, through which they could go. they cast their eyes on the right,
 and there was window which suddenly impeded their progress. they went
 forward, but there again they were obstructed by bookcase. they turned
 their heads round, and there too stood windows pasted with transparent
 gauze and available door-ways: but the moment they came face to face
 with the door, they unexpectedly perceived that whole company of
 people had likewise walked in, just in front of them, whose appearance
 resembled their own in every respect. but it was only mirror. and when
 they rounded the mirror, they detected still larger number of doors.
 
"sir," chia chen remarked with grin; "if you'll follow out through
 this door, we'll forthwith get into the back-court; and once out of the
 back-court, we shall be, at all events, nearer than we were before."
 
taking the lead, conducted chia cheng and the whole party round two
 gauze mosquito houses, when they verily espied door through which they
 made their exit, into court, replete with stands of cinnamon roses.
 passing round the flower-laden hedge, the only thing that spread before
 their view was pure stream impeding their advance. the whole company
 was lost in admiration. "where does this water again issue from?" they
 cried.
 
chia chen pointed to spot at distance. "starting originally," he
 explained, "from that water-gate, it runs as far as the mouth of that
 cave, when from among the hills on the north-east side, it is introduced
 into that village, where again diverging channel has been opened and
 it is made to flow in south-westerly direction; the whole volume of
 water then runs to this spot, where collecting once more in one place,
 it issues, on its outward course, from beneath that wall."
 
"it's most ingenious!" they one and all exclaimed, after they had
 listened to him; but, as they uttered these words, they unawares
 realised that lofty hill obstructed any further progress. the whole
 party felt very hazy about the right road. but "come along after me,"
 chia chen smilingly urged, as at once went ahead and showed the way,
 whereupon the company followed in his steps, and as soon as they turned
 round the foot of the hill, level place and broad road lay before
 them; and wide before their faces appeared the main entrance.
 
"this is charming! this is delightful!" the party unanimously exclaimed,
 "what wits must have been ransacked, and ingenuity attained, so as to
 bring things to this extreme degree of excellence!"
 
forthwith the party egressed from the garden, and pao-yü's heart
 anxiously longed for the society of the young ladies in the inner
 quarters, but as did not hear chia cheng bid him go, had help
 but to follow him into the library. but suddenly chia cheng bethought
 himself of him. "what," said, "you haven't gone yet! the old lady
 will i fear be anxious on your account; and is it pray that you haven't
 as yet had enough walking?"
 
pao-yü at length withdrew out of the library. on his arrival in the
 court, page, who had been in attendance on chia cheng, at once pressed
 forward, and took hold of him fast in his arms. "you've been lucky
 enough," said, "to-day to have been in master's good graces! just a
 while back when our old mistress despatched servants to come on several
 occasions and ask after you, we replied that master was pleased with
 you; for had we given any other answer, her ladyship would have sent to
 fetch you to go in, and you wouldn't have had an opportunity of
 displaying your talents. every one admits that the several stanzas you
 recently composed were superior to those of the whole company put
 together; but you must, after the good luck you've had to-day, give us a
 tip!"
 
"i'll give each one of you tiao," pao-yü rejoined smirkingly.
 
"who of us hasn't seen tiao?" they all exclaimed, "let's have that
 purse of yours, and have done with it!"
 
saying this, one by one advanced and proceeded to unloosen the purse,
 and to unclasp the fan-case; and allowing pao-yü time to make any
 remonstrance, they stripped him of every ornament in the way of
 appendage which carried about on his person. "whatever we do let's
 escort him home!" they shouted, and one after another hustled round him
 and accompanied him as far as dowager lady chia's door.
 
her ladyship was at this moment awaiting his arrival, so that when she
 saw him walk in, and she found out that (chia cheng) had not bullied
 him, she felt, of course, extremely delighted. but not long interval
 elapsed before hsi jen came to serve the tea; and when she perceived
 that on his person not one of the ornaments remained, she consequently
 smiled and inquired: "have all the things that you had on you been again
 taken away by these barefaced rascals?"
 
as soon as lin tai-yü heard this remark, she crossed over to him and saw
 at glance that not one single trinket was, in fact, left. "have you
 also given them," she felt constrained to ask, "the purse that i gave
 you? well, by and by, when you again covet anything of mine, i shan't
 let you have it."
 
after uttering these words, she returned into her apartment in high
 dudgeon, and taking the scented bag, which pao-yü had asked her to make
 for him, and which she had not as yet finished, she picked up pair of
 scissors, and instantly cut it to pieces.
 
pao-yü noticing that she had lost her temper, came after her with
 hurried step, but the bag had already been cut with the scissors; and as
 pao-yü observed how extremely fine and artistic this scented bag was, in
 spite of its unfinished state, verily deplored that it should have
 been rent to pieces for rhyme or reason. promptly therefore
 unbuttoning his coat, produced from inside the lapel the purse, which
 had been fastened there. "look at this!" remarked as handed it to
 tai-yü; "what kind of thing is this! have i given away to any one what
 was yours?" lin tai-yü, upon seeing how much prized it as to wear it
 within his clothes, became alive to the fact that it was done with
 intent, as feared lest any one should take it away; and as this
 conviction made her sorry that she had been so impetuous as to have cut
 the scented bag, she lowered her head and uttered not word.
 
"there was really need for you to have cut it," pao-yü observed; "but
 as i know that you're loth to give anything, what do you say to my
 returning even this purse?"
 
with these words, threw the purse in her lap and walked off; which
 vexed tai-yü so much the more that, after giving way to tears, she took
 up the purse in her hands to also destroy it with the scissors, when
 pao-yü precipitately turned round and snatched it from her grasp.
 
"my dear cousin," smilingly pleaded, "do spare it!" and as tai-yü
 dashed down the scissors and wiped her tears: "you needn't," she urged,
 "be kind to at one moment, and unkind at another; if you wish to have
 tiff, why then let's part company!" but as she spoke, she lost control
 over her temper, and, jumping on her bed, she lay with her face turned
 towards the inside, and set to work drying her eyes.
 
pao-yü could not refrain from approaching her. "my dear cousin, my own
 cousin," added, "i confess my fault!"
 
"go and find pao-yü!" dowager lady chia thereupon gave shout from
 where she was in the front apartment, and all the attendants explained
 that was in miss lin's room.
 
"all right, that will do! that will do!" her ladyship rejoined, when she
 heard this reply; "let the two cousins play together; his father kept
 him short while back under check, for ever so long, so let him have
 some distraction. but the only thing is that you mustn't allow them to
 have any quarrels." to which the servants in body expressed their
 obedience.
 
tai-yü, unable to put up with pao-yü's importunity, felt compelled to
 rise. "your object seems to be," she remarked, "not to let have any
 rest. if it is, i'll run away from you." saying which, she there and
 then was making her way out, when pao-yü protested with face full of
 smiles: "wherever you go, i'll follow!" and as he, at the same time,
 took the purse and began to fasten it on him, tai-yü stretched out her
 hand, and snatching it away, "you say you don't want it," she observed,
 "and now you put it on again! i'm really much ashamed on your account!"
 and these words were still on her lips when with sound of ch'ih, she
 burst out laughing.
 
"my dear cousin," pao-yü added, "to-morrow do work another scented bag
 for me!"
 
"that too will rest upon my good pleasure," tai-yü rejoined.
 
as they conversed, they both left the room together and walked into
 madame wang's suite of apartments, where, as luck would have it,
 pao-ch'ai was also seated.
 
unusual commotion prevailed, at this time, over at madame wang's, for
 the fact is that chia had already come back from ku su, where had
 selected twelve young girls, and settled about an instructor, as well as
 about the theatrical properties and the other necessaries. and as mrs.
 hsüeh had by this date moved her quarters into separate place on the
 northeast side, and taken up her abode in secluded and quiet house,
 (madame wang) had had repairs of distinct character executed in the
 pear fragrance court, and then issued directions that the instructor
 should train the young actresses in this place; and casting her choice
 upon all the women, who had, in days of old, received training in
 singing, and who were now old matrons with white hair, she bade them
 have an eye over them and keep them in order. which done, she enjoined
 chia to assume the chief control of all matters connected with the
 daily and monthly income and outlay, as well as of the accounts of all
 articles in use of every kind and size.
 
lin chih-hsiao also came to report: "that the twelve young nuns and
 taoist girls, who had been purchased after proper selection, had all
 arrived, and that the twenty newly-made taoist coats had also been
 received. that there was besides maiden, who though devoted to
 asceticism, kept her chevelure unshaved; that she was originally a
 denizen of suchow, of family whose ancestors were also people of
 letters and official status; that as from her youth up she had been
 stricken with much sickness, (her parents) had purchased good number
 of substitutes (to enter the convent), but all with relief to her,
 until at last this girl herself entered the gate of abstraction when she
 at once recovered. that hence it was that she grew her hair, while she
 devoted herself to an ascetic life; that she was this year eighteen
 years of age, and that the name given to her was miao yü; that her
 father and mother were, at this time, already dead; that she had only by
 her side, two old nurses and young servant girl to wait upon her; that
 she was most proficient in literature, and exceedingly well versed in
 the classics and canons; and that she was likewise very attractive as
 far as looks went; that having heard that in the city of ch'ang-an,
 there were vestiges of kuan yin and relics of the canons inscribed on
 leaves, she followed, last year, her teacher (to the capital). she now
 lives," said, "in the lao nunnery, outside the western gate; her
 teacher was great expert in prophetic divination, but she died in the
 winter of last year, and her dying words were that as it was not
 suitable for (miao yü) to return to her native place, she should await
 here, as something in the way of denouement was certain to turn up;
 and this is the reason why she hasn't as yet borne the coffin back to
 her home!"
 
"if such be the case," madame wang readily suggested, "why shouldn't we
 bring her here?"
 
"if we are to ask her," lin chih-hsiao's wife replied, "she'll say that
 marquis' family and duke's household are sure, in their honourable
 position, to be overbearing to people; and i had rather not go."
 
"as she's the daughter of an official family," madame wang continued,
 "she's bound to be inclined to be somewhat proud; but what harm is there
 to our sending her written invitation to ask her to come!"
 
lin chih-hsiao's wife assented; and leaving the room, she made the
 secretary write an invitation and then went to ask miao yü. the next day
 servants were despatched, and carriages and sedan chairs were got ready
 to go and bring her over.
 
what subsequently transpired is not as yet known, but, reader, listen to
 the account given in the following chapter.
 



chapter xviii.
 
his majesty shows magnanimous bounty.
 the imperial consort yuan pays visit to her parents.
 the happiness of family gathering.
 pao-yü displays his polished talents.
 

but let us resume our story. servant came, at this moment, to report
 that for the works in course of execution, they were waiting for gauze
 and damask silk to paste on various articles, and that they requested
 lady feng to go and open the depôt for them to take the gauze and silk,
 while another servant also came to ask lady feng to open the treasury
 for them to receive the gold and silver ware. and as madame wang, the
 waiting-maids and the other domestics of the upper rooms had all no
 leisure, pao-ch'ai suggested: "don't let us remain in here and be in the
 way of their doing what there is to be done, and of going where they
 have to go," and saying this, she betook herself, escorted by pao-yü and
 the rest, into ying ch'un's rooms.
 
madame wang continued day after day in great state of flurry and
 confusion, straight up to within the tenth moon, by which time every
 arrangement had been completed, and the overseers had all handed in a
 clear statement of their accounts. the curios and writing materials,
 wherever needed, had all already been laid out and everything got ready,
 and the birds (and animals), from the stork, the deer and rabbits to the
 chickens, geese and the like, had all been purchased and handed over to
 be reared in the various localities in the garden; and over at chia
 se's, had also been learnt twenty miscellaneous plays, while company
 of young nuns and taoist priestesses had likewise the whole number of
 them, mastered the intonation of buddhist classics and incantations.
 
chia cheng after this, at length, was slightly composed in mind, and
 cheerful at heart; and having further invited dowager lady chia and
 other inmates to go into the garden, deliberated with them on, and
 made arrangements for, every detail in such befitting manner that not
 the least trifle remained for which suitable provision had not been
 made; and chia cheng eventually mustered courage to indite memorial,
 and on the very day on which the memorial was presented, decree was
 received fixing upon the fifteenth day of the first moon of the ensuing
 year, the very day of the shang yuan festival, for the honourable
 consorts to visit their homes.
 
upon the receipt of this decree, with which the chia family was
 honoured, they had still less leisure, both by day as well as by night;
 so much so that they could not even properly observe the new year
 festivities. but in twinkle of the eye, the festival of the full moon
 of the first moon drew near; and beginning from the eighth day of the
 first moon, eunuchs issued from the palace and inspected beforehand the
 various localities, the apartments in which the imperial consort was to
 change her costume; the place where she would spend her leisure moments;
 the spot where she would receive the conventionalities; the premises
 where the banquets would be spread; the quarters where she would retire
 for rest.
 
there were also eunuchs who came to assume the patrol of the grounds and
 the direction of the defences; and they brought along with them good
 many minor eunuchs, whose duty it was to look after the safety of the
 various localities, to screen the place with enclosing curtains, to
 instruct the inmates and officials of the chia mansion whither to go out
 and whence to come in from, what side the viands should be brought in
 from, where to report matters, and in the observance of every kind of
 etiquette; and for outside the mansion, there were, on the other hand,
 officers from the board of works, and superintendent of the police, of
 the "five cities," in charge of the sweeping of the streets and roads,
 and the clearing away of loungers. while chia she and the others
 superintended the workmen in such things as the manufacture of flowered
 lanterns and fireworks.
 
the fourteenth day arrived and everything was in order; but on this
 night, one and all whether high or low, did not get wink of sleep; and
 when the fifteenth came, every one, at the fifth watch, beginning from
 dowager lady chia and those who enjoyed any official status, appeared in
 full gala dress, according to their respective ranks. in the garden, the
 curtains were, by this time, flapping like dragons, the portieres flying
 about like phoenixes with variegated plumage. gold and silver glistened
 with splendour. pearls and precious gems shed out their brilliant
 lustre. the tripod censers burnt the pai-ho incense. in the vases were
 placed evergreens. silence and stillness prevailed, and not man
 ventured so much as to cough.
 
chia she and the other men were standing outside the door giving on to
 the street on the west; and old lady chia and the other ladies were
 outside the main entrance of the jung mansion at the head of the street,
 while at the mouth of the lane were placed screens to rigorously
 obstruct the public gaze. they were unable to bear the fatigue of any
 further waiting when, at an unexpected moment, eunuch arrived on
 horseback, and chia cheng went up to meet him, and ascertained what
 tidings was the bearer of.
 
"it's as yet far too early," rejoined the eunuch, "for at one o'clock
 (her highness) will have her evening repast, and at two she has to
 betake herself to the palace of precious perception to worship buddha.
 at five, she will enter the palace of great splendour to partake of a
 banquet, and to see the lanterns, after which, she will request his
 majesty's permission; so that, i'm afraid, it won't be earlier than
 seven before they set out."
 
lady feng's ear caught what was said. "if such be the case," she
 interposed, "may it please your venerable ladyship, and you, my lady, to
 return for while to your apartments, and wait; and if you come when
 it's time you'll be here none too late."
 
dowager lady chia and the other ladies immediately left for time and
 suited their own convenience, and as everything in the garden devolved
 upon lady feng to supervise, she ordered the butlers to take the eunuchs
 and give them something to eat and drink; and at the same time, she sent
 word that candles should be brought in and that the lanterns in the
 various places should be lit.
 
but unexpectedly was heard from outside the continuous patter of horses
 running, whereupon about ten eunuchs hurried in gasping and out of
 breath. they clapped their hands, and the several eunuchs (who had come
 before), understanding the signal, and knowing that the party had
 arrived, stood in their respective positions; while chia she, at the
 head of all the men of the clan, remained at the western street door,
 and dowager lady chia, at the head of the female relatives of the
 family, waited outside the principal entrance to do the honours.
 
for long interval, everything was plunged in silence and quiet; when
 suddenly two eunuchs on horseback were espied advancing with leisurely
 step. reaching the western street gate, they dismounted, and, driving
 their horses beyond the screens, they forthwith took their stand facing
 the west. after another long interval, second couple arrived, and went
 likewise through the same proceedings. in short time, drew near about
 ten couples, when, at length, were heard the gentle strains of music,
 and couple by couple advanced with banners, dragons, with fans made with
 phoenix feathers, and palace flabella of pheasant plumes; and those
 besides who carried gold-washed censers burning imperial incense. next
 in order was brought past state umbrella of golden yellow, with
 crooked handle and embroidered with seven phoenixes; after which quickly
 followed the crown, robe, girdle and shoes.
 
there were likewise eunuchs, who took part in the procession, holding
 scented handkerchiefs and embroidered towels, cups for rinsing the
 mouth, dusters and other such objects; and company after company went
 past, when, at the rear, approached with stately step eight eunuchs
 carrying an imperial sedan chair, of golden yellow, with gold knob and
 embroidered with phoenixes.
 
old lady chia and the other members of the family hastily fell on their
 knees, but eunuch came over at once to raise her ladyship and the
 rest; and the imperial chair was thereupon carried through the main
 entrance, the ceremonial gate and into court on the eastern side, at
 the door of which stood eunuch, who prostrated himself and invited
 (her highness) to dismount and change her costume.
 
having forthwith carried her inside the gate, the eunuchs dispersed; and
 only the maids-of-honour and ladies-in-waiting ushered yuan ch'un out of
 the chair, when what mainly attracted her eye in the park was the
 brilliant lustre of the flowered lamps of every colour, all of which
 were made of gauze or damask, and were beautiful in texture, and out of
 the common run; while on the upper side was flat lantern with the
 inscription in four characters, "regarded (by his majesty's) benevolence
 and permeated by his benefits."
 
yuan ch'un entered the apartment and effected the necessary changes in
 her toilette; after which, she again egressed, and, mounting her chair,
 she made her entry into the garden, when she perceived the smoke of
 incense whirling and twirling, and the reflection of the flowers
 confusing the eyes. far and wide, the rays of light, shed by the
 lanterns, intermingled their brilliancy, while, from time to time, fine
 strains of music sounded with clamorous din. but it would be impossible
 to express adequately the perfect harmony in the aspect of this scene,
 and the grandeur of affluence and splendour.
 
the imperial consort of the chia family, we must now observe, upon
 catching sight, from the interior of her chair, of the picture presented
 within as well as without the confines of this garden, shook her head
 and heaved sigh. "what lavish extravagance! what excessive waste!" she
 soliloquised.
 
but of sudden was again seen eunuch who, on his knees, invited her
 to get into boat; and the chia consort descended from the chair and
 stepped into the craft, when the expanse of limpid stream met her
 gaze, whose grandeur resembled that of the dragon in its listless
 course. the stone bannisters, on each side, were one mass of air-tight
 lanterns, of every colour, made of crystal or glass, which threw out a
 light like the lustre of silver or the brightness of snow.
 
the willow, almond and the whole lot of trees, on the upper side, were,
 it is true, without blossom and leaves; but pongee and damask silks,
 paper and lustring had been employed, together with rice-paper, to make
 flowers of, which had been affixed on the branches. upon each tree were
 suspended thousands of lanterns; and what is more, the lotus and aquatic
 plants, the ducks and water fowl in the pond had all, in like manner,
 been devised out of conches and clams, plumes and feathers. the various
 lanterns, above and below, vied in refulgence. in real truth, it was a
 crystal region, world of pearls and precious stones. on board the boat
 were also every kind of lanterns representing such designs as are used
 on flower-pots, pearl-laden portieres, embroidered curtains, oars of
 cinnamon wood, and paddles of magnolia, which need not of course be
 minutely described.
 
they entered landing with stone curb; and on this landing was
 erected flat lantern upon which were plainly visible the four
 characters the "persicary beach and flower-laden bank." but, reader, you
 have heard how that these four characters "the persicary beach and the
 flower-laden bank," the motto "a phoenix comes with dignified air," and
 the rest owe one and all their origin to the unexpected test to which
 chia cheng submitted, on previous occasion, pao-yü's literary
 abilities; but how did it come about that they were actually adopted?
 
you must remember that the chia family had been, generation after
 generation, given to the study of letters, so that it was only natural
 that there should be among them one or two renowned writers of verses;
 for how could they ever resemble the families of such upstarts, who only
 employ puerile expressions as makeshift to get through what they have
 to do? but the why and the wherefore must be sought in the past. the
 consort, belonging to the chia mansion, had, before she entered the
 palace, been, from her infancy, also brought up by dowager lady chia;
 and when pao-yü was subsequently added to the family, she was the eldest
 sister and pao-yü the youngest child. the chia consort, bearing in mind
 how that she had, when her mother was verging on old age, at length
 obtained this younger brother, she for this reason doated upon him with
 single love; and as they were besides companions in their attendance
 upon old lady chia, they were inseparable for even moment. before
 pao-yü had entered school, and when three or four years of age, had
 already received oral instruction from the imperial spouse chia from the
 contents of several books and had committed to memory several thousands
 of characters, for though they were only sister and brother, they were
 like mother and child. and after she had entered the palace, she was
 wont time and again to have letters taken out to her father and her
 cousins, urgently recommending them to be careful with his bringing up,
 that if they were not strict, could not possibly become good for
 anything, and that if they were immoderately severe, there was the
 danger of something unpropitious befalling him, with the result,
 moreover, that his grandmother would be stricken with sorrow; and this
 solicitude on his account was never for an instant lost sight of by her.
 
hence it was that chia cheng having, few days back, heard his teacher
 extol him for his extreme abilities, forthwith put him to the test on
 the occasion of their ramble through the garden. and though (his
 compositions) were not in the bold style of writer of note, yet they
 were productions of their own family, and would, moreover, be
 instrumental, when the chia consort had her notice attracted by them,
 and come to know that they were devised by her beloved brother, in also
 not rendering nugatory the anxious interest which she had ever
 entertained on his behalf, and he, therefore, purposely adopted what had
 been suggested by pao-yü; while for those places, for which on that day
 devices had been completed, good number were again subsequently
 composed to make up what was wanted.
 
after the chia consort had, for we shall now return to her, perused the
 four characters, she gave smile. "the two words 'flower-laden bank,'"
 she said, "are really felicitous, so what use was there for 'persicary
 beach?'"
 
when the eunuch in waiting heard this observation, promptly jumped
 off the craft on to the bank, and at flying pace hurried to
 communicate it to chia cheng, and chia cheng instantly effected the
 necessary alteration.
 
by this time the craft had reached the inner bank, and leaving the boat,
 and mounting into her sedan chair, she in due course contemplated the
 magnificent jade-like palace; the hall of cinnamon wood, lofty and
 sublime; and the marble portals with the four characters in bold style:
 the "precious confines of heavenly spirits," which the chia consort gave
 directions should be changed for the four words denoting: "additional
 hall (for the imperial consort) on visit to her parents." and
 forthwith making her entrance into the travelling lodge her gaze was
 attracted by torches burning in the court encompassing the heavens,
 fragments of incense strewn on the ground, fire-like trees and gem-like
 flowers, gold-like windows and jade-like bannisters. but it would be
 difficult to give full account of the curtains, which rolled up (as
 fine as a) shrimp's moustache; of the carpets of other skins spread on
 the floor; of the tripods exhaling the fragrant aroma of the brain of
 the musk deer; of the screens in row resembling fans made of pheasant
 tails. indeed, the gold-like doors and the windows like jade were
 suggestive of the abode of spirits; while the halls made of cinnamon
 wood and the palace of magnolia timber, of the very homes of the
 imperial secondary consorts.
 
"why is it," the chia consort inquired, "that there is tablet in this
 hall?"
 
the eunuch in waiting fell on his knees. "this is the main hall," he
 reverently replied, "and the officials, outside the palace, did not
 presume to take upon themselves to suggest any motto."
 
the chia consort shook her head and said not word; whereupon the
 eunuch, who acted as master of ceremonies, requested her majesty to
 ascend the throne and receive homage. the band stationed on the two
 flights of steps struck up tune, while two eunuchs ushered chia she,
 chia cheng and the other members on to the moonlike stage, where they
 arranged themselves in order and ascended into the hall, but when the
 ladies-in-waiting transmitted her commands that the homage could be
 dispensed with, they at once retraced their footsteps.
 
(the master of the ceremonies), in like manner led forward the dowager
 lady of the jung kuo mansion, as well as the female relatives, from the
 steps on the east side, on to the moon-like stage; where they were
 placed according to their ranks. but the maids-of-honour again commanded
 that they should dispense with the ceremony, so they likewise promptly
 withdrew.
 
after tea had been thrice presented, the chia consort descended the
 throne, and the music ceased. she retired into side room to change her
 costume, and the private chairs were then got ready for her visit to her
 parents. issuing from the garden, she came into the main quarters
 belonging to dowager lady chia, where she was bent upon observing the
 domestic conventionalities, when her venerable ladyship, and the other
 members of the family, prostrated themselves in body before her, and
 made her desist. tears dropped down from the eyes of the chia consort as
 (she and her relatives) mutually came forward, and greeted each other,
 and as with one hand she grasped old lady chia, and with the other she
 held madame wang, the three had plenty in their hearts which they were
 fain to speak about; but, unable as each one of them was to give
 utterance to their feelings, all they did was to sob and to weep, as
 they kept face to face to each other; while madame hsing, widow li wan,
 wang hsi-feng, and the three sisters: ying ch'un, t'an ch'un, and hsi
 ch'un, stood aside in body shedding tears and saying not word.
 
after long time, the chia consort restrained her anguish, and forcing
 smile, she set to work to reassure old lady chia and madame wang.
 "having in days gone by," she urged, "been sent to that place where no
 human being can be seen, i have to-day after extreme difficulty returned
 home; and now that you ladies and i have been reunited, instead of
 chatting or laughing we contrariwise give way to incessant tears! but
 shortly, i shall be gone, and who knows when we shall be able again to
 even see each other!"
 
when she came to this sentence, they could not help bursting into
 another tit of crying; and madame hsing hastened to come forward, and to
 console dowager lady chia and the rest. but when the chia consort
 resumed her seat, and one by one came again, in turn, to exchange
 salutations, they could not once more help weeping and sobbing for a
 time.
 
next in order, were the managers and servants of the eastern and western
 mansions to perform their obeisance in the outer pavilion; and after the
 married women and waiting-maids had concluded their homage, the chia
 consort heaved sigh. "how many relatives," she observed, "there are
 all of whom, alas! i may not see."
 
"there are here now," madame wang rejoined with due respect, "kindred
 with outside family names, such as mrs. hsüeh, née wang, pao-ch'ai, and
 tai-yü waiting for your commands; but as they are distant relatives, and
 without official status, they do not venture to arrogate to themselves
 the right of entering into your presence." but the chia consort issued
 directions that they should be invited to come that they should see each
 other; and in short while, mrs. hsüeh and the other relatives walked
 in, but as they were on the point of performing the rites, prescribed by
 the state, she bade them relinquish the observance so that they came
 forward, and each, in turn, alluded to what had transpired during the
 long separation.
 
pao ch'in also and few other waiting-maids, whom the chia consort had
 originally taken along with her into the palace, knocked their heads
 before dowager lady chia, but her ladyship lost time in raising them
 up, and in bidding them go into separate suite of rooms to be
 entertained; and as for the retainers, eunuchs as well as
 maids-of-honour, ladies-in-waiting and every attendant, there were
 needless to say, those in the two places, the ning mansion and chia
 she's residence, to wait upon them; there only remained three or four
 young eunuchs to answer the summons.
 
the mother and daughter and her cousins conversed for some time on what
 had happened during the protracted separation, as well as on domestic
 affairs and their private feelings, when chia cheng likewise advanced as
 far as the other side of the portiere, and inquired after her health,
 and the chia consort from inside performed the homage and other
 conventionalities (due to her parent).
 
"the families of farmers," she further went on to say to her father,
 "feed on salted cabbage, and clothe in cotton material; but they readily
 enjoy the happiness of the relationships established by heaven! we,
 however, relatives though we now be of one bone and flesh, are, with all
 our affluence and honours, living apart from each other, and deriving no
 happiness whatsoever!"
 
chia cheng, on his part endeavoured, to restrain his tears. "i
 belonged," rejoined, "to rustic and poor family; and among that
 whole number of pigeons and pheasants, how could i have imagined that i
 would have obtained the blessing of hidden phoenix! of late all for
 the sake of your honourable self, his majesty, above, confers upon us
 his heavenly benefits; while we, below, show forth the virtue of our
 ancestors! and it is mainly because the vital principle of the hills,
 streams, sun, and moon, and the remote virtue of our ancestors have been
 implanted in you alone that this good fortune has attained cheng and
 my wife! moreover, the present emperor, bearing in mind the great bounty
 shewn by heaven and earth in promoting ceaseless succession, has
 vouchsafed more generous act of grace than has ever been displayed
 from old days to the present. and although we may besmear our liver and
 brain in the mire, how could we show our gratitude, even to so slight a
 degree as one ten-thousandth part. but all i can do is, in the daytime,
 to practise diligence, vigilance at night, and loyalty in my official
 duties. my humble wish is that his majesty, my master, may live ten
 thousand years and see thousands of autumns, so as to promote the
 welfare of all mankind in the world! and you, worthy imperial consort,
 must, on account, be mindful of cheng and my wife, decrepid as we
 are in years. what i would solicit more than anything is that you should
 be more careful of yourself, and that you should be diligent and
 reverential in your service to his majesty, with the intent that you may
 not prove ungrateful of his affectionate regard and bountiful grace."
 
the chia consort, on the other hand, enjoined "that much as it was
 expedient to display zeal, in the management of state matters, it
 behoved him, when had any leisure, to take good care of himself, and
 that should not, whatever did, give way to solicitude on her
 behalf." and chia cheng then went on to say "that the various
 inscriptions in the park over the pavilions, terraces, halls and
 residences had been all composed by pao-yü, and, that in the event of
 there being one or two that could claim her attention, would be happy
 if it would please her to at once favour him with its name." whereupon
 the imperial consort yüan, when she heard that pao-yü could compose
 verses, forthwith exclaimed with smile: "he has in very truth made
 progress!"
 
after chia cheng had retired out of the hall, the chia consort made it a
 point to ask: "how is it that i do not see pao-yü?" and dowager lady
 chia explained: "an outside male relative as is, and without official
 rank, does not venture to appear before you of his own accord."
 
"bring him in!" the imperial consort directed; whereupon young eunuch
 ushered pao-yü in. after had first complied with the state
 ceremonies, she bade him draw near to her, and taking his hand, she held
 it in her lap, and, as she went on to caress his head and neck, she
 smiled and said: "he's grown considerably taller than was before;"
 but she had barely concluded this remark, when her tears ran down as
 profuse as rain. mrs. yu, lady feng, and the rest pressed forward. "the
 banquet is quite ready," they announced, "and your highness is requested
 to favour the place with your presence."
 
the imperial consort yuan stood up and asking pao-yü to lead the way,
 she followed in his steps, along with the whole party, and betook
 herself on foot as far as the entrance of the garden gate, whence she at
 once espied, in the lustre shed by the lanterns, every kind of
 decorations. entering the garden, they first passed the spots with the
 device "a phoenix comes with dignified air," "the red (flowers are)
 fragrant and the green (banana leaves like) jade!" "the sign on the
 apricot tree is visible," "the fragrance pure of the ligularia and
 iris," and other places; and ascending the towers they walked up the
 halls, forded the streams and wound round the hills; contemplating as
 they turned their gaze from side to side, each place arranged in a
 different style, and each kind of article laid out in unique designs.
 the chia consort expressed her admiration in most profuse eulogiums, and
 then went on to advise them: "that it was not expedient to indulge in
 future in such excessive extravagance and that all these arrangements
 were over and above what should have been done."
 
presently they reached the main pavilion, where she commanded that they
 could dispense with the rites and take their seats. sumptuous banquet
 was laid out, at which dowager lady chia and the other ladies occupied
 the lower seats and entertained each other, while mrs. yu, widow li wan,
 lady feng and the rest presented the soup and handed the cups. the
 imperial consort yuan subsequently directed that the pencils and
 inkslabs should be brought, and with her own hands she opened the silken
 paper. she chose the places she liked, and conferred upon them name;
 and devising general designation for the garden, she called it the ta
 kuan garden (broad vista), while for the tablet of the main pavilion the
 device she composed ran as follows: "be mindful of the grace and
 remember the equity (of his majesty);" with this inscription on the
 antithetical scrolls:
 
mercy excessive heaven and earth display,
 and it men young and old hail gratefully;
 from old till now they pour their bounties great
 those rich gifts which cathay and all states permeate.
 
changing also the text: "a phoenix comes with dignified air for the
 hsiao hsiang lodge."
 
"the red (flowers are) fragrant and the green (banana leaves like)
 jade," she altered into "happy red and joyful green"; bestowing upon the
 place the appellation of the i hung court (joyful red). the spot where
 "the fragrance pure of the ligularia and iris," was inscribed, she
 called "the ligularia and the 'wu' weed court;" and where was "the sign
 in the apricot tree is visible," she designated "the cottage in the
 hills where dolichos is bleached." the main tower she called the broad
 vista tower. the lofty tower facing the east, she designated "the
 variegated and flowery hall;" bestowing on the line of buildings, facing
 the west, the appellation of "the hall of occult fragrance;" and besides
 these figured such further names as: "the hall of peppery wind," "the
 arbour of lotus fragrance," "the islet of purple caltrop," "the bank of
 golden lotus," and the like. there were also tablets with four
 characters such as: "the peach blossom and the vernal rain;" "the
 autumnal wind prunes the eloecocca," "the artemisia leaves and the night
 snow," and other similar names which could not all be placed on record.
 she furthermore directed that such tablets as were already put up,
 should not be dismounted, and she forthwith took the lead and composed
 an heptameter stanza, the burden of which was:
 
hills it enclasps, embraces streams, with skill it is laid out:
 what task the grounds to raise! the works to start and bring about!
 of scenery in heaven and amongst men store has been made;
 the name broad vista o'er the fragrant park should be engraved.
 
when she had finished writing, she observed smilingly, as she addressed
 herself to all the young ladies: "i have all along lacked the quality of
 sharpness and never besides been good at verses; as you, sisters, and
 all of you have ever been aware; but, on night like this i've been
 fain to do my best, with the object of escaping censure, and of not
 reflecting injustice on this scenery and nothing more. but some other
 day when i've got time, be it ever so little, i shall deem it my duty to
 make up what remains by inditing record of the broad vista garden, as
 well as song on my visit to my parents and other such literary
 productions in memory of the events of this day. you sisters and others
 must, each of you, in like manner compose stanza on the motto on each
 tablet, expressing your sentiments, as you please, without being
 restrained by any regard for my meagre ability. knowing as i do besides
 that pao-yü is, indeed, able to write verses, i feel the more delighted!
 but among his compositions, those i like the best are those in the two
 places, 'the hsiao hsiang lodge,' and 'the court of heng and wu;' and
 next those of 'the joyful red court,' and 'the cottage in the hills,
 where the dolichos is bleached.' as for grand sites like these four,
 there should be found some out-of-the-way expressions to insert in the
 verses so that they should be felicitous. the antithetical lines
 composed by you, (pao-yü), on former occasion are excellent, it is
 true; but you should now further indite for each place, pentameter
 stanza, so that by allowing to test you in my presence, you may not
 show yourself ungrateful for the trouble i have taken in teaching you
 from your youth up."
 
pao-yü had help but to assent, and descending from the hall, went
 off all alone to give himself up to reflection.
 
of the three ying ch'un, t'an ch'un, and hsi ch'un, t'an ch'un must be
 considered to have also been above the standard of her sisters, but she,
 in her own estimation, imagined it, in fact, difficult to compete with
 hsüeh pao-ch'ai and lin tai-yü. with alternative however than that of
 doing her best, she followed the example of all the rest with the sole
 purpose of warding off criticism. and li wan too succeeded, after much
 exertion, in putting together stanza.
 
the consort of the chia family perused in due order the verses written
 by the young ladies, the text of which is given below.
 
the lines written by ying ch'un on the tablet of "boundless spirits and
 blissful heart" were:
 
park laid out with scenery surpassing fine and rare!
 submissive to thy will, on boundless bliss bashful i write!
 who could believe that yonder scenes in this world found share!
 will not thy heart be charmed on thy visit by the sight?
 
these are the verses by t'an ch'un on the tablet of "all nature vies in
 splendour":
 
of aspect lofty and sublime is raised park of fame!
 honoured with thy bequest, my shallow lore fills with shame.
 words could e'er amply exhaust the beauteous skill,
 for lo! in very truth glory and splendour all things fill!
 
thus runs hsi ch'un's stanza on the tablet of the "conception of
 literary compositions":
 
the hillocks and the streams crosswise beyond thousand li extend!
 the towers and terraces 'midst the five-coloured clouds lofty ascend!
 in the resplendent radiance of both sun and moon the park it lies!
 the skill these scenes to raise the skill e'en essays to conceive
 outvies!
 
the lines composed by li wan on the tablet "grace and elegance,"
 consisted of:
 
the comely streams and hillocks clear, in double folds, embrace;
 e'en fairyland, forsooth, transcend they do in elegance and grace!
 the "fragrant plant" the theme is of the ballad fan, green-made.
 like drooping plum-bloom flap the lapel red and the hsiang gown.
 from prosperous times must have been handed down those pearls and
 jade.
 what bliss! the fairy on the jasper terrace will come down!
 when to our prayers she yields, this glorious park to contemplate,
 mortal must e'er be allowed these grounds to penetrate.
 
the ode by hsüeh pao-ch'ai on the tablet of "concentrated splendour and
 accumulated auspiciousness" was:
 
raised on the west of the imperial city, lo! the park stored with
 fragrant smell,
 shrouded by phoebe's radiant rays and clouds of good omen, in wondrous
 glory lies!
 the willows tall with joy exult that the parrots their nests have
 shifted from the dell.
 the bamboo groves, when laid, for the phoenix with dignity to come,
 were meant to rise.
 the very eve before the empress' stroll, elegant texts were ready and
 affixed.
 if even she her parents comes to see, how filial piety supreme must
 be!
 when i behold her beauteous charms and talents supernatural, with awe
 transfixed,
 one word, to utter more how can i troth ever presume, when shame
 overpowers me.
 
the distich by lin tai-yü on the tablet of "spiritual stream outside the
 world," ran thus:
 
th' imperial visit doth enhance joy and delight.
 this fairy land from mortal scenes what diff'rent sight!
 the comely grace it borrows of both hill and stream;
 and to the landscape it doth add charm supreme.
 the fumes of chin ku wine everything permeate;
 the flowers the inmate of the jade hall fascinate.
 the imperial favour to receive how blessed our lot!
 for oft the palace carriage will pass through this spot.
 
the chia consort having concluded the perusal of the verses, and
 extolled them for time: "after all," she went on to say with smile,
 "those composed by my two cousins, hsüeh pao-ch'ai and lin tai-yü,
 differ in excellence from those of all the rest; and neither i, stupid
 as i am, nor my sisters can attain their standard."
 
lin tao-yü had, in point of fact, made up her mind to display, on this
 evening, her extraordinary abilities to their best advantage, and to put
 down every one else, but contrary to her expectations the chia consort
 had expressed her desire that more than single stanza should be
 written on each tablet, so that unable, after all, to disregard her
 directions by writing anything in excess, she had help but to compose
 pentameter stanza, in an offhand way, merely with the intent of
 complying with her wishes.
 
pao-yü had by this time not completed his task. had just finished two
 stanzas on the hsiao hsiang lodge and the heng wu garden, and was just
 then engaged in composing verse on the "happy red court." in his draft
 figured line: "the (leaves) of jade-like green in spring are yet
 rolled up," which pao-ch'ai stealthily observed as she turned her eyes
 from side to side; and availing herself of the very first moment, when
 none of the company could notice her, she gave him nudge. "as her
 highness," she remarked, "doesn't relish the four characters,
 representing the red (flowers are) fragrant, and the green (banana
 leaves) like jade, she changed them, just while back, for 'the joyful
 red and gladsome green;' and if you deliberately now again employ these
 two words 'jade-like green,' won't it look as if you were bent upon
 being at variance with her? besides, very many are the old books, in
 which the banana leaves form the theme, so you had better think of
 another line and substitute it and have done with it!"
 
when pao-yü heard the suggestion made by pao-ch'ai, speedily replied,
 as wiped off the perspiration: "i can't at all just at present call
 to mind any passage from the contents of some old book."
 
"just simply take," proposed pao-ch'ai smilingly, "the character jade in
 jade-like green and change it into the character wax, that's all."
 
"does 'green wax,'" pao-yü inquired, "come out from anywhere?"
 
pao-ch'ai gently smacked her lips and nodded her head as she laughed. "i
 fear," she said, "that if, on an occasion like to-night, you show no
 more brains than this, by and by when you have to give any answers in
 the golden hall, to the questions (of the examiner), you will, really,
 forget (the very first four names) of chao, oh'ien, sun and li (out of
 the hundred)! what, have you so much as forgotten the first line of the
 poem by yü, of the t'ang dynasty, on the banana leaf:
 
"cold is the candle and without flame, the green wax dry?"
 
on hearing these words, pao-yü's mind suddenly became enlightened. "what
 fool i am!" added with simper; "i couldn't for the moment even
 remember the lines, ready-made though they were and staring at in my
 very eyes! sister, you really can be styled my teacher, little though
 you may have taught me, and i'll henceforward address you by other
 name than 'teacher,' and not call you 'sister' any more!"
 
"don't you yet hurry to go on," pao-ch'ai again observed in gentle
 tone of voice sneeringly, "but keep on calling elder sister and
 younger sister? who's your sister? that one over there in yellow coat
 is your sister!"
 
but apprehending, as she bandied these jokes, lest she might be wasting
 his time, she felt constrained to promptly move away; whereupon pao-yü
 continued the ode had been working at, and brought it to close,
 writing in all three stanzas.
 
tai-yü had not had so far an opportunity of making display of her
 ability, and was feeling at heart in very dejected mood; but when she
 perceived that pao-yü was having intense trouble in conceiving what he
 had to write, and she found, upon walking up to the side of the table,
 that had only one stanza short, that on "the sign on the apricot tree
 is visible," she consequently bade him copy out clean the first three
 odes, while she herself composed stanza, which she noted down on a
 slip of paper, rumpled up into ball, and threw just in front of
 pao-yü.
 
as soon as pao-yü opened it and glanced at it, realised that it was a
 hundred times better than his own three stanzas, and transcribing it
 without loss of time, in bold writing, handed up his compositions.
 
on perusal, the chia consort read what follows. by pao-yü, on: "a
 phoenix comes with dignified air:"
 
the bamboos just now don that jadelike grace,
 which worthy makes them the pheasant to face;
 each culm so tender as if to droop fain,
 each one so verdant, in aspect so cool,
 the curb protects, from the steps wards the pool.
 the pervious screens the tripod smell restrain.
 the shadow will be strewn, mind do not shake
 and (hsieh) from her now long fine dream (awake)!
 
on "the pure fragrance of the ligularia and iris florentina:"
 
hengs and wus the still park permeate;
 the and pis their sweet perfume enhance;
 and supple charms the third spring flowers ornate;
 softly is wafted one streak of fragrance!
 light mist doth becloud the tortuous way!
 with moist the clothes bedews, that verdure cold!
 the pond who ever sinuous could hold?
 dreams long and subtle, dream the household hsieh.
 
on "the happy red and joyful green:"
 
stillness pervades the deep pavilion on lengthy day.
 the green and red, together matched, transcendent grace display.
 unfurled do still remain in spring the green and waxlike leaves.
 sleep yet seeks the red-clad maid, though night's hours be
 far-spent,
 but o'er the rails lo, she reclines, dangling her ruddy sleeves;
 against the stone she leans shrouded by taintless scent,
 and stands the quarter facing whence doth blow the eastern wind!
 her lord and master must look up to her with feelings kind.
 
on "the sign on the apricot tree is visible:"
 
the apricot tree sign to drink wayfarers doth invite;
 farm located on hill, lo! yonder strikes the sight!
 and water caltrops, golden lotus, geese, as well as flows,
 and mulberry and elm trees which afford rest to swallows.
 that wide extent of spring leeks with verdure covers the ground;
 and o'er ten li the paddy blossom fragrance doth abound.
 in days of plenty there's lack of dearth and of distress,
 and what need then is there to plough and weave with such briskness?
 
when the chia consort had done with the perusal, excessive joy filled
 her heart. "he has indeed made progress!" she exclaimed, and went on to
 point at the verses on "the sign on the apricot tree," as being the
 crowning piece of the four stanzas. in due course, she with her own
 hands changed the motto "a cottage in the hills where dolichos is
 bleached" into "the paddy-scented village;" and bidding also t'an ch'un
 to take the several tens of stanzas written then, and to transcribe them
 separately on ornamented silk paper, she commanded eunuch to send them
 to the outer quarters. and when chia cheng and the other men perused
 them, one and all sung their incessant praise, while chia cheng, on his
 part, sent in some complimentary message, with regard to her return home
 on visit.
 
yuan ch'un went further and gave orders that luscious wines, ham and
 other such presents should be conferred upon pao-yü, as well as upon
 chia lan. this chia lan was as yet at this time perfect youth without
 any knowledge of things in general, so that all that could do was to
 follow the example of his mother, and imitate his uncle in performing
 the conventional rites.
 
at the very moment that chia felt unable, along with company of
 actresses, to bear the ordeal of waiting on the ground floor of the
 two-storied building, caught sight of eunuch come running at a
 flying pace. "the composition of verses is over," said, "so quick
 give the programme;" whereupon chia hastened to present the
 programme as well as roll of the names of the twelve girls. and not a
 long interval elapsed before four plays were chosen; no. 1 being the
 imperial banquet; no. 2 begging (the weaver goddess) for skill in
 needlework; no. 3 the spiritual match; and no. 4 the parting spirit.
 chia speedily lent hand in the getting up, and the preparations for
 the performance, and each of the girls sang with voice sufficient to
 split the stones and danced in the manner of heavenly spirits; and
 though their exterior was that of the characters in which they were
 dressed up for the play, their acting nevertheless represented, in a
 perfect manner, both sorrow as well as joy. as soon as the performance
 was brought to close, eunuch walked in holding golden salver
 containing cakes, sweets, and the like, and inquired who was ling kuan;
 and chia readily concluding that these articles were presents
 bestowed upon ling kuan, made haste to take them over, as bade ling
 kuan prostrate herself.
 
"the honourable consort," the eunuch further added, "directs that ling
 kuan, who is the best actress of the lot, should sing two more songs;
 any two will do, she does not mind what they are."
 
chia at once expressed his obedience, and felt constrained to urge
 ling kuan to sing the two ballads entitled: "the walk through the
 garden" and "frightened out of dream." but ling kuan asserted that
 these two ballads had not originally been intended for her own role; and
 being firm in her refusal to accede and insisting upon rendering the two
 songs "the mutual promise" and "the mutual abuse," chia found it hard
 to bring her round, and had help but to let her have her own way. the
 chia consort was so extremely enchanted with her that she gave
 directions that she should not be treated harshly, and that this girl
 should receive careful training, while besides the fixed number of
 presents, she gave her two rolls of palace silk, two purses, gold and
 silver ingots, and presents in the way of eatables.
 
subsequently, when the banquet had been cleared, and she once more
 prosecuted her visit through those places to which she had not been, she
 quite accidentally espied the buddhist temple encircled by hills, and
 promptly rinsing her hands, she walked in and burnt incense and
 worshipped buddha. she also composed the device for tablet, "a humane
 boat on the (world's) bitter sea," and went likewise so far as to show
 special acts of additional grace to company of ascetic nuns and taoist
 priestesses.
 
eunuch came in short while and reverently fell on his knees. "the
 presents are all in readiness," reported, "and may it please you to
 inspect them and to distribute them, in compliance with custom;" and
 presented to her list, which the chia consort perused from the very
 top throughout without raising any objection, and readily commanding
 that action should be taken according to the list, eunuch descended
 and issued the gifts one after another. the presents for dowager lady
 chia consisted, it may be added, of two sceptres, one of gold, the other
 of jade, with "may your wishes be fulfilled" inscribed on them; staff
 made of lign-aloes; string of chaplet beads of chia-nan fragrant wood;
 four rolls of imperial satins with words "affluence and honours" and
 perennial spring (woven in them); four rolls of imperial silk with
 perennial happiness and longevity; two shoes of purple gold bullion,
 representing pen, an ingot and "as you like;" and ten silver ingots
 with the device "felicitous blessings." while the two shares for madame
 hsing and madame wang were only short of hers by the sceptres and
 staffs, four things in all. chia she, chia cheng and the others had each
 apportioned to him work newly written by the emperor, two boxes of
 superior ink, and gold and silver cups, two pairs of each; their other
 gifts being identical with those above. pao-ch'ai, tai-yü, all the
 sisters and the rest were assigned each copy of new book, fine
 slab and two pair of gold and silver ornaments of novel kind and
 original shape; pao-yü likewise receiving the same presents. chia lan's
 gifts consisted of two necklets, one of gold, the other of silver, and
 of two pair of gold ingots. mrs. yu, widow li wan, lady feng and the
 others had each of them, four ingots of gold and silver; and, in the way
 of keepsakes, four pieces of silk. there were, in addition, presents
 consisting of twenty-four pieces of silk and thousand strings of good
 cash to be allotted to the nurses, and waiting-maids, in the apartments
 of dowager lady chia, madame wang and of the respective sisters; while
 chia chen, chia lien, chia huan, chia jung and the rest had, every one,
 for presents, piece of silk, and pair of gold and silver ingots.
 
as regards the other gifts, there were hundred rolls of various
 coloured silks, thousand ounces of pure silver, and several bottles of
 imperial wine, intended to be bestowed upon all the men-servants of the
 mansions, on the east and the west, as well as upon those who had been
 in the garden overseeing works, arranging the decorations, and in
 waiting to answer calls, and upon those who looked after the theatres
 and managed the lanterns. there being, besides, five hundred strings of
 pure cash for the cooks, waiters, jugglers and hundreds of actors and
 every kind of domestic.
 
the whole party had finished giving expression to their thanks for her
 bounty, when the managers and eunuchs respectfully announced: "it is
 already quarter to three, and may it please your majesty to turn back
 your imperial chariot;" whereupon, much against her will, the chia
 consort's eyes brimmed over, and she once more gave vent to tears.
 forcing herself however again to put on smile, she clasped old lady
 chia's and madame wang's hands, and could not bring herself to let them
 go; while she repeatedly impressed upon their minds: that there was no
 need to give way to any solicitude, and that they should take good care
 of their healths; that the grace of the present emperor was so vast,
 that once month would grant permission for them to enter the palace
 and pay her visit. "it is easy enough for us to see each other," (she
 said,) "and why should we indulge in any excess of grief? but when his
 majesty in his heavenly generosity allows another time to return
 home, you shouldn't go in for such pomp and extravagance."
 
dowager lady chia and the other inmates had already cried to such an
 extent that sobs choked their throats and they could with difficulty
 give utterance to speech. but though the chia consort could not
 reconcile herself to the separation, the usages in vogue in the imperial
 household could not be disregarded or infringed, so that she had no
 alternative but to stifle the anguish of her heart, to mount her
 chariot, and take her departure.
 
the whole family experienced meanwhile hard task before they succeeded
 in consoling the old lady and madame wang and in supporting them away
 out of the garden. but as what follows is not ascertained, the next
 chapter will disclose it.
 



chapter xix.
 
in the vehemence of her feelings, hua (hsi jen) on quiet evening
 admonishes pao-yü.
 while (the spell) of affection continues unbroken, pao-yü, on still
 day, perceives the fragrance emitted from tai-yü's person.
 

the chia consort, we must now go on to explain, returned to the palace,
 and the next day, on her appearance in the presence of his majesty, she
 thanked him for his bounty and gave him furthermore an account of her
 experiences on her visit home. his majesty's dragon countenance was much
 elated, and also issued from the privy store coloured satins, gold
 and silver and such like articles to be presented to chia cheng and the
 other officials in the various households of her relatives. but
 dispensing with minute details about them, we will now revert to the two
 mansions of jung and ning.
 
with the extreme strain on mind and body for successive days, the
 strength of one and all was, in point of fact, worn out and their
 respective energies exhausted. and it was besides after they had been
 putting by the various decorations and articles of use for two or three
 days, that they, at length, got through the work.
 
lady feng was the one who had most to do, and whose responsibilities
 were greatest. the others could possibly steal few leisure moments and
 retire to rest, while she was the sole person who could not slip away.
 in the second place, naturally anxious as she was to excel and both to
 fall in people's estimation, she put up with the strain just as if she
 were like one of those who had nothing to attend to. but the one who had
 the least to do and had the most leisure was pao-yü.
 
as luck would have it on this day, at an early hour, hsi jen's mother
 came again in person and told dowager lady chia that she would take hsi
 jen home to drink cup of tea brewed in the new year and that she would
 return in the evening. for this reason pao-yü was only in the company of
 all the waiting-maids, throwing dice, playing at chess and amusing
 himself. but while was in the room playing with them with total
 absence of zest, unawares perceived few waiting-maids arrive, who
 informed him that their senior master mr. chen, of the eastern mansion,
 had come to invite him to go and see theatrical performance, and the
 fireworks, which were to be let off.
 
upon hearing these words, pao-yü speedily asked them to change his
 clothes; but just as was ready to start, presents of cream, steamed
 with sugar, arrived again when least expected from the chia consort, and
 pao-yü recollecting with what relish hsi jen had partaken of this dish
 on the last occasion forthwith bid them keep it for her; while went
 himself and told dowager lady chia that was going over to see the
 play.
 
the plays sung over at chia chen's consisted, who would have thought it,
 of "ting l'ang recognises his father," and "huang po-ying deploys the
 spirits for battle," and in addition to these, "sung hsing-che causes
 great commotion in the heavenly palace;" "ghiang t'ai-kung kills the
 general and deifies him," and other such like. soon appeared the spirits
 and devils in confused crowd on the stage, and suddenly also became
 visible the whole band of sprites and goblins, among which were some
 waving streamers, as they went past in procession, invoking buddha and
 burning incense. the sound of the gongs and drums and of shouts and
 cries were audible at distance beyond the lane; and in the whole
 street, one and all extolled the performance as exceptionally grand, and
 that the like could never have been had in the house of any other
 family.
 
pao-yü, noticing that the commotion and bustle had reached stage so
 unbearable to his taste, speedily betook himself, after merely sitting
 for little while, to other places in search of relaxation and fun.
 first of all, entered the inner rooms, and after spending some time
 in chatting and laughing with mrs. yu, the waiting-maids, and secondary
 wives, eventually took his departure out of the second gate; and as
 mrs. yu and her companions were still under the impression that was
 going out again to see the play, they let him speed on his way, without
 so much as keeping an eye over him.
 
chia chen, chia lien, hsúeh p'an and the others were bent upon guessing
 enigmas, enforcing the penalties and enjoying themselves in hundred
 and one ways, so that even allowing that they had for moment noticed
 that was not occupying his seat, they must merely have imagined that
 had gone inside and not, in fact, worried their minds about him. and
 as for the pages, who had come along with pao-yü, those who were a
 little advanced in years, knowing very well that pao-yü would, on an
 occasion like the present, be sure not to be going before dusk,
 stealthily therefore took advantage of his absence, those, who could, to
 gamble for money, and others to go to the houses of relatives and
 friends to drink of the new year tea, so that what with gambling and
 drinking the whole bevy surreptitiously dispersed, waiting for dusk
 before they came back; while those, who were younger, had all crept into
 the green rooms to watch the excitement; with the result that pao-yü
 perceiving not one of them about bethought himself of small reading
 room, which existed in previous days on this side, in which was
 suspended picture of beauty so artistically executed as to look
 life-like. "on such bustling day as this," reasoned, "it's pretty
 certain, i fancy, that there will be one in there; and that beautiful
 person must surely too feel lonely, so that it's only right that i
 should go and console her bit." with these thoughts, hastily betook
 himself towards the side-house yonder, and as soon as came up to the
 window, heard the sound of groans in the room. pao-yü was really
 quite startled. "what!" (he thought), "can that beautiful girl,
 possibly, have come to life!" and screwing up his courage, licked a
 hole in the paper of the window and peeped in. it was not she, however,
 who had come to life, but ming yen holding down girl and likewise
 indulging in what the monitory dream fairy had taught him.
 
"dreadful!" exclaimed pao-yü, aloud, unable to repress himself, and,
 stamping one of his feet, walked into the door to the terror of both
 of them, who parting company, shivered with fear, like clothes that are
 being shaken. ming yen perceiving that it was pao-yü promptly fell on
 his knees and piteously implored for pardon.
 
"what! in broad daylight! what do you mean by it? were your master mr.
 chen to hear of it, would you die or live?" asked pao-yü, as he
 simultaneously cast glance at the servant-girl, who although not a
 beauty was anyhow so spick and span, and possessed besides few charms
 sufficient to touch the heart. from shame, her face was red and her ears
 purple, while she lowered her head and uttered not syllable.
 
pao-yü stamped his foot. "what!" shouted, "don't you yet bundle
 yourself away!"
 
this simple remark suggested the idea to the girl's mind who ran off, as
 if she had wings to fly with; but as pao-yü went also so far as to go in
 pursuit of her, calling out: "don't be afraid, i'm not one to tell
 anyone," ming yen was so exasperated that cried, as went after
 them, "my worthy ancestor, this is distinctly telling people about it."
 
"how old is that servant girl?" pao-yü having asked; "she's, i expect,
 more than sixteen or seventeen," ming yen rejoined.
 
"well, if you haven't gone so far as to even ascertain her age," pao-yü
 observed, "you're sure to know still less about other things; and it
 makes it plain enough that her acquaintance with you is all vain and
 futile! what pity! what pity!"
 
then went on to enquire what her name was; and "were i," continued
 ming yen smiling, "to tell you about her name it would involve long
 yarn; it's indeed novel and strange story! she relates that while her
 mother was nursing her, she dreamt dream and obtained in this dream
 possession of piece of brocaded silk, on which were designs, in
 variegated colours, representing opulence and honour, and continuous
 line of the character wan; and that this reason accounts for the name of
 wan erh, which was given her."
 
"this is really strange!" pao-yü exclaimed with grin, after lending an
 ear to what had to say; "and she is bound, i think, by and by to have
 good deal of good fortune!"
 
these words uttered, plunged in deep thought for while, and ming
 yen having felt constrained to inquire: "why aren't you, mr. secundus,
 watching theatrical performance of this excellent kind?" "i had been
 looking on for ever so long," pao-yü replied, "until i got quite weary;
 and had just come out for stroll, when i happened to meet you two. but
 what's to be done now?"
 
ming yen gave faint smile. "as there's one here to know anything
 about it," added, "i'll stealthily take you, mr. secundus, for walk
 outside the city walls; and we'll come back shortly, before they've got
 wind of it."
 
"that won't do," pao-yü demurred, "we must be careful, or else some
 beggar might kidnap us away; besides, were they to come to hear of it,
 there'll be again dreadful row; and isn't it better that we should go
 to some nearer place, from which we could, after all, return at once?"
 
"as for some nearer place," ming yen observed; "to whose house can we
 go? it's really easy matter!"
 
"my idea is," pao-yü suggested with smirk, "that we should simply go,
 and find sister hua, and see what she's up to at home."
 
"yes! yes!" ming yen replied laughingly; "the fact is i had forgotten
 all about her home; but should it reach their ears," continued,
 "they'll say that it was i who led you, mr. secundus, astray, and
 they'll beat me!"
 
"i'm here for you!" pao-yü having assured him; ming yen at these words
 led the horses round, and the two of them speedily made their exit by
 the back gate. luckily hsi jen's house was not far off. it was no
 further than half li's distance, so that in twinkle they had already
 reached the front of the door, and ming yen was the first to walk in and
 to call for hsi jen's eldest brother hua tzu-fang.
 
hsi jen's mother had, on this occasion, united in her home hsi jen,
 several of her sister's daughters, as well as few of her nieces, and
 they were engaged in partaking of fruits and tea, when they heard some
 one outside call out, "brother hua." hua tzu-fang lost time in
 rushing out; and upon looking and finding that it was the two of them,
 the master and his servant, was so taken by surprise that his fears
 could not be set at rest. promptly, clasped pao-yü in his arms and
 dismounted him, and coming into the court, shouted out at the top of
 his voice: "mr. pao has come." the other persons heard the announcement
 of his arrival, with equanimity, but when it reached hsi jen's ears, she
 truly felt at such loss to fathom the object of his visit that issuing
 hastily out of the room, she came to meet pao-yü, and as she laid hold
 of him: "why did you come?" she asked.
 
"i felt awfully dull," pao-yü rejoined with smile, "and came to see
 what you were up to."
 
hsi jen at these words banished, at last, all anxiety from her mind.
 "you're again up to your larks," she observed, "but what's the aim of
 your visit? who else has come along with him?" she at the same time went
 on to question ming yen.
 
"all the others know nothing about it!" explained ming yen exultingly;
 "only we two do, that's all."
 
when hsi jen heard this remark, she gave way afresh to solicitous fears:
 "this is dreadful!" she added; "for were you to come across any one from
 the house, or to meet master; or were, in the streets, people to press
 against you, or horses to collide with you, as to make (his horse) shy,
 and were to fall, would that too be joke? the gall of both of you
 is larger than peck measure; but it's all you, ming yen, who has
 incited him, and when i go back, i'll surely tell the nurses to beat
 you."
 
ming yen pouted his mouth. "mr. secundus," pleaded, "abused and
 beat me, as bade bring him here, and now shoves the blame on my
 shoulders! 'don't let us go,' i suggested; 'but if you do insist, well
 then let us go and have done.'"
 
hua tzu-fang promptly interceded. "let things alone," said; "now that
 they're already here, there's need whatever of much ado. the only
 thing is that our mean house with its thatched roof is both so crammed
 and so filthy that how could you, sir, sit in it!"
 
hsi jen's mother also came out at an early period to receive him, and
 hsi jen pulled pao-yü in. once inside the room, pao-yü perceived three
 or five girls, who, as soon as they caught sight of him approaching, all
 lowered their heads, and felt so bashful that their faces were suffused
 with blushes. but as both hua tzu-fang and his mother were afraid that
 pao-yü would catch cold, they pressed him to take seat on the
 stove-bed, and hastened to serve fresh supply of refreshments, and to
 at once bring him cup of good tea.
 
"you needn't be flurrying all for nothing," hsi jen smilingly
 interposed; "i, naturally, should know; and there's use of even
 laying out any fruits, as i daren't recklessly give him anything to
 eat."
 
saying this, she simultaneously took her own cushion and laid it on a
 stool, and after pao-yü took seat on it, she placed the footstove she
 had been using, under his feet; and producing, from satchet, two
 peach-blossom-scented small cakes, she opened her own hand-stove and
 threw them into the fire; which done, she covered it well again and
 placed it in pao-yü's lap. and eventually, she filled her own tea-cup
 with tea and presented it to pao-yü, while, during this time, her mother
 and sister had been fussing about, laying out in fine array tableful
 of every kind of eatables.
 
hsi jen noticed that there were absolutely things that could eat,
 but she felt urged to say with smile: "since you've come, it isn't
 right that you should go empty away; and you must, whether the things be
 good or bad, taste little, so that it may look like visit to my
 house!"
 
as she said this, she forthwith took several seeds of the fir-cone, and
 cracking off the thin skin, she placed them in handkerchief and
 presented them to pao-yü. but pao-yü, espying that hsi jen's two eyes
 were slightly red, and that the powder was shiny and moist, quietly
 therefore inquired of hsi jen, "why do you cry for rhyme or reason?"
 
"why should i cry?" hsi jen laughed; "something just got into my eyes
 and i rubbed them." by these means she readily managed to evade
 detection; but seeing that pao-yü wore deep red archery-sleeved
 pelisse, ornamented with gold dragons, and lined with fur from foxes'
 ribs and grey sable fur surtout with fringe round the border. "what!
 have you," she asked, "put on again your new clothes for? specially to
 come here? and didn't they inquire of you where you were going?"
 
"i had changed," pao-yü explained with grin, "as mr. chen had invited
 to go over and look at the play."
 
"well, sit while and then go back;" hsi jen continued as she nodded
 her head; "for this isn't the place for you to come to!"
 
"you'd better be going home now," pao-yü suggested smirkingly; "where
 i've again kept something good for you."
 
"gently," smiled hsi jen, "for were you to let them hear, what figure
 would we cut?" and with these, words, she put out her hand and
 unclasping from pao-yü's neck the jade of spiritual perception, she
 faced her cousins and remarked exultingly. "here! see for yourselves;
 look at this and learn! when i repeatedly talked about it, you all
 thought it extraordinary, and were anxious to have glance at it;
 to-day, you may gaze on it with all your might, for whatever precious
 thing you may by and by come to see will really never excel such an
 object as this!"
 
when she had finished speaking, she handed it over to them, and after
 they had passed it round for inspection, she again fastened it properly
 on pao-yü's neck, and also bade her brother go and hire small
 carriage, or engage small chair, and escort pao-yü back home.
 
"if i see him back," hua tzu-fang remarked, "there would be harm,
 were even to ride his horse!"
 
"it isn't because of harm," hsi jen replied; "but because may come
 across some one from the house."
 
hua tzu-fang promptly went and bespoke small chair; and when it came
 to the door, the whole party could not very well detain him, and they of
 course had to see pao-yü out of the house; while hsi jen, on the other
 hand, snatched few fruits and gave them to ming yen; and as she at the
 same time pressed in his hand several cash to buy crackers with to let
 off, she enjoined him not to tell any one as himself would likewise
 incur blame.
 
as she uttered these words, she straightway escorted pao-yü as far as
 outside the door, from whence having seen him mount into the sedan
 chair, she dropped the curtain; whereupon ming yen and her brother, the
 two of them, led the horses and followed behind in his wake. upon
 reaching the street where the ning mansion was situated, ming yen told
 the chair to halt, and said to hua tzu-fang, "it's advisable that i
 should again go, with mr. secundus, into the eastern mansion, to show
 ourselves before we can safely betake ourselves home; for if we don't,
 people will suspect!"
 
hua tzu-fang, upon hearing that there was good reason in what said,
 promptly clasped pao-yü out of the chair and put him on the horse,
 whereupon after pao-yü smilingly remarked: "excuse for the trouble
 i've surely put you to," they forthwith entered again by the back gate;
 but putting aside all details, we will now confine ourselves to pao-yü.
 
after had walked out of the door, the several waiting-maids in his
 apartments played and laughed with greater zest and with less restraint.
 some there were who played at chess, others who threw the dice or had a
 game of cards; and they covered the whole floor with the shells of
 melon-seeds they were cracking, when dame li, his nurse, happened to
 come in, propping herself on staff, to pay her respects and to see
 pao-yü, and perceiving that pao-yü was not at home and that the
 servant-girls were only bent upon romping, she felt intensely disgusted.
 "since i've left this place," she therefore exclaimed with sigh, "and
 don't often come here, you've become more and more unmannerly; while the
 other nurse does still less than ever venture to expostulate with you;
 pao-yü is like candlestick eighty feet high, shedding light on others,
 and throwing none upon himself! all knows is to look down upon people
 as being filthy; and yet this is his room and allows you to put it
 topsy-turvey, and to become more and more unmindful of decorum!"
 
these servant-girls were well aware that pao-yü was not particular in
 these respects, and that in the next place nurse li, having pleaded old
 age, resigned her place and gone home, had nowadays control over
 them, so that they simply gave their minds to romping and joking, and
 paid heed whatever to her. nurse li however still kept on asking
 about pao-yü, "how much rice now ate at one meal? and at what time he
 went to sleep?" to which questions, the servant-girls replied quite at
 random; some there being too who observed: "what dreadful despicable
 old thing she is!"
 
"in this covered bowl," she continued to inquire, "is cream, and why not
 give it to to eat?" and having concluded these words, she took it up
 and there and then began eating it.
 
"be quick, and leave it alone!" servant-girl expostulated, "that, he
 said, was kept in order to be given to hsi jen; and on his return, when
 again gets into huff, you, old lady, must, on your own motion,
 confess to having eaten it, and not involve us in any way as to have to
 bear his resentment."
 
nurse li, at these words, felt both angry and ashamed. "i can't
 believe," she forthwith remarked, "that has become so bad at heart!
 not to speak of the milk i've had, i have, in fact every right to even
 something more expensive than this; for is it likely that holds hsi
 jen dearer than myself? it can't forsooth be that doesn't bear in
 mind how that i've brought him up to be big man, and how that has
 eaten my blood transformed into milk and grown up to this age! and will
 be because i'm now having bowl of milk of his be angry on that score!
 i shall, yes, eat it, and we'll see what he'll do! i don't know what you
 people think of hsi jen, but she was lowbred girl, whom i've with my
 own hands raised up! and what fine object indeed was she!"
 
as she spoke, she flew into temper, and taking the cream she drank the
 whole of it.
 
"they don't know how to speak properly!" another servant-girl interposed
 sarcastically, "and it's wonder that you, old lady, should get angry!
 pao-yü still sends you, venerable dame, presents as proof of his
 gratitude, and is it possible that will feel displeased for such a
 thing like this?"
 
"you girls shouldn't also pretend to be artful flatterers to cajole me!"
 nurse li added; "do you imagine that i'm not aware of the dismissal, the
 other day, of hsi hsüeh, on account of cup of tea? and as it's clear
 enough that i've incurred blame, i'll come by and by and receive it!"
 
having said this, she went off in dudgeon, but not long interval
 elapsed before pao-yü returned, and gave orders to go and fetch hsi jen;
 and perceiving ching ling reclining on the bed perfectly still: "i
 presume she's ill," pao-yü felt constrained to inquire, "or if she isn't
 ill, she must have lost at cards."
 
"not so!" observed chiu wen; "she had been winner, but dame li came in
 quite casually and muddled her so that she lost; and angry at this she
 rushed off to sleep."
 
"don't place yourselves," pao-yü smiled, "on the same footing as nurse
 li, and if you were to let her alone, everything will be all right."
 
these words were still on his lips when hsi jen arrived. after the
 mutual salutations, hsi jen went on to ask of pao-yü: "where did you
 have your repast? and what time did you come back?" and to present
 likewise, on behalf of her mother and sister, her compliments to all the
 girls, who were her companions. in short while, she changed her
 costume and divested herself of her fineries, and pao-yü bade them fetch
 the cream.
 
"nurse li has eaten it," the servant-girls rejoined, and as pao-yü was
 on the point of making some remark hsi jen hastened to interfere,
 laughing the while; "is it really this that you had kept for me? many
 thanks for the trouble; the other day, when i had some, i found it very
 toothsome, but after i had partaken of it, i got pain in the stomach,
 and was so much upset, that it was only after i had brought it all up
 that i felt all right. so it's as well that she has had it, for, had it
 been kept here, it would have been wasted all for use! what i fancy
 are dry chestnuts; and while you clean few for me, i'll go and lay the
 bed!"
 
pao-yü upon hearing these words credited them as true, so that he
 discarded all thought of the cream and fetched the chestnuts, which he,
 with his own hands, selected and pealed. perceiving at the same time
 that none of the party were present in the room, put on smile and
 inquired of hsi jen: "who were those persons dressed in red to day?"
 
"they're my two cousins on my mother's side," hsi jen explained, and
 hearing this, pao-yü sang their praise as heaved couple of sighs.
 
"what are you sighing for?" hsi jen remarked. "i know the secret reasons
 of your heart; it's i fancy because she isn't fit to wear red!"
 
"it isn't that," pao-yü protested smilingly, "it isn't that; if such a
 person as that isn't good enough to be dressed in red, who would
 forsooth presume to wear it? it's because i find her so really lovely!
 and if we could, after all, manage to get her into our family, how nice
 it would be then!"
 
hsi jen gave sardonic smile. "that it's my own fate to be slave
 doesn't matter, but is it likely that the destiny of even my very
 relatives could be to become one and all of them bond servants? but you
 should certainly set your choice upon some really beautiful girl, for
 she would in that case be good enough to enter your house."
 
"here you are again with your touchiness!" pao-yü eagerly exclaimed
 smiling, "if i said that she should come to our house, does it
 necessarily imply that she should be servant? and wouldn't it do were
 i to mention that she should come as relative!"
 
"that too couldn't exalt her to be fit match for you!" rejoined hsi
 jen; but pao-yü being loth to continue the conversation, simply busied
 himself with cleaning the chestnuts.
 
"how is it you utter not word?" hsi jen laughed; "i expect it's
 because i just offended you by my inconsiderate talk! but if by and by
 you have your purpose fixed on it, just spend few ounces of silver to
 purchase them with, and bring them in and have done!"
 
"how would you have one make any reply?" pao-yü smilingly rejoined; "all
 i did was to extol her charms; for she's really fit to have been born in
 deep hall and spacious court as this; and it isn't for such foul
 things as myself and others to contrariwise spend our days in this
 place!"
 
"though deprived of this good fortune," hsi jen explained, "she's
 nevertheless also petted and indulged and the jewel of my maternal uncle
 and my aunt! she's now seventeen years of age, and everything in the way
 of trousseau has been got ready, and she's to get married next year."
 
upon hearing the two words "get married," could not repress himself
 from again ejaculating: "hai hai!" but while was in an unhappy frame
 of mind, once more heard hsi jen remark as she heaved sigh: "ever
 since i've come here, we cousins haven't all these years been able to
 get to live together, and now that i'm about to return home, they, on
 the other hand, will all be gone!"
 
pao-yü, realising that there lurked in this remark some meaning or
 other, was suddenly so taken aback that dropping the chestnuts, he
 inquired: "how is it that you now want to go back?"
 
"i was present to-day," hsi jen explained, "when mother and brother held
 consultation together, and they bade be patient for another year, and
 that next year they'll come up and redeem out of service!"
 
pao-yü, at these words, felt the more distressed. "why do they want to
 redeem you?" consequently asked.
 
"this is strange question!" hsi jen retorted, "for i can't really be
 treated as if i were the issue born in this homestead of yours! all the
 members of my family are elsewhere, and there's only myself in this
 place, so that how could i end my days here?"
 
"if i don't let you go, it will verily be difficult for you to get
 away!" pao-yü replied.
 
"there has never been such principle of action!" urged hsi jen; "even
 in the imperial palace itself, there's fixed rule, by which possibly
 every certain number of years selection (of those who have to go takes
 place), and every certain number of years new batch enters; and
 there's such practice as that of keeping people for ever; not to
 speak of your own home."
 
pao-yü realised, after reflection, that she, in point of fact, was
 right, and went on to observe: "should the old lady not give you your
 release, it will be impossible for you to get off."
 
"why shouldn't she release me?" hsi jen questioned. "am i really so very
 extraordinary person as to have perchance made such an impression upon
 her venerable ladyship and my lady that they will be positive in not
 letting go? they may, in all likelihood, give my family some more
 ounces of silver to keep here; that possibly may come about. but, in
 truth, i'm also person of the most ordinary run, and there are many
 more superior to me, yea very many! ever since my youth up, i've been in
 her old ladyship's service; first by waiting upon miss shih for several
 years, and recently by being in attendance upon you for another term of
 years; and now that our people will come to redeem me, i should, as a
 matter of right, be told to go. my idea is that even the very redemption
 money won't be accepted, and that they will display such grace as to let
 go at once. and, as for being told that i can't be allowed to go as
 i'm so diligent in my service to you, that's thing that can on no
 account come about! my faithful attendance is an obligation of my
 duties, and is exceptional service! and when i'm gone you'll again
 have some other faithful attendant, and it isn't likely that when i'm no
 more here, you'll find it impracticable to obtain one!"
 
after pao-yü had listened to these various arguments, which proved the
 reasonableness of her going and the unreasonableness of any detention,
 felt his heart more than ever prey to distress. "in spite of all
 you say," therefore continued, "the sole desire of my heart is to
 detain you; and i have doubt but that the old lady will speak to your
 mother about it; and if she were to give your mother ample money,
 she'll, of course, not feel as if she could very well with any decency
 take you home!"
 
"my mother won't naturally have the audacity to be headstrong!" hsi jen
 ventured, "not to speak besides of the nice things, which may be told
 her and the lots of money she may, in addition, be given; but were she
 even not to be paid any compliments, and not so much as single cash
 given her, she won't, if you set your mind upon keeping here, presume
 not to comply with your wishes, were it also against my inclination. one
 thing however; our family would never rely upon prestige, and trust upon
 honorability to do anything so domineering as this! for this isn't like
 anything else, which, because you take fancy to it, hundred per cent
 profit can be added, and it obtained for you! this action can be well
 taken if the seller doesn't suffer loss! but in the present instance,
 were they to keep back for rhyme or reason, it would also be of no
 benefit to yourself; on the contrary, they would be instrumental in
 keeping us blood relatives far apart; thing the like of which, i feel
 positive that dowager lady chia and my lady will never do!"
 
after lending an ear to this argument, pao-yü cogitated within himself
 for while. "from what you say," then observed, "when you say you'll
 go, it means that you'll go for certain!"
 
"yes, that i'll go for certain," hsi jen rejoined.
 
"who would have anticipated," pao-yü, after these words, mused in his
 own heart, "that person like her would have shown such little sense of
 gratitude, and such lack of respect! had i," then remarked aloud
 with sigh, "been aware, at an early date, that your whole wish would
 have been to go, i wouldn't, in that case, have brought you over! but
 when you're away, i shall remain alone, solitary spirit!"
 
as spoke, lost control over his temper, and, getting into bed, he
 went to sleep.
 
the fact is that when hsi jen had been at home, and she heard her mother
 and brother express their intention of redeeming her back, she there and
 then observed that were she even at the point of death, she would not
 return home. "when in past days," she had argued, "you had rice to
 eat, there remained myself, who was still worth several taels; and
 hadn't i urged you to sell me, wouldn't i have seen both father and
 mother die of starvation under my very eyes? and you've now had the good
 fortune of selling into this place, where i'm fed and clothed just
 like mistress, and where i'm not beaten by day, nor abused by night!
 besides, though now father be more, you two have anyhow by putting
 things straight again, so adjusted the family estate that it has resumed
 its primitive condition. and were you, in fact, still in straitened
 circumstances, and you could by redeeming back, make again some more
 money, that would be well and good; but the truth is that there's no
 such need, and what would be the use for you to redeem at such time
 as this? you should temporarily treat as dead and gone, and shouldn't
 again recall any idea of redeeming me!"
 
having in consequence indulged in loud fit of crying, her mother and
 brother resolved, when they perceived her in this determined frame of
 mind, that for fact there was need for her to come out of service.
 what is more they had sold her under contract until death, in the
 distinct reliance that the chia family, charitable and generous family
 as it was, would, possibly, after more than few entreaties, make
 them present of her person as well as the purchase money. in the
 second place, never had they in the chia mansion ill-used any of those
 below; there being always plenty of grace and little of imperiousness.
 besides, the servant-girls, who acted as personal attendants in the
 apartments of the old as well as of the young, were treated so far
 unlike the whole body of domestics in the household that the daughters
 even of an ordinary and penniless parentage could not have been so
 looked up to. and these considerations induced both the mother as well
 as her to at once dispel the intention and not to redeem her, and
 when pao-yü had subsequently paid them an unexpected visit, and the two
 of them (pao-yü and hsi jen) were seen to be also on such terms, the
 mother and her obtained clearer insight into their relations, and
 still one more burden (which had pressed on their mind) fell to the
 ground, and as besides this was contingency, which they had never
 reckoned upon, they both composed their hearts, and did not again
 entertain any idea of ransoming her.
 
it must be noticed moreover that hsi jen had ever since her youth not
 been blind to the fact that pao-yü had an extraordinary temperament,
 that was self-willed and perverse, far even in excess of all young
 lads, and that had, in addition, good many peculiarities and many
 unspeakable defects. and as of late had placed such reliance in the
 fond love of his grandmother that his father and mother even could not
 exercise any extreme control over him, had become so much the more
 remiss, dissolute, selfish and unconcerned, not taking the least
 pleasure in what was proper, that she felt convinced, whenever she
 entertained the idea of tendering him advice, that would not listen
 to her. on this day, by strange coincidence, came about the discussion
 respecting her ransom, and she designedly made use, in the first
 instance, of deception with view to ascertain his feelings, to
 suppress his temper, and to be able subsequently to extend to him some
 words of admonition; and when she perceived that pao-yü had now silently
 gone to sleep, she knew that his feelings could not brook the idea of
 her return and that his temper had already subsided. she had never had,
 as far as she was concerned, any desire of eating chestnuts, but as she
 feared lest, on account of the cream, some trouble might arise, which
 might again lead to the same results as when hsi hsüeh drank the tea,
 she consequently made use of the pretence that she fancied chestnuts, in
 order to put off pao-yü from alluding (to the cream) and to bring the
 matter speedily to an end. but telling forthwith the young waiting-maids
 to take the chestnuts away and eat them, she herself came and pushed
 pao-yü; but at the sight of pao-yü with the traces of tears on his face,
 she at once put on smiling expression and said: "what's there in this
 to wound your heart? if you positively do wish to keep me, i shall, of
 course, not go away!"
 
pao-yü noticed that these words contained some hidden purpose, and
 readily observed: "do go on and tell what else i can do to succeed in
 keeping you here, for of my own self i find it indeed difficult to say
 how!"
 
"of our friendliness all along," hsi jen smilingly rejoined, "there's
 naturally need to speak; but, if you have this day made up your mind
 to retain here, it isn't through this friendship that you'll succeed
 in doing so. but i'll go on and mention three distinct conditions, and,
 if you really do accede to my wishes, you'll then have shown an earnest
 desire to keep here, and i won't go, were even sword to be laid on
 my neck!"
 
"do tell what these conditions are," pao-yü pressed her with
 alacrity, as smiled, "and i'll assent to one and all. my dear sister,
 my own dear sister, not to speak of two or three, but even two or three
 hundred of them i'm quite ready to accept. all i entreat you is that you
 and all of you should combine to watch over and take care of me,
 until some day when i shall be transformed into flying ashes; but flying
 ashes are, after all, not opportune, as they have form and substance and
 they likewise possess sense, but until i've been metamorphosed into a
 streak of subtle smoke. and when the wind shall have with one puff
 dispelled me, all of you then will be unable to attend to me, just as
 much as i myself won't be able to heed you. you will, when that time
 comes, let go where i please, as i'll let you speed where you choose
 to go!"
 
these words so harassed hsi jen that she hastened to put her hand over
 his mouth. "speak decently," she said; "i was on account of this just
 about to admonish you, and now here you are uttering all this still more
 loathsome trash."
 
"i won't utter these words again," pao-yü eagerly added.
 
"this is the first fault that you must change," hsi jen replied.
 
"i'll amend," pao-yü observed, "and if i say anything of the kind again
 you can wring my mouth; but what else is there?"
 
"the second thing is this," hsi jen explained; "whether you really like
 to study or whether you only pretend to like study is immaterial; but
 you should, when you are in the presence of master, or in the presence
 of any one else, not do nothing else than find fault with people and
 make fun of them, but behave just as if you were genuinely fond of
 study, so that you shouldn't besides provoke your father so much to
 anger, and that should before others have also chance of saying
 something! 'in my family,' reflects within himself, 'generation after
 generation has been fond of books, but ever since i've had you, you
 haven't accomplished my expectations, and not only is it that you don't
 care about reading books,'--and this has already filled his heart with
 anger and vexation,--'but both before my face and behind my back, you
 utter all that stuff and nonsense, and give those persons, who have,
 through their knowledge of letters, attained high offices, the nickname
 of the "the salaried worms." you also uphold that there's work
 exclusive (of the book where appears) "fathom spotless virtue;" and that
 all other books consist of foolish compilations, which owe their origin
 to former authors, who, unable themselves to expound the writings of
 confucius, readily struck new line and invented original notions.' now
 with words like these, how can one wonder if master loses all patience,
 and if does from time to time give you thrashing! and what do you
 make other people think of you?"
 
"i won't say these things again," pao-yü laughingly protested, "these
 are the reckless and silly absurdities of time when i was young and
 had idea of the height of the heavens and the thickness of the earth;
 but i'll now more repeat them. what else is there besides?"
 
"it isn't right that you should sneer at the bonzes and vilify the
 taoist priests, nor mix cosmetics or prepare rouge," hsi jen continued;
 "but there's still another thing more important, you shouldn't again
 indulge the bad habits of licking the cosmetic, applied by people on
 their lips, nor be fond of (girls dressed) in red!"
 
"i'll change in all this," pao-yü added by way of rejoinder; "i'll
 change in all this; and if there's anything more be quick and tell me."
 
"there's nothing more," hsi jen observed; "but you must in everything
 exercise little more diligence, and not indulge your caprices and
 allow your wishes to run riot, and you'll be all right. and should you
 comply to all these things in real earnest, you couldn't carry out,
 even in chair with eight bearers."
 
"well, if you do stay in here long enough," pao-yü remarked with a
 smile, "there's fear as to your not having an eight-bearer-chair to
 sit in!"
 
hsi jen gave sardonic grin. "i don't care much about it," she replied;
 "and were i even to have such good fortune, i couldn't enjoy such a
 right. but allowing i could sit in one, there would be pleasure in
 it!"
 
while these two were chatting, they saw ch'iu wen walk in. "it's the
 third watch of the night," she observed, "and you should go to sleep.
 just few moments back your grandmother lady chia and our lady sent a
 nurse to ask about you, and i replied that you were asleep."
 
pao-yü bade her fetch watch, and upon looking at the time, found
 indeed that the hand was pointing at ten; whereupon rinsing his mouth
 again and loosening his clothes, retired to rest, where we will leave
 him without any further comment.
 
the next day, hsi jen got up as soon as it was dawn, feeling her body
 heavy, her head sore, her eyes swollen, and her limbs burning like fire.
 she managed however at first to keep up, an effort though it was, but as
 subsequently she was unable to endure the strain, and all she felt
 disposed to do was to recline, she therefore lay down in her clothes on
 the stove-couch. pao-yü hastened to tell dowager lady chia, and the
 doctor was sent for, who, upon feeling her pulse and diagnosing her
 complaint, declared that there was nothing else the matter with her than
 chill, which she had suddenly contracted, that after she had taken a
 dose or two of medicine, it would be dispelled, and that she would be
 quite well. after had written the prescription and taken his
 departure, some one was despatched to fetch the medicines, which when
 brought were properly decocted. as soon as she had swallowed dose,
 pao-yü bade her cover herself with her bed-clothes so as to bring on
 perspiration; while himself came into tai-yü's room to look her up.
 tai-yü was at this time quite alone, reclining on her bed having a
 midday siesta, and the waiting-maids having all gone out to attend to
 whatever they pleased, the whole room was plunged in stillness and
 silence. pao-yü raised the embroidered soft thread portiere and walked
 in; and upon espying tai-yü in the room fast asleep, hurriedly
 approached her and pushing her: "dear cousin," said, "you've just had
 your meal, and are you asleep already?" and kept on calling "tai-yü"
 till woke her out of her sleep.
 
perceiving that it was pao-yü, "you had better go for stroll," tai-yü
 urged, "for the day before yesterday i was disturbed the whole night,
 and up to this day i haven't had rest enough to get over the fatigue. my
 whole body feels languid and sore."
 
"this languor and soreness," pao-yü rejoined, "are of consequence;
 but if you go on sleeping you'll be feeling very ill; so i'll try and
 distract you, and when we've dispelled this lassitude, you'll be all
 right."
 
tai-yü closed her eyes. "i don't feel any lassitude," she explained,
 "all i want is little rest; and you had better go elsewhere and come
 back after romping about for while."
 
"where can i go?" pao-yü asked as pushed her. "i'm quite sick and
 tired of seeing the others."
 
at these words, tai-yü burst out laughing with sound of ch'ih. "well!
 since you wish to remain here," she added, "go over there and sit down
 quietly, and let's have chat."
 
"i'll also recline," pao-yü suggested.
 
"well, then, recline!" tai-yü assented.
 
"there's pillow," observed pao-yü, "so let us lie on the same
 pillow."
 
"what nonsense!" tai-yü urged, "aren't those pillows outside? get one
 and lie on it."
 
pao-yü walked into the outer apartment, and having looked about him, he
 returned and remarked with smile: "i don't want those, they may be,
 for aught i know, some dirty old hag's."
 
tai-yü at this remark opened her eyes wide, and as she raised herself
 up: "you're really," she exclaimed laughingly, "the evil star of my
 existence! here, please recline on this pillow!" and as she uttered
 these words, she pushed her own pillow towards pao-yü, and, getting up
 she went and fetched another of her own, upon which she lay her head in
 such way that both of them then reclined opposite to each other. but
 tai-yü, upon turning up her eyes and looking, espied on pao-yü's cheek
 on the left side of his face, spot of blood about the size of a
 button, and speedily bending her body, she drew near to him, and rubbing
 it with her hand, she scrutinised it closely. "whose nail," she went on
 to inquire, "has scratched this open?"
 
pao-yü with his body still reclining withdrew from her reach, and as he
 did so, answered with smile: "it isn't scratch; it must, i
 presume, be simply drop, which bespattered my cheek when i was just
 now mixing and clarifying the cosmetic paste for them."
 
saying this, tried to get at his handkerchief to wipe it off; but
 tai-yü used her own and rubbed it clean for him, while she observed: "do
 you still give your mind to such things? attend to them you may; but
 must you carry about you placard (to make it public)? though uncle
 mayn't see it, were others to notice it, they would treat it as a
 strange occurrence and novel bit of news, and go and tell him to curry
 favour, and when it has reached uncle's ear, we shall all again not come
 out clean, and provoke him to anger."
 
pao-yü did not in the least heed what she said, being intent upon
 smelling subtle scent which, in point of fact, emanated from tai-yü's
 sleeve, and when inhaled inebriated the soul and paralysed the bones.
 with snatch, pao-yü laid hold of tai-yü's sleeve meaning to see what
 object was concealed in it; but tai-yü smilingly expostulated: "at such
 time as this," she said, "who keeps scents about one?"
 
"well, in that case," pao-yü rejoined with smirking face, "where does
 this scent come from?"
 
"i myself don't know," tai-yü replied; "i presume it must be, there's no
 saying, some scent in the press which has impregnated the clothes."
 
"it doesn't follow," pao-yü added, as shook his head; "the fumes of
 this smell are very peculiar, and don't resemble the perfume of
 scent-bottles, scent-balls, or scented satchets!"
 
"is it likely that i have, like others, buddhistic disciples," tai-yü
 asked laughing ironically, "or worthies to give novel kinds of
 scents? but supposing there is about some peculiar scent, i haven't,
 at all events, any older or younger brothers to get the flowers, buds,
 dew, and snow, and concoct any for me; all i have are those common
 scents, that's all."
 
"whenever i utter any single remark," pao-yü urged with grin, "you at
 once bring up all these insinuations; but unless i deal with you
 severely, you'll never know what stuff i'm made of; but from henceforth
 i'll more show you any grace!"
 
as spoke, turned himself over, and raising himself, puffed a
 couple of breaths into both his hands, and hastily stretching them out,
 tickled tai-yü promiscuously under her armpits, and along both sides.
 tai-yü had never been able to stand tickling, so that when pao-yü put
 out his two hands and tickled her violently, she forthwith giggled to
 such an extent that she could scarcely gasp for breath. "if you still go
 on teasing me," she shouted, "i'll get angry with you!"
 
pao-yü then kept his hands off, and as laughed, "tell me," asked,
 "will you again come out with all those words or not?"
 
"i daren't do it again," tai-yü smiled and adjusted her hair; adding
 with another laugh: "i may have peculiar scents, but have you any 'warm'
 scents?"
 
pao-yü at this question, could not for time unfold its meaning: "what
 'warm' scent?" therefore asked.
 
tai-yü nodded her head and smiled deridingly. "how stupid! what fool!"
 she sighed; "you have jade, and another person has gold to match with
 you, and if some one has 'cold' scent, haven't you any 'warm' scent as a
 set-off?"
 
pao-yü at this stage alone understood the import of her remark.
 
"a short while back you craved for mercy," pao-yü observed smilingly,
 "and here you are now going on talking worse than ever;" and as spoke
 again put out his hands.
 
"dear cousin," tai-yü speedily implored with smirk, "i won't venture
 to do it again."
 
"as for letting you off," pao-yü remarked laughing, "i'll readily let
 you off, but do allow to take your sleeve and smell it!" and while
 uttering these words, hastily pulled the sleeve, and pressing it
 against his face, kept on smelling it incessantly, whereupon tai-yü drew
 her hand away and urged: "you must be going now!"
 
"though you may wish to go, i can't," pao-yü smiled, "so let us now
 lie down with all propriety and have chat," laying himself down again,
 as spoke, while tai-yü likewise reclined, and covered her face with
 her handkerchief. pao-yü in rambling way gave vent to lot of
 nonsense, which tai-yü did not heed, and pao-yü went on to inquire: "how
 old she was when she came to the capital? what sights and antiquities
 she saw on the journey? what relics and curiosities there were at yang
 chou? what were the local customs and the habits of the people?"
 
tai-yü made reply; and pao-yü fearing lest she should go to sleep,
 and get ill, readily set to work to beguile her to keep awake. "ai yah!"
 exclaimed, "at yang chou, where your official residence is, has
 occurred remarkable affair; have you heard about it?"
 
tai-yü perceiving that spoke in earnest, that his words were correct
 and his face serious, imagined that what referred to was true
 story, and she therefore inquired what it was?
 
pao-yü upon hearing her ask this question, forthwith suppressed laugh,
 and, with glib tongue, began to spin yarn. "at yang chou," he
 said, "there's hill called the tai hill; and on this hill stands a
 cave called the lin tzu."
 
"this must all be lies," tai-yü answered sneeringly, "as i've never
 before heard of such hill."
 
"under the heavens many are the hills and rivers," pao-yü rejoined, "and
 how could you know them all? wait until i've done speaking, when you
 will be free to express your opinion!"
 
"go on then," tai-yü suggested, whereupon pao-yü prosecuted his
 raillery. "in this lin tzu cave," said, "there was once upon time a
 whole swarm of rat-elves. in some year or other and on the seventh day
 of the twelfth moon, an old rat ascended the throne to discuss matters.
 'tomorrow,' argued, 'is the eighth of the twelfth moon, and men in
 the world will all be cooking the congee of the eighth of the twelfth
 moon. we have now in our cave short supply of fruits of all kinds, and
 it would be well that we should seize this opportunity to steal few
 and bring them over.' drawing mandatory arrow, handed it to a
 small rat, full of aptitude, to go forward on tour of inspection. the
 young rat on his return reported that had already concluded his
 search and inquiries in every place and corner, and that in the temple
 at the bottom of the hill alone was the largest stock of fruits and
 rice. 'how many kinds of rice are there?' the old rat ascertained, 'and
 how many species of fruits?' 'rice and beans,' the young rat rejoined,
 'how many barns-full there are, i can't remember; but in the way of
 fruits there are five kinds: 1st, red dates; 2nd, chestnuts; 3rd, ground
 nuts; 4th, water caltrops, and 5th, scented taros.' at this report the
 old rat was so much elated that promptly detailed rats to go forth;
 and as drew the mandatory arrow, and inquired who would go and steal
 the rice, rat readily received the order and went off to rob the rice.
 drawing another mandatory arrow, asked who would go and abstract the
 beans, when once more rat took over the arrow and started to steal the
 beans; and one by one subsequently received each an arrow and started on
 his errand. there only remained the scented taros, so that picking again
 mandatory arrow, ascertained who would go and carry away the taros:
 whereupon very puny and very delicate rat was heard to assent. 'i
 would like,' said, 'to go and steal the scented taros.' the old rat
 and all the swarm of rats, upon noticing his state, feared that would
 not be sufficiently expert, and apprehending at the same time that he
 was too weakly and too devoid of energy, they one and all would not
 allow him to proceed. 'though i be young in years and though my frame be
 delicate,' the wee rat expostulated, 'my devices are unlimited, my talk
 is glib and my designs deep and farseeing; and i feel convinced that, on
 this errand, i shall be more ingenious in pilfering than any of them.'
 'how could you be more ingenious than they?' the whole company of rats
 asked. 'i won't,' explained the young rat, 'follow their example, and go
 straight to work and steal, but by simply shaking my body, and
 transforming myself, i shall metamorphose myself into taro, and roll
 myself among the heap of taros, so that people will not be able to
 detect me, and to hear me; whereupon i shall stealthily, by means of the
 magic art of dividing my body into many, begin the removal, and little
 by little transfer the whole lot away, and will not this be far more
 ingenious than any direct pilfering or forcible abstraction?' after the
 whole swarm of rats had listened to what had to say, they, with one
 voice, exclaimed: 'excellent it is indeed, but what is this art of
 metamorphosis we wonder? go forth you may, but first transform yourself
 and let us see you.' at these words the young rat laughed. 'this isn't a
 hard task!' observed, 'wait till i transform myself.'
 
"having done speaking, shook his body and shouted out 'transform,'
 when was converted into young girl, most beauteous and with most
 lovely face.
 
"'you've transformed yourself into the wrong thing,' all the rats
 promptly added deridingly; 'you said that you were to become fruit,
 and how is it that you've turned into young lady?'
 
"the young rat in its original form rejoined with sneering smile: 'you
 all lack, i maintain, experience of the world; what you simply are aware
 of is that this fruit is the scented taro, but have idea that the
 young daughter of mr. lin, of the salt tax, is, in real truth, genuine
 scented taro.'"
 
tai-yü having listened to this story, turned herself round and raising
 herself, she observed laughing, while she pushed pao-yü: "i'll take that
 mouth of yours and pull it to pieces! now i see that you've been
 imposing upon me."
 
with these words on her lips, she readily gave him pinch, and pao-yü
 hastened to plead for mercy. "my dear cousin," said, "spare me; i
 won't presume to do it again; and it's when i came to perceive this
 perfume of yours, that i suddenly bethought myself of this old story."
 
"you freely indulge in abusing people," tai-yü added with smile, "and
 then go on to say that it's an old story."
 
but hardly had she concluded this remark before they caught sight of
 pao-ch'ai walk in. "who has been telling old stories?" she asked with a
 beaming face; "do let also hear them."
 
tai-yü pressed her at once into seat. "just see for yourself who else
 besides is here!" she smiled; "he goes in for profuse abuses and then
 maintains that it's an old story!"
 
"is it indeed cousin pao-yü?" pao-ch'ai remarked. "well, one can't feel
 surprised at his doing it; for many have ever been the stories stored up
 in his brain. the only pity is that when should make use of old
 stories, invariably forgets them! to-day, can easily enough recall
 them to mind, but in the stanza of the other night on the banana leaves,
 when should have remembered them, couldn't after all recollect
 what really stared him in the face! and while every one else seemed so
 cool, was in such flurry that actually perspired! and yet, at
 this moment, happens once again to have memory!"
 
at these words, tai-yü laughed. "o-mi-to-fu!" she exclaimed. "you are
 indeed my very good cousin! but you've also (to pao-yü) come across your
 match. and this makes it clear that requital and retribution never fail
 or err."
 
she had just reached this part of her sentence, when in pao-yü's rooms
 was heard continuous sound of wrangling; but as what transpired is not
 yet known, the ensuing chapter will explain.
 



chapter xx.
 
wang hsi-feng with earnest words upbraids mrs. chao's jealous notions.
 lin tai-yü uses specious language to make sport of shih hsiang-yün's
 querulous tone of voice.
 

but to continue. pao-yü was in tai yü's apartments relating about the
 rat-elves, when pao-ch'ai entered unannounced, and began to gibe pao-yü,
 with trenchant irony: how that on the fifteenth of the first moon, he
 had shown ignorance of the allusion to the green wax; and the three of
 them then indulged in that room in mutual poignant satire, for the sake
 of fun. pao-yü had been giving way to solicitude lest tai-yü should, by
 being bent upon napping soon after her meal, be shortly getting an
 indigestion, or lest sleep should, at night, be completely dispelled, as
 neither of these things were conducive to the preservation of good
 health, when luckily pao-ch'ai walked in, and they chatted and laughed
 together; and when lin tai-yü at length lost all inclination to dose, he
 himself then felt composed in his mind. but suddenly they heard
 clamouring begin in his room, and after they had all lent an ear and
 listened, lin tai-yü was the first to smile and make remark. "it's
 your nurse having row with hsi jen!" she said. "hsi jen treats her
 well enough, but that nurse of yours would also like to keep her well
 under her thumb; she's indeed an old dotard;" and pao-yü was anxious to
 go over at once, but pao-ch'ai laid hold of him and kept him back,
 suggesting: "it's as well that you shouldn't wrangle with your nurse,
 for she's quite stupid from old age; and it's but fair, on the contrary,
 that you should bear with her little."
 
"i know all about that!" pao-yü rejoined. but having concluded this
 remark, walked into his room, where discovered nurse li, leaning
 on her staff, standing in the centre of the floor, abusing hsi jen,
 saying: "you young wench! how utterly unmindful you are of your origin!
 it's i who've raised you up, and yet, when i came just now, you put on
 high airs and mighty side, and remained reclining on the stove-couch!
 you saw well enough, but you paid not the least heed to me! your
 whole heart is set upon acting like wily enchantress to befool pao-yü;
 and you so impose upon pao-yü that doesn't notice me, but merely
 lends an ear to what you people have to say! you're more than low
 girl bought for few taels and brought in here; and will it ever do
 that you should be up to your mischievous tricks in this room? but
 whether you like it or not, i'll drag you out from this, and give you to
 some mean fellow, and we'll see whether you will still behave like a
 very imp, and cajole people or not?"
 
hsi jen was, at first, under the simple impression that the nurse was
 wrath for other reason than because she remained lying down, and she
 felt constrained to explain that "she was unwell, that she had just
 succeeded in perspiring, and that having had her head covered, she
 hadn't really perceived the old lady;" but when she came subsequently to
 hear her mention that she imposed upon pao-yü, and also go so far as to
 add that she would be given to some mean fellow, she unavoidably
 experienced both sense of shame and injury, and found it impossible to
 restrain herself from beginning to cry.
 
pao-yü had, it is true, caught all that had been said, but unable with
 any propriety to take notice of it, thought it his duty to explain
 matters for her. "she's ill," observed, "and is taking medicines; and
 if you don't believe it," went on, "well then ask the rest of the
 servant-girls."
 
nurse li at these words flew into more violent dudgeon. "your sole
 delight is to screen that lot of sly foxes!" she remarked, "and do you
 pay any notice to me? no, none at all! and whom would you like to go
 and ask; who's it that doesn't back you? and who hasn't been dismounted
 from her horse by hsi jen? i know all about it; but i'll go with you and
 explain all these matters to our old mistress and my lady; for i've
 nursed you till i've brought you to this age, and now that you don't
 feed on milk, you thrust on one side, and avail yourself of the
 servant-girls, in your wish to browbeat me."
 
as she uttered this remark, she too gave way to tears, but by this time,
 tai-yü and pao-ch'ai had also come over, and they set to work to
 reassure her. "you, old lady," they urged, "should bear with them a
 little, and everything will be right!" and when nurse li saw these two
 arrive, she hastened to lay bare her grievances to them; and taking up
 the question of the dismissal in days gone by, of hsi hsüeh, for having
 drunk some tea, of the cream eaten on the previous day, and other
 similar matters, she spun long, interminable yarn.
 
by strange coincidence lady feng was at this moment in the upper
 rooms, where she had been making up the account of losses and winnings,
 and upon hearing at the back continuous sound of shouting and
 bustling, she readily concluded that nurse li's old complaint was
 breaking forth, and that she was finding fault with pao-yü's servants.
 but she had, as luck would have it, lost money in gambling on this
 occasion, so that she was ready to visit her resentment upon others.
 with hurried step, she forthwith came over, and laying hold of nurse li,
 "nurse," she said smiling, "don't lose your temper, on great festival
 like this, and after our venerable lady has just gone through day in
 excellent spirits! you're an old dame, and should, when others get up a
 row, still do what is right and keep them in proper order; and aren't
 you, instead of that, aware what good manners imply, that you will start
 vociferating in this place, and make our dowager lady full of
 displeasure? tell who's not good, and i'll beat her for you; but be
 quick and come along with over to my quarters, where pheasant which
 they have roasted is scalding hot, and let us go and have glass of
 wine!" and as she spoke, she dragged her along and went on her way.
 "feng erh," she also called, "hold the staff for your old lady li, and
 the handkerchief to wipe her tears with!" while nurse li walked along
 with lady feng, her feet scarcely touched the ground, as she kept on
 saying: "i don't really attach any value to this decrepid existence of
 mine! and i had rather disregard good manners, have row and lose face,
 as it's better, it seems to me, than to put up with the temper of that
 wench!"
 
behind followed pao-ch'ai and tai-yü, and at the sight of the way in
 which lady feng dealt with her, they both clapped their hands, and
 exclaimed, laughing, "what piece of luck that this gust of wind has
 come, and dragged away this old matron!" while pao-yü nodded his head to
 and fro and soliloquised with sigh: "one can neither know whence
 originates this score; for she will choose the weak one to maltreat; nor
 can one see what girl has given her offence that she has come to be put
 in her black books!"
 
scarcely had ended this remark, before ch'ing wen, who stood by, put
 in her word. "who's gone mad again?" she interposed, "and what good
 would come by hurting her feelings? but did even any one happen to hurt
 her, she would have pluck enough to bear the brunt, and wouldn't act so
 improperly as to involve others!"
 
hsi jen wept, and as she, did so, she drew pao-yü towards her: "all
 through my having aggrieved an old nurse," she urged, "you've now again
 given umbrage, entirely on my account, to this crowd of people; and
 isn't this still enough for to bear but must you also go and drag in
 third parties?"
 
when pao-yü realised that to this sickness of hers, had also been
 superadded all these annoyances, promptly stifled his resentment,
 suppressed his voice and consoled her so far as to induce her to lie
 down again to perspire. and when further noticed how scalding like
 soup and burning like fire she was, himself watched by her, and
 reclining by her side, tried to cheer her, saying: "all you must do
 is to take good care of your ailment; and don't give your mind to those
 trifling matters, and get angry."
 
"were i," hsi jen smiled sardonically, "to lose my temper over such
 concerns, would i be able to stand one moment longer in this room? the
 only thing is that if she goes on, day after day, doing nothing else
 than clamour in this manner, how can she let people get along? but you
 rashly go and hurt people's feelings for our sakes; but they'll bear it
 in mind, and when they find an opportunity, they'll come out with what's
 easy enough to say, but what's not pleasant to hear, and how will we all
 feel then?"
 
while her mouth gave utterance to these words, she could not stop her
 tears from running; but fearful, on the other hand, lest pao-yü should
 be annoyed, she felt compelled to again strain every nerve to repress
 them. but in short while, the old matrons employed for all sorts of
 duties, brought in some mixture of two drugs; and, as pao-yü noticed
 that she was just on the point of perspiring, did not allow her to
 get up, but readily taking it up to her, she immediately swallowed it,
 with her head still on her pillow; whereupon gave speedy directions
 to the young servant-maids to lay her stove-couch in order.
 
"whether you mean to have anything to eat or not," hsi jen advised, "you
 should after all sit for time with our old mistress and our lady, and
 have romp with the young ladies; after which you can come back again;
 while i, by quietly keeping lying down, will also feel the better."
 
when pao-yü heard this suggestion, had help but to accede, and,
 after she had divested herself of her hair-pins and earrings, and saw
 her lie down, betook himself into the drawing-rooms, where had his
 repast with old lady chia. but the meal over, her ladyship felt still
 disposed to play at cards with the nurses, who had looked after the
 household for many years; and pao-yü, bethinking himself of hsi jen,
 hastened to return to his apartments; where seeing that hsi jen was
 drowsily falling asleep, himself would have wished to go to bed, but
 the hour was yet early. and as about this time ch'ing wen, i hsia, ch'in
 wen, pi hen had all, in their desire of getting some excitement, started
 in search of yüan yang, hu po and their companions, to have romp with
 them, and espied she yüeh alone in the outer room, having game of
 dominoes by lamp-light, pao-yü inquired full of smiles: "how is it you
 don't go with them?"
 
"i've money," she yüeh replied.
 
"under the bed," continued pao-yü, "is heaped up all that money, and
 isn't it enough yet for you to lose from?"
 
"had we all gone to play," she yüeh added, "to whom would the charge of
 this apartment have been handed over? that other one is sick again, and
 the whole room is above, one mass of lamps, and below, full of fire; and
 all those old matrons, ancient as the heavens, should, after all their
 exertions in waiting upon you from morning to night, be also allowed
 some rest; while the young servant girls, on the other hand, have
 likewise been on duty the whole day long, and shouldn't they even at
 this hour be left to go and have some distraction? and that's why i am
 in here on watch."
 
when pao-yü heard these words, which demonstrated distinctly that she
 was another hsi jen, consequently put on smile and remarked: "i'll
 sit in here, so you had better set your mind at ease and go!"
 
"since you remain in here, there's less need for to go," resumed she
 yüeh, "for we two can chat and play and laugh; and won't that be nice?"
 
"what can we two do? it will be awfully dull! but never mind," pao-yü
 rejoined; "this morning you said that your head itched, and now that you
 have nothing to do, i may as well comb it for you."
 
"yes! do so!" readily assented she yüeh, upon catching what he
 suggested; and while still speaking, she brought over the dressing-case
 containing set of small drawers and looking-glass, and taking off her
 ornaments, she dishevelled her hair; whereupon pao-yü picked up the fine
 comb and passed it repeatedly through her hair; but had only combed
 it three or five times, when perceived ch'ing wen hurriedly walk in
 to fetch some money. as soon as she caught sight of them both: "you
 haven't as yet drunk from the marriage cup," she said with smile full
 of irony, "and have you already put up your hair?"
 
"now that you've come, let also comb yours for you," pao-yü
 continued.
 
"i'm not blessed with such excessive good fortune!" ch'ing wen retorted,
 and as she uttered these words, she took the money, and forthwith
 dashing the portiere after her, she quitted the room.
 
pao-yü stood at the back of she yüeh, and she yüeh sat opposite the
 glass, so that the two of them faced each other in it, and pao-yü
 readily observed as gazed in the glass, "in the whole number of rooms
 she's the only one who has glib tongue!"
 
she yüeh at these words hastily waved her hand towards the inside of the
 glass, and pao-yü understood the hint; and suddenly sound of "hu" was
 heard from the portiere, and ch'ing wen ran in once again.
 
"how have i got glib tongue?" she inquired; "it would be well for us
 to explain ourselves."
 
"go after your business, and have done," she yüeh interposed laughingly;
 "what's the use of your coming and asking questions of people?"
 
"will you also screen him?" ch'ing wen smiled significantly; "i know all
 about your secret doings, but wait until i've got back my capital, and
 we'll then talk matters over!"
 
with this remark still on her lips, she straightway quitted the room,
 and during this while, pao-yü having finished combing her hair, asked
 she yüeh to quietly wait upon him, while went to sleep, as would
 not like to disturb hsi jen.
 
of the whole night there is nothing to record. but the next day, when he
 got up at early dawn, hsi jen had already perspired, during the night,
 so that she felt considerably lighter and better; but limiting her diet
 to little rice soup, she remained quiet and nursed herself, and pao-yü
 was so relieved in mind that came, after his meal, over on this side
 to his aunt hsüeh's on saunter. the season was the course of the first
 moon, and the school was shut up for the new year holidays; while in the
 inner chambers the girls had put by their needlework, and were all
 having time of leisure, and hence it was that when chia huan too came
 over in search of distraction, discovered pao-ch'ai, hsiang ling,
 ying erh, the three of them, in the act of recreating themselves by
 playing at chess. chia huan, at the sight of them, also wished to join
 in their games; and pao-ch'ai, who had always looked upon him with, in
 fact, the same eye as she did pao-yü, and with different sentiment of
 any kind, pressed him to come up, upon hearing that was on this
 occasion desirous to play; and, when had seated himself together with
 them, they began to gamble, staking each time pile of ten cash. the
 first time, was the winner, and felt supremely elated at heart,
 but as it happened that subsequently lost in several consecutive
 games soon became prey to considerable distress. but in due course
 came the game in which it was his turn to cast the dice, and, if in
 throwing, got seven spots, stood to win, but was likewise bound
 to be winner were to turn up six; and when ying erh had turned up
 three spots and lost, consequently took up the dice, and dashing them
 with spite, one of them settled at five; and, as the other reeled wildly
 about, ying erh clapped her hands, and kept on shouting, "one spot;"
 while chia huan at once gazed with fixed eye and cried at random: "it's
 six, it's seven, it's eight!" but the dice, as it happened, turned up at
 one spot, and chia huan was so exasperated that putting out his hand, he
 speedily made snatch at the dice, and eventually was about to lay hold
 of the money, arguing that it was six spot. but ying erh expostulated,
 "it was distinctly an ace," she said. and as pao-ch'ai noticed how
 distressed chia huan was, she forthwith cast glance at ying erh and
 observed: "the older you get, the less manners you have! is it likely
 that gentlemen will cheat you? and don't you yet put down the money?"
 
ying erh felt her whole heart much aggrieved, but as she heard pao-ch'ai
 make these remarks, she did not presume to utter sound, and as she was
 under the necessity of laying down the cash, she muttered to herself:
 "this one calls himself gentleman, and yet cheats us of these few
 cash, for which i myself even have eye! the other day when i played
 with mr. pao-yü, lost ever so many, and yet did not distress
 himself! and what remained of the cash were besides snatched away by a
 few servant-girls, but all did was to smile, that's all!"
 
pao-ch'ai did not allow her time to complete what she had to say, but
 there and then called her to account and made her desist; whereupon chia
 huan exclaimed: "how can i compare with pao-yü; you all fear him, and
 keep on good terms with him, while you all look down upon for not
 being the child of my lady." and as uttered these words, at once
 gave way to tears.
 
"my dear cousin," pao-ch'ai hastened to advise him, "leave off at once
 language of this kind, for people will laugh at you;" and then went on
 to scold ying erh, when pao-yü just happened to come in. perceiving him
 in this plight, "what is the matter?" asked; but chia huan had not
 the courage to say anything.
 
pao-ch'ai was well aware of the custom, which prevailed in their family,
 that younger brothers lived in respect of the elder brothers, but she
 was not however cognisant of the fact that pao-yü would not that any one
 should entertain any fear of him. his idea being that elder as well as
 younger brothers had, all alike, father and mother to admonish them, and
 that there was need for any of that officiousness, which, instead of
 doing good gave, on the contrary, rise to estrangement. "besides," (he
 reasoned,) "i'm the offspring of the primary wife, while he's the of
 the secondary wife, and, if by treating him as leniently as i have done,
 there are still those to talk about me, behind my back, how could i
 exercise any control over him?" but besides these, there were other
 still more foolish notions, which fostered in his mind; but what
 foolish notions they were can you, reader, guess? as result of his
 growing up, from his early youth, among crowd of girls, of whom, in
 the way of sister, there was yüan ch'un, of cousins, from his paternal
 uncle's side, there were ying ch'un, and hsi ch'un, and of relatives
 also there were shih hsiang-yün, lin tai-yü, hsüeh pao-ch'ai and the
 rest, he, in due course, resolved in his mind that the divine and
 unsullied virtue of heaven and earth was only implanted in womankind,
 and that men were more than feculent dregs and foul dirt. and for
 this reason it was that men were without discrimination, considered by
 him as so many filthy objects, which might or might not exist; while the
 relationships of father, paternal uncles, and brothers, did not
 however presume to disregard, as these were among the injunctions
 bequeathed by the holy man, and felt bound to listen to few of
 their precepts. but to the above causes must be assigned the fact that,
 among his brothers, did more than accomplish the general purport
 of the principle of human affections; bearing in mind thought
 whatever that himself was human being of the male sex, and that it
 was his duty to be an example to his younger brothers. and this is why
 chia huan and the others entertained respect for him, though in their
 veneration for dowager lady chia, they yielded to him to certain
 degree.
 
pao-ch'ai harboured fears lest, on this occasion, pao-yü should call him
 to book, and put him out of face, and she there and then lost time in
 taking chia huan's part with view to screening him.
 
"in this felicitous first moon what are you blubbering for?" pao-yü
 inquired, "if this place isn't nice, why then go somewhere else to play.
 but from reading books, day after day, you've studied so much that
 you've become quite dunce. if this thing, for instance, isn't good,
 that must, of course, be good, so then discard this and take up that,
 but is it likely that by sticking to this thing and crying for while
 that it will become good? you came originally with the idea of reaping
 some fun, and you've instead provoked yourself to displeasure, and isn't
 it better then that you should be off at once."
 
chia huan upon hearing these words could not but come back to his
 quarters; and mrs. chao noticing the frame of mind in which was felt
 constrained to inquire: "where is it that you've been looked down upon
 by being made to fill up hole, and being trodden under foot?"
 
"i was playing with cousin pao-ch'ai," chia huan readily replied, "when
 ying erh insulted me, and deprived of my money, and brother pao-yü
 drove away."
 
"ts'ui!" exclaimed mrs. chao, "who bade you (presume so high) as to get
 up into that lofty tray? you low and barefaced thing! what place is
 there that you can't go to and play; and who told you to run over there
 and bring upon yourself all this shame?"
 
as she spoke, lady feng was, by strange coincidence, passing outside
 under the window; so that every word reached her ear, and she speedily
 asked from outside the window: "what are you up to in this happy first
 moon? these brothers are, really, but mere children, and will you just
 for slight mistake, go on preaching to him! what's the use of coming
 out with all you've said? let him go wherever pleases; for there are
 still our lady and mr. chia cheng to keep him in order. but you go and
 sputter him with your gigantic mouth; he's at present master, and if
 there be anything wrong about him, there are, after all, those to rate
 him; and what business is that of yours? brother huan, come out with
 you, and follow and let us go and enjoy ourselves."
 
chia huan had ever been in greater fear and trembling of lady feng, than
 of madame wang, so that when her summons reached his ear, hurriedly
 went out, while mrs. chao, on the other hand, did not venture to breathe
 single word.
 
"you too," resumed lady feng, addressing chia huan; "are thing devoid
 of all natural spirit! i've often told you that if you want to eat,
 drink, play, or laugh, you were quite free to go and play with whatever
 female cousin, male cousin, or sister-in-law you choose to disport
 yourself with; but you won't listen to my words. on the contrary, you
 let all these persons teach you to be depraved in your heart, perverse
 in your mind, to be sly, artful, and domineering; and you've, besides,
 respect for your own self, but will go with that low-bred lot! and
 your perverse purpose is to begrudge people's preferences! but what
 you've lost are simply few cash, and do you behave in this manner? how
 much did you lose?" she proceeded to ask chia huan; and chia huan, upon
 hearing this question, felt constrained to obey, by saying something in
 the way of reply. "i've lost," explained, "some hundred or two
 hundred cash."
 
"you have," rejoined lady feng, "the good fortune of being gentleman,
 and do you make such fuss for the loss of hundred or two hundred
 cash!" and turning her head round, "feng erh," she added, "go and fetch
 thousand cash; and as the girls are all playing at the back, take him
 along to go and play. and if again by and by, you're so mean and
 deceitful, i shall, first of all, beat you, and then tell some one to
 report it at school, and won't your skin be flayed for you? all because
 of this want of respect of yours, your elder cousin is so angry with you
 that his teeth itch; and were it not that i prevent him, would hit
 you with his foot in the stomach and kick all your intestines out! get
 away," she then cried; whereupon chia huan obediently followed feng erh,
 and taking the money went all by himself to play with ying ch'un and
 the rest; where we shall leave him without another word.
 
but to return to pao-yü. was just amusing himself and laughing with
 pao-ch'ai, when at an unexpected moment, heard some one announce that
 miss shih had come. at these words, pao-yü rose, and was at once going
 off when "wait," shouted pao-ch'ai with smile, "and we'll go over
 together and see her."
 
saying this, she descended from the stove-couch, and came, in company
 with pao-yü, to dowager lady chia's on this side, where they saw shih
 hsiang-yün laughing aloud, and talking immoderately; and upon catching
 sight of them both, she promptly inquired after their healths, and
 exchanged salutations.
 

lin tai-yü just happened to be standing by, and having set the question
 to pao-yü "where do you come from?" "i come from cousin pao-ch'ai's
 rooms," pao-yü readily replied.
 
tai-yü gave sardonic smile. "what i maintain is this," she rejoined,
 "that lucky enough for you, you were detained over there; otherwise, you
 would long ago have, at once, come flying in here!"
 
"am i only free to play with you?" pao-yü inquired, "and to dispel your
 ennui! i simply went over to her place for run, and that quite
 casually, and will you insinuate all these things?"
 
"your words are quite devoid of sense," tai-yü added; "whether you go or
 not what's that to me? neither did i tell you to give any
 distraction; you're quite at liberty from this time forth not to pay any
 notice to me!"
 
saying this, she flew into high dudgeon and rushed back into her room;
 but pao-yü promptly followed in her footsteps: "here you are again in a
 huff," urged, "and all for reason! had i even passed any remark
 that i shouldn't, you should anyhow have still sat in there, and chatted
 and laughed with the others for while; instead of that, you come again
 to sit and mope all alone!"
 
"are you my keeper?" tai-yü expostulated.
 
"i couldn't, of course," pao-yü smiled, "presume to exercise any
 influence over you; but the only thing is that you are doing your own
 health harm!"
 
"if i do ruin my health," tai-yü rejoined, "and i die, it's my own
 lookout! what's that to do with you?"
 
"what's the good," protested pao-yü, "of talking in this happy first
 moon of dying and of living?"
 
"i _will_ say die," insisted tai-yü, "die now, at this very moment!
 but you're afraid of death; and you may live long life of hundred
 years, but what good will that be!"
 
"if all we do is to go on nagging in this way," pao-yü remarked smiling,
 "will i any more be afraid to die? on the contrary, it would be better
 to die, and be free!"
 
"quite so!" continued tai-yü with alacrity, "if we go on nagging in this
 way, it would be better for to die, and that you should be free of
 me!"
 
"i speak of my own self dying," pao-yü added, "so don't misunderstand my
 words and accuse people wrongly."
 
while was as yet speaking, pao-ch'ai entered the room: "cousin shih
 is waiting for you;" she said; and with these words, she hastily pushed
 pao-yü on, and they walked away.
 
tai-yü, meanwhile, became more and more prey to resentment; and
 disconsolate as she felt, she shed tears in front of the window. but not
 time enough had transpired to allow two cups of tea to be drunk, before
 pao-yü came back again. at the sight of him, tai-yü sobbed still more
 fervently and incessantly, and pao-yü realising the state she was in,
 and knowing well enough how arduous task it would be to bring her
 round, began to join together hundred, yea thousand kinds of soft
 phrases and tender words to console her. but at an unforeseen moment,
 and before could himself open his mouth, heard tai-yü anticipate
 him.
 
"what have you come back again for?" she asked. "let die or live, as
 i please, and have done! you've really got at present some one to play
 with you, one who, compared with me, is able to read and able to
 compose, able to write, to speak, as well as to joke, one too who for
 fear lest you should have ruffled your temper dragged you away: and what
 do you return here for now?"
 
pao-yü, after listening to all she had to say, hastened to come up to
 her. "is it likely," observed in low tone of voice, "that an
 intelligent person like you isn't so much as aware that near relatives
 can't be separated by distant relative, and remote friend set aside
 an old friend! i'm stupid, there's gainsaying, but i do anyhow
 understand what these two sentiments imply. you and i are, in the first
 place, cousins on my father's sister's side; while sister pao-ch'ai and
 i are two cousins on mother's sides, so that, according to the degrees
 of relationship, she's more distant than yourself. in the second place,
 you came here first, and we two have our meals at one table and sleep in
 one bed, having ever since our youth grown up together; while she has
 only recently come, and how could i ever distance you on her account?"
 
"ts'ui!" tai-yü exclaimed. "will i forsooth ever make you distance her!
 who and what kind of person have i become to do such thing? what (i
 said) was prompted by my own motives."
 
"i too," pao-yü urged, "made those remarks prompted by my own heart's
 motives, and do you mean to say that your heart can only read the
 feelings of your own heart, and has idea whatsoever of my own?"
 
tai-yü at these words, lowered her head and said not word. but after a
 long interval, "you only know," she continued, "how to feel bitter
 against people for their action in censuring you: but you don't, after
 all, know that you yourself provoke people to such degree, that it's
 hard for them to put up with it! take for instance the weather of to-day
 as an example. it's distinctly very cold, to-day, and yet, how is it
 that you are so contrary as to go and divest yourself of the pelisse
 with the bluish breast-fur overlapping the cloth?"
 
"why say i didn't wear it?" pao-yü smilingly observed. "i did, but
 seeing you get angry i felt suddenly in such terrible blaze, that i at
 once took it off!"
 
tai-yü heaved sigh. "you'll by and by catch cold," she remarked,
 "and then you'll again have to starve, and vociferate for something to
 eat!"
 
while these two were having this colloquy, hsiang-yün was seen to walk
 in! "you two, ai cousin and cousin lin," she ventured jokingly, "are
 together playing every day, and though i've managed to come after ever
 so much trouble, you pay heed to at all!"
 
"it's invariably the rule," tai-yü retorted smilingly, "that those who
 have defect in their speech will insist upon talking; she can't even
 come out correctly with 'erh' (secundus) cousin, and keeps on calling
 him 'ai' cousin, 'ai' cousin! and by and by when you play 'wei ch'i'
 you're sure also to shout out yao, ai, (instead of erh), san; (one, two,
 three)."
 
pao-yü laughed. "if you imitate her," interposed, "and get into that
 habit, you'll also begin to bite your tongue when you talk."
 
"she won't make even the slightest allowance for any one," hsiang-yün
 rejoined; "her sole idea being to pick out others' faults. you may
 readily be superior to any mortal being, but you shouldn't, after all,
 offend against what's right and make fun of every person you come
 across! but i'll point out some one, and if you venture to jeer her,
 i'll at once submit to you."
 
"who is it?" tai-yü vehemently inquired.
 
"if you do have the courage," hsiang-yün answered, "to pick out cousin
 pao-ch'ai's faults, you then may well be held to be first-rate!"
 
tai-yü after hearing these words, gave sarcastic smile. "i was
 wondering," she observed, "who it was. is it indeed she? how could i
 ever presume to pick out hers?"
 
pao-yü allowed her time to finish, but hastened to say something to
 interrupt the conversation.
 
"i couldn't, of course, during the whole of this my lifetime,"
 hsiang-yün laughed, "attain your standard! but my earnest wish is that
 by and by should be found for you, cousin lin, husband, who bites his
 tongue when speaks, so that you should every minute and second listen
 to 'ai-ya-os!' o-mi-to-fu, won't then your reward be manifest to my
 eyes!"
 
as she made this remark, they all burst out laughing heartily, and
 hsiang-yün speedily turned herself round and ran away.
 
but reader, do you want to know the sequel? well, then listen to the
 explanation given in the next chapter.
 



chapter xxi.
 
the eminent hsi jen, with winsome ways, rails at pao-yü, with view
 to exhortation.
 the beauteous p'ing erh, with soft words, screens chia lien.
 

but to resume our story. when shih hsiang-yün ran out of the room, she
 was all in flutter lest lin tai-yü should catch her up; but pao-yü,
 who came after her, readily shouted out, "you'll trip and fall. how ever
 could she come up to you?"
 
lin tai-yü went in pursuit of her as far as the entrance, when she was
 impeded from making further progress by pao-yü, who stretched his arms
 out against the posts of the door.
 
"were i to spare yün erh, i couldn't live!" lin tai-yü exclaimed, as she
 tugged at his arms. but hsiang-yün, perceiving that pao-yü obstructed
 the door, and surmising that tai-yü could not come out, speedily stood
 still. "my dear cousin," she smilingly pleaded, "do let off this
 time!"
 
but it just happened that pao-ch'ai, who was coming along, was at the
 back of hsiang-yün, and with face also beaming with smiles: "i advise
 you both," she said, "to leave off out of respect for cousin pao-yü, and
 have done."
 
"i don't agree to that," tai-yü rejoined; "are you people, pray, all of
 one mind to do nothing but make fun of me?"
 
"who ventures to make fun of you?" pao-yü observed advisingly; "and
 hadn't you made sport of her, would she have presumed to have said
 anything about you?"
 
while this quartet were finding it an arduous task to understand one
 another, servant came to invite them to have their repast, and they
 eventually crossed over to the front side, and as it was already time
 for the lamps to be lit, madame wang, widow li wan, lady feng, ying
 ch'un, t'an ch'un, hsi ch'un and the other cousins, adjourned in body
 to dowager lady chia's apartments on this side, where the whole company
 spent while in chat on irrelevant topics, after which they each
 returned to their rooms and retired to bed. hsiang-yün, as of old,
 betook herself to tai-yü's quarters to rest, and pao-yü escorted them
 both into their apartment, and it was after the hour had already past
 the second watch, and hsi jen had come and pressed him several times,
 that at length returned to his own bedroom and went to sleep. the
 next morning, as soon as it was daylight, threw his clothes over him,
 put on his low shoes and came over into tai-yü's room, where however
 saw nothing of the two girls tzu chüan and ts'ui lu, as there was one
 else here in there besides his two cousins, still reclining under the
 coverlets. tai-yü was closely wrapped in quilt of almond-red silk, and
 lying quietly, with closed eyes fast asleep; while shih hsiang-yün, with
 her handful of shiny hair draggling along the edge of the pillow, was
 covered only up to the chest, and outside the coverlet rested her curved
 snow-white arm, with the gold bracelets, which she had on.
 
at the sight of her, pao-yü heaved sigh. "even when asleep," he
 soliloquised, "she can't be quiet! but by and by, when the wind will
 have blown on her, she'll again shout that her shoulder is sore!" with
 these words, gently covered her, but lin tai-yü had already awoke out
 of her sleep, and becoming aware that there was some one about, she
 promptly concluded that it must, for certainty, be pao-yü, and turning
 herself accordingly round, and discovering at glance that the truth
 was not beyond her conjectures, she observed: "what have you run over to
 do at this early hour?" to which question pao-yü replied: "do you call
 this early? but get up and see for yourself!"
 
"first quit the room," tai-yü suggested, "and let us get up!"
 
pao-yü thereupon made his exit into the ante-chamber, and tai-yü jumped
 out of bed, and awoke hsiang-yün. when both of them had put on their
 clothes, pao-yü re-entered and took seat by the side of the toilet
 table; whence beheld tzu-chüan and hsüeh yen walk in and wait upon
 them, as they dressed their hair and performed their ablutions.
 hsiang-yün had done washing her face, and ts'üi lü at once took the
 remaining water and was about to throw it away, when pao-yü interposed,
 saying: "wait, i'll avail myself of this opportunity to wash too and
 finish with it, and thus save myself the trouble of having again to go
 over!" speaking the while, hastily came forward, and bending his
 waist, washed his face twice with two handfuls of water, and when tzu
 chüan went over to give him the scented soap, pao-yü added: "in this
 basin, there's good deal of it, and there's need of rubbing any
 more!" then washed his face with two more handfuls, and forthwith
 asked for towel, and ts'üi lü exclaimed: "what! have you still got
 this failing? when will you turn new leaf?" but pao-yü paid not so
 much as any heed to her, and there and then called for some salt, with
 which rubbed his teeth, and rinsed his mouth. when had done, he
 perceived that hsiang-yün had already finished combing her hair, and
 speedily coming up to her, put on smile, and said: "my dear cousin,
 comb my hair for me!"
 
"this can't be done!" hsiang-yün objected.
 
"my dear cousin," pao-yü continued smirkingly, "how is it that you
 combed it for in former times?"
 
"i've forgotten now how to comb it!" hsiang-yün replied.
 
"i'm not, after all, going out of doors," pao-yü observed, "nor will i
 wear hat or frontlet, so that all that need be done is to plait few
 queues, that's all!" saying this, went on to appeal to her in a
 thousand and one endearing terms, so that hsiang-yün had alternative,
 but to draw his head nearer to her and to comb one queue after another,
 and as when stayed at home wore hat, nor had, in fact, any
 tufted horns, she merely took the short surrounding hair from all four
 sides, and twisting it into small tufts, she collected it together over
 the hair on the crown of the head, and plaited large queue, binding it
 fast with red ribbon; while from the root of the hair to the end of the
 queue, were four pearls in row, below which, in the way of tip, was
 suspended golden pendant.
 
"of these pearls there are only three," hsiang-yün remarked as she went
 on plaiting; "this isn't one like them; i remember these were all of one
 kind, and how is it that there's one short?"
 
"i've lost one," pao-yü rejoined.
 
"it must have dropped," hsiang-yün added, "when you went out of doors,
 and been picked up by some one when you were off your guard; and he's
 now, instead of you, the richer for it."
 
"one can neither tell whether it has been really lost," tai-yü, who
 stood by, interposed, smiling the while sarcastically; "nor could one
 say whether it hasn't been given away to some one to be mounted in some
 trinket or other and worn!"
 
pao-yü made reply; but set to work, seeing that the two sides of the
 dressing table were all full of toilet boxes and other such articles,
 taking up those that came under his hand and examining them. grasping
 unawares box of cosmetic, which was within his reach, would have
 liked to have brought it to his lips, but feared again lest
 hsiang-yün should chide him. while was hesitating whether to do so or
 not, hsiang-yün, from behind, stretched forth her arm and gave him a
 smack, which sent the cosmetic flying from his hand, as she cried out:
 "you good-for-nothing! when will you mend those weaknesses of yours!"
 but hardly had she had time to complete this remark, when she caught
 sight of hsi jen walk in, who upon perceiving this state of things,
 became aware that was already combed and washed, and she felt
 constrained to go back and attend to her own coiffure and ablutions. but
 suddenly, she saw pao-ch'ai come in and inquire: "where's cousin pao-yü
 gone?"
 
"do you mean to say," hsi jen insinuated with sardonic smile, "that
 your cousin pao-yü has leisure to stay at home?"
 
when pao-ch'ai heard these words, she inwardly comprehended her meaning,
 and when she further heard hsi jen remark with sigh: "cousins may well
 be on intimate terms, but they should also observe some sort of
 propriety; and they shouldn't night and day romp together; and matter
 how people may tender advice it's all like so much wind blowing past the
 ears." pao-ch'ai began, at these remarks, to cogitate within her mind:
 "may i not, possibly, have been mistaken in my estimation of this girl;
 for to listen to her words, she would really seem to have certain
 amount of _savoir faire_!"
 
pao-ch'ai thereupon took seat on the stove-couch, and quietly, in the
 course of their conversation on one thing and another, she managed to
 ascertain her age, her native village and other such particulars, and
 then setting her mind diligently to put, on the sly, her conversation
 and mental capacity to the test, she discovered how deeply worthy she
 was to be respected and loved. but in while pao-yü arrived, and
 pao-ch'ai at once quitted the apartment.
 
"how is it," pao-yü at once inquired, "that cousin pao-ch'ai was
 chatting along with you so lustily, and that as soon as she saw me
 enter, she promptly ran away?"
 
hsi jen did not make any reply to his first question, and it was only
 when had repeated it that hsi jen remarked: "do you ask me? how can i
 know what goes on between you two?"
 
when pao-yü heard these words, and noticed that the look on her face
 was so unlike that of former days, lost time in putting on smile
 and asking: "why is it that you too are angry in real earnest?"
 
"how could i presume to get angry!" hsi jen rejoined smiling
 indifferently; "but you mustn't, from this day forth, put your foot into
 this room! and as you have anyhow people to wait on you, you shouldn't
 come again to make use of my services, for i mean to go and attend to
 our old mistress, as in days of old."
 
with this remark still on her lips, she lay herself down on the
 stove-couch and closed her eyes. when pao-yü perceived the state of mind
 she was in, felt deeply surprised and could not refrain from coming
 forward and trying to cheer her up. but hsi jen kept her eyes closed and
 paid heed to him, so that pao-yü was quite at loss how to act. but
 espying she yüeh enter the room, said with alacrity: "what's up with
 your sister?"
 
"do i know?" answered she yüeh, "examine your own self and you'll
 readily know!"
 
after these words had been heard by pao-yü, gazed vacantly for some
 time, feeling the while very unhappy; but raising himself impetuously:
 "well!" exclaimed, "if you don't notice me, all right, i too will go
 to sleep," and as spoke got up, and, descending from the couch, he
 betook himself to his own bed and went to sleep. hsi jen noticing that
 had not budged for ever so long, and that faintly snored, presumed
 that must have fallen fast asleep, so she speedily rose to her feet,
 and, taking wrapper, came over and covered him. but sound of "hu"
 reached her ear, as pao-yü promptly threw it off and once again closed
 his eyes and feigned sleep. hsi jen distinctly grasped his idea and,
 forthwith nodding her head, she smiled coldly. "you really needn't lose
 your temper! but from this time forth, i'll become mute, and not say one
 word to you; and what if i do?"
 
pao-yü could not restrain himself from rising. "what have i been up to
 again," asked, "that you're once more at with your advice? as far
 as your advice goes, it's all well and good; but just now without one
 word of counsel, you paid heed to when i came in, but, flying into
 huff, you went to sleep. nor could i make out what it was all about,
 and now here you are again maintaining that i'm angry. but when did i
 hear you, pray, give word of advice of any kind?"
 
"doesn't your mind yet see for itself?" hsi jen replied; "and do you
 still expect to tell you?"
 
while they were disputing, dowager lady chia sent servant to call him
 to his repast, and thereupon crossed over to the front; but after he
 had hurriedly swallowed few bowls of rice, returned to his own
 apartment, where discovered hsi jen reclining on the outer
 stove-couch, while she yüeh was playing with the dominoes by her side.
 pao-yü had been ever aware of the intimacy which existed between she
 yüeh and hsi jen, so that paying not the slightest notice to even she
 yüeh, raised the soft portiere and straightway walked all alone into
 the inner apartment. she yüeh felt constrained to follow him in, but
 pao-yü at once pushed her out, saying: "i don't venture to disturb you
 two;" so that she yüeh had alternative but to leave the room with a
 smiling countenance, and to bid two young waiting-maids go in. pao-yü
 took hold of book and read for considerable time in reclining
 position; but upon raising his head to ask for some tea, caught sight
 of couple of waiting-maids, standing below; the one of whom, slightly
 older than the other, was exceedingly winsome.
 
"what's your name?" pao-yü eagerly inquired.
 
"i'm called hui hsiang, (orchid fragrance)," that waiting-maid rejoined
 simperingly.
 
"who gave you this name?" pao-yü went on to ask.
 
"i went originally under the name of yün hsiang (gum sandarac)," added
 hui hsiang, "but miss hua it was who changed it."
 
"you should really be called hui ch'i, (latent fragrance), that would be
 proper; and why such stuff as hui hsiang, (orchid fragrance)?"
 
"how many sisters have you got?" further went on to ask of her.
 
"four," replied hui hsiang.
 
"which of them are you?" pao-yü asked.
 
"the fourth," answered hui hsiang.
 
"by and by you must be called ssu erh, (fourth child)," pao-yü
 suggested, "for there's need for any such nonsense as hui hsiang
 (orchid fragrance) or lan ch'i (epidendrum perfume.) which single girl
 deserves to be compared to all these flowers, without profaning pretty
 names and fine surnames!"
 
as uttered these words, bade her give him some tea, which he
 drank; while hsi jen and she yüeh, who were in the outer apartment, had
 been listening for long time and laughing with compressed lips.
 
pao-yü did not, on this day, so much as put his foot outside the door of
 his room, but sat all alone sad and dejected, simply taking up his
 books, in order to dispel his melancholy fit, or diverting himself with
 his writing materials; while did not even avail himself of the
 services of any of the family servants, but simply bade ssu erh answer
 his calls.
 
this ssu erh was, who would have thought it, girl gifted with
 matchless artfulness, and perceiving that pao-yü had requisitioned her
 services, she speedily began to devise extreme ways and means to
 inveigle him. when evening came, and dinner was over, pao-yü's eyes were
 scorching hot and his ears burning from the effects of two cups of wine
 that had taken. had it been in past days, would have now had hsi
 jen and her companions with him, and with all their good cheer and
 laughter, would have been enjoying himself. but here was he, on this
 occasion, dull and forlorn, solitary being, gazing at the lamp with an
 absolute lack of pleasure. by and by felt certain wish to go after
 them, but dreading that if they carried their point, they would, in the
 future, come and tender advice still more immoderate, and that, were he
 to put on the airs of superior to intimidate them, would appear to
 be too deeply devoid of all feeling, therefore, needless to say,
 thwarted the wish of his heart, and treated them just as if they were
 dead. and as anyway was constrained also to live, alone though he
 was, readily looked upon them, for the time being as departed, and
 did not worry his mind in the least on their account. on the contrary,
 was able to feel happy and contented with his own society. hence it
 was that bidding ssu erh trim the candles and brew the tea, himself
 perused for time the "nan hua ching," and upon reaching the precept:
 "on thieves," given on some additional pages, the burden of which was:
 "therefore by exterminating intuitive wisdom, and by discarding
 knowledge, highway robbers will cease to exist, and by taking off the
 jade and by putting away the pearls, pilferers will not spring to
 existence; by burning the slips and by breaking up the seals, by
 smashing the measures, and snapping the scales, the result will be that
 the people will not wrangle; by abrogating, to the utmost degree, wise
 rules under the heavens, the people will, at length, be able to take
 part in deliberation. by putting to confusion the musical scale, and
 destroying fifes and lutes, by deafening the ears of the blind kuang,
 then, at last, will the human race in the world constrain his sense of
 hearing. by extinguishing literary compositions, by dispersing the five
 colours and by sticking the eyes of li chu, then, at length, mankind
 under the whole sky, will restrain the perception of his eyes. by
 destroying and eliminating the hooks and lines, by discarding the
 compasses and squares, and by amputating kung chui's fingers, the human
 race will ultimately succeed in constraining his ingenuity,"--his high
 spirits, on perusal of this passage, were so exultant that taking
 advantage of the exuberance caused by the wine, picked up his pen,
 for could not repress himself, and continued the text in this wise:
 "by burning the flower, (hua-hsi jen) and dispersing the musk, (she
 yüeh), the consequence will be that the inmates of the inner chambers
 will, eventually, keep advice to themselves. by obliterating pao-ch'ai's
 supernatural beauty, by reducing to ashes tai-yü's spiritual perception,
 and by destroying and extinguishing my affectionate preferences, the
 beautiful in the inner chambers as well as the plain will then, at
 length, be put on the same footing. and as they will keep advice to
 themselves, there will be fear of any disagreement. by obliterating
 her supernatural beauty, i shall then have incentive for any violent
 affection; by dissolving her spiritual perception, i will have no
 feelings with which to foster the memory of her talents. the hair-pin,
 jade, flower and musk (pao-ch'ai, tai-yü, hsi jen and she yüeh) do each
 and all spread out their snares and dig mines, and thus succeed in
 inveigling and entrapping every one in the world."
 
at the conclusion of this annex, flung the pen away, and lay himself
 down to sleep. his head had barely reached the pillow before at once
 fell fast asleep, remaining the whole night long perfectly unconscious
 of everything straight up to the break of day, when upon waking and
 turning himself round, he, at glance, caught sight of one else than
 hsi jen, sleeping in her clothes over the coverlet.
 
pao-yü had already banished from his mind every thought of what had
 transpired the previous day, so that forthwith giving hsi jen push:
 "get up!" said, "and be careful where you sleep, as you may catch
 cold."
 
the fact is that hsi jen was aware that was, without regard to day or
 night, ever up to mischief with his female cousins; but presuming that
 if she earnestly called him to account, would not mend his ways, she
 had, for this reason, had recourse to tender language to exhort him, in
 the hope that, in short while, would come round again to his better
 self. but against all her expectations pao-yü had, after the lapse of a
 whole day and night, not changed the least in his manner, and as she
 really was in her heart quite at loss what to do, she failed to find
 throughout the whole night any proper sleep. but when on this day, she
 unexpectedly perceived pao-yü in this mood, she flattered herself that
 had made up his mind to effect change, and readily thought it best
 not to notice him. pao-yü, seeing that she made reply, forthwith
 stretched out his hand and undid her jacket; but had just unclasped
 the button, when his arm was pushed away by hsi jen, who again made it
 fast herself.
 
pao-yü was so much at his wit's ends that had alternative but to
 take her hand and smilingly ask: "what's the matter with you, after all,
 that i've had to ask you something time after time?"
 
hsi jen opened her eyes wide. "there's nothing really the matter with
 me!" she observed; "but as you're awake, you surely had better be going
 over into the opposite room to comb your hair and wash; for if you
 dilly-dally any longer, you won't be in time."
 
"where shall i go over to?" pao-yü inquired.
 
hsi jen gave sarcastic grin. "do you ask me?" she rejoined; "do i
 know? you're at perfect liberty to go over wherever you like; from this
 day forth you and i must part company so as to avoid fighting like cocks
 or brawling like geese, to the amusement of third parties. indeed, when
 you get surfeited on that side, you come over to this, where there are,
 after all, such girls as fours and fives (ssu erh and wu erh) to dance
 attendance upon you. but such kind of things as ourselves uselessly
 defile fine names and fine surnames."
 
"do you still remember this to-day!" pao-yü asked with smirk.
 
"hundred years hence i shall still bear it in mind," hsi jen protested;
 "i'm not like you, who treat my words as so much wind blowing by the
 side of your ears, that what i've said at night, you've forgotten early
 in the morning."
 
pao-yü perceiving what seductive though angry air pervaded her face
 found it difficult to repress his feelings, and speedily taking up, from
 the side of the pillow, hair-pin made of jade, dashed it down
 breaking it into two exclaiming: "if i again don't listen to your words,
 may i fare like this hair-pin."
 
hsi jen immediately picked up the hair-pin, as she remarked: "what's up
 with you at this early hour of the morning? whether you listen or not is
 of consequence; and is it worth while that you should behave as you
 do?"
 
"how can you know," pao-yü answered, "the anguish in my heart!"
 
"do you also know what anguish means?" hsi jen observed laughing; "if
 you do, then you can judge what the state of my heart is! but be quick
 and get up, and wash your face and be off!"
 
as she spoke, they both got out of bed and performed their toilette; but
 after pao-yü had gone to the drawing rooms, and at moment least
 expected by any one, tai-yü walked into his apartment. noticing that
 pao-yü was not in, she was fumbling with the books on the table and
 examining them, when, as luck would have it, she turned up the chuang
 tzu of the previous day. upon perusing the passage tagged on by pao-yü,
 she could not help feeling both incensed and amused. nor could she
 restrain herself from taking up the pen and appending stanza to this
 effect:
 
who is that man, who of his pen, without good rhyme, made use,
 toilsome task to do into the chuang-tzu text to steal,
 who for the knowledge doth lack sense of shame doth feel,
 but language vile and foul employs third parties to abuse?
 
at the conclusion of what she had to write, she too came into the
 drawing room; but after paying her respects to dowager lady chia, she
 walked over to madame wang's quarters.
 
contrary to everybody's expectations, lady feng's daughter, ta chieh
 erh, had fallen ill, and great fuss was just going on as the doctor
 had been sent for to diagnose her ailment.
 
"my congratulations to you, ladies," the doctor explained; "this young
 lady has fever, as she has small-pox; indeed it's other complaint!"
 
as soon as madame wang and lady feng heard the tidings, they lost no
 time in sending round to ascertain whether she was getting on all right
 or not, and the doctor replied: "the symptoms are, it is true, serious,
 but favourable; but though after all importing danger, it's necessary
 to get ready the silkworms and pigs' tails."
 
when lady feng received this report, she, there and then, hastened to
 make the necessary preparations, and while she had the rooms swept and
 oblations offered to the goddess of small-pox, she, at the same time,
 transmitted orders to her household to avoid viands fried or roasted in
 fat, or other such heating things; and also bade p'ing erh get ready the
 bedding and clothes for chia lien in separate room, and taking pieces
 of deep red cotton material, she distributed them to the nurses,
 waiting-maids and all the servants, who were in close attendance, to cut
 out clothes for themselves. and having had likewise some apartments
 outside swept clean, she detained two doctors to alternately deliberate
 on the treatment, feel the pulse and administer the medicines; and for
 twelve days, they were not at liberty to return to their homes; while
 chia lien had help but to move his quarters temporarily into the
 outer library, and lady feng and p'ing erh remained both in daily
 attendance upon madame wang in her devotions to the goddess.
 
chia lien, now that was separated from lady feng, soon felt disposed
 to look round for flame. had only slept alone for couple of
 nights, but these nights had been so intensely intolerable that had
 option than to choose, for the time being, from among the young
 pages, those who were of handsome appearance, and bring them over to
 relieve his monotony. in the jung kuo mansion, there was, it happened, a
 cook, most useless, good-for-nothing drunkard, whose name was to kuan,
 in whom people recognised an infirm and useless husband so that they
 all dubbed him with the name of to hun ch'ung, the stupid worm to. as
 the wife given to him in marriage by his father and mother was this year
 just twenty, and possessed further several traits of beauty, and was
 also naturally of flighty and frivolous disposition, she had an
 extreme penchant for violent flirtations. but to hun-ch'ung, on the
 other hand, did not concern himself (with her deportment), and as long
 as had wine, meat and money paid heed whatever to anything. and
 for this reason it was that all the men in the two mansions of ning and
 jung had been successful in their attentions; and as this woman was
 exceptionally fascinating and incomparably giddy, she was generally
 known by all by the name to ku ning (miss to).
 
chia lien, now that had his quarters outside, chafed under the pangs
 of irksome ennui, yet too, in days gone by, had set his eyes upon
 this woman, and had for long, watered in the mouth with admiration; but
 as, inside, feared his winsome wife, and outside, dreaded his
 beloved lads, had not made any advances. but this to ku niang had
 likewise liking for chia lien, and was full of resentment at the
 absence of favourable opportunity; but she had recently come to hear
 that chia lien had shifted his quarters into the outer library, and her
 wont was, even in the absence of any legitimate purpose, to go over
 three and four times to entice him on; but though chia lien was, in
 every respect, like rat smitten with hunger, could not dispense
 with holding consultation with the young friends who enjoyed his
 confidence; and as struck bargain with them for large amount of
 money and silks, how could they ever not have come to terms (with him to
 speak on his behalf)? besides, they were all old friends of this woman,
 so that, as soon as they conveyed the proposal, she willingly accepted
 it. when night came to hun ch'ung was lying on the couch in state of
 drunkenness, and at the second watch, when every one was quiet, chia
 lien at once slipped in, and they had their assignation. as soon as he
 gazed upon her face, lost control over his senses, and without even
 one word of ordinary greeting or commonplace remark, they forthwith,
 fervently indulged in most endearing tête-à-tête.
 
this woman possessed, who could have thought it, strange natural
 charm; for, as soon as any one of her lovers came within any close
 distance of her, speedily could not but notice that her very tendons
 and bones mollified, paralysed-like from feeling, so that his was the
 sensation of basking in soft bower of love. what is more, her
 demonstrative ways and free-and-easy talk put even those of born
 coquette to shame, with the result that while chia lien, at this time,
 longed to become heart and soul one with her, the woman designedly
 indulged in immodest innuendoes.
 
"your daughter is at home," she insinuated in her recumbent position,
 "ill with the small-pox, and prayers are being offered to the goddess;
 and your duty too should be to abstain from love affairs for couple of
 days, but on the contrary, by flirting with me, you've contaminated
 yourself! but, you'd better be off at once from here!"
 
"you're my goddess!" gaspingly protested chia lien, as gave way to
 demonstrativeness; "what do i care about any other goddess!"
 
the woman began to be still more indelicate in her manner, so that chia
 lien could not refrain himself from making full exhibition of his warm
 sentiments. when their tête-à-tête had come to close, they both went
 on again to vow by the mountains and swear by the seas, and though they
 found it difficult to part company and hard to tear themselves away,
 they, in due course, became, after this occasion, mutual sworn friends.
 but by certain day the virus in ta chieh's system had become
 exhausted, and the spots subsided, and at the expiry of twelve days the
 goddess was removed, and the whole household offered sacrifices to
 heaven, worshipped the ancestors, paid their vows, burnt incense,
 exchanged congratulations, and distributed presents. and these
 formalities observed, chia lien once more moved back into his own
 bedroom and was reunited with lady feng. the proverb is indeed true
 which says: "that new marriage is not equal to long separation," for
 there ensued between them demonstrations of loving affection still more
 numerous than heretofore, to which we need not, of course, refer with
 any minuteness.
 
the next day, at an early hour, after lady feng had gone into the upper
 rooms, p'ing erh set to work to put in order the clothes and bedding,
 which had been brought from outside, when, contrary to her expectation,
 tress of hair fell out from inside the pillow-case, as she was intent
 upon shaking it. p'ing erh understood its import, and taking at once the
 hair, she concealed it in her sleeve, and there and then came over into
 the room on this side, where she produced the hair, and smirkingly asked
 chia lien, "what's this?"
 
chia lien, at the sight of it, lost time in making snatch with the
 idea of depriving her of it; and when p'ing erh speedily endeavoured to
 run away, she was clutched by chia lien, who put her down on the
 stove-couch, and came up to take it from her hand.
 
"you heartless fellow!" p'ing erh laughingly exclaimed, "i conceal this,
 with every good purpose, from her knowledge, and come to ask you about
 it, and you, on the contrary, fly into rage! but wait till she comes
 back, and i'll tell her, and we'll see what will happen."
 
at these words, chia lien hastily forced smile. "dear girl!" he
 entreated, "give it to me, and i won't venture again to fly into a
 passion."
 
but hardly was this remark finished, when they heard the voice of lady
 feng penetrate into the room. as soon as it reached the ear of chia
 lien, was at loss whether it was better to let her go or to snatch
 it away, and kept on shouting, "my dear girl! don't let her know."
 
p'ing erh at once rose to her feet; but lady feng had already entered
 the room; and she went on to bid p'ing erh be quick and open box and
 find pattern for madame wang. p'ing erh expressed her obedience with
 alacrity; but while in search of it, lady feng caught sight of chia
 lien; and suddenly remembering something, she hastened to ask p'ing erh
 about it.
 
"the other day," she observed, "some things were taken out, and have you
 brought them all in or not?"
 
"i have!" p'ing erh assented.
 
"is there anything short or not?" lady feng inquired.
 
"i've carefully looked at them," p'ing erh added, "and haven't found
 even one single thing short."
 
"is there anything in excess?" lady feng went on to ascertain.
 
p'ing erh laughed. "it's enough," she rejoined, "that there's nothing
 short; and how could there really turn out to be anything over and
 above?"
 
"that this half month," lady feng continued still smiling, "things have
 gone on immaculately it would be hard to vouch; for some intimate friend
 there may have been, who possibly has left something behind, in the
 shape of ring, handkerchief or other such object, there's saying
 for certain!"
 
while these words were being spoken, chia lien's face turned perfectly
 sallow, and, as stood behind lady feng, was intent upon gazing at
 p'ing erh, making signs to her (that was going) to cut her throat as
 chicken is killed, (threatening her not to utter sound) and
 entreating her to screen him; but p'ing erh pretended not to notice him,
 and consequently observed smiling: "how is it that my ideas should
 coincide with those of yours, my lady; and as i suspected that there may
 have been something of the kind, i carefully searched all over, but i
 didn't find even so much as the slightest thing wrong; and if you don't
 believe me, my lady, you can search for your own self."
 
"you fool!" lady feng laughed, "had any things of the sort, would he
 be likely to let you and i discover them!"
 
with these words still on her lips, she took the patterns and went her
 way; whereupon p'ing erh pointed at her nose, and shook her head to and
 fro. "in this matter," she smiled, "how much you should be grateful to
 me!" remark which so delighted chia lien that his eyebrows distended,
 and his eyes smiled, and running over, clasped her in his embrace,
 and called her promiscuously: "my darling, my pet, my own treasure!"
 
"this," observed p'ing erh, with the tress in her hand, "will be my
 source of power, during all my lifetime! if you treat kindly, then
 well and good! but if you behave unkindly, then we'll at once produce
 this thing!"
 
"do put it away, please," chia lien entreated smirkingly, "and don't, on
 an any account, let her know about it!" and as uttered these words,
 noticed that she was off her guard, and, with snatch, readily
 grabbed it adding laughingly: "in your hands, it would be source of
 woe, so that it's better that i should burn it, and have done with it!"
 saying this simultaneously shoved it down the sides of his boot,
 while p'ing erh shouted as she set her teeth close: "you wicked man! you
 cross the river and then demolish the bridge! but do you imagine that
 i'll by and by again tell lies on your behalf!"
 
chia lien perceiving how heart-stirring her seductive charms were,
 forthwith clasped her in his arms, and begged her to be his; but p'ing
 erh snatched her hands out of his grasp and ran away out of the room;
 which so exasperated chia lien that as bent his body, exclaimed,
 full of indignation: "what dreadful niggardly young wench! she
 actually sets her mind to stir up people's affections with her wanton
 blandishments, and then, after all, she runs away!"
 
"if i be wanton, it's my own look-out;" p'ing erh answered, from outside
 the window, with grin, "and who told you to arouse your affections? do
 you forsooth mean to imply that my wish is to become your tool? and did
 she come to know about it would she again ever forgive me?"
 
"you needn't dread her!" chia lien urged; "wait till my monkey is up,
 and i'll take this jealous woman, and beat her to atoms; and she'll then
 know what stuff i'm made of. she watches just as she would watch a
 thief! and she's only to hobnob with men, and i'm not to say word to
 any girl! and if i do say aught to girl, or get anywhere near one, she
 must at once give way to suspicion. but with regard to younger
 brothers or nephews, to young and old, she prattles and giggles with
 them, and doesn't entertain any fear that i may be jealous; but
 henceforward i too won't allow her to set eyes upon any man."
 
"if she be jealous, there's every reason," p'ing erh answered, "but for
 you to be jealous on her account isn't right. her conduct is really
 straightforward, and her deportment upright, but your conduct is
 actuated by an evil heart, so much so that even i don't feel my heart at
 ease, not to say anything of her."
 
"you two," continued chia lien, "have mouth full of malicious breath!
 everything the couple of you do is invariably proper, while whatever i
 do is all from an evil heart! but some time or other i shall bring you
 both to your end with my own hands!"
 
this sentence was scarcely at an end, when lady feng walked into the
 court. "if you're bent upon chatting," she urgently inquired, upon
 seeing p'ing erh outside the window, "why don't you go into the room?
 and what do you mean, instead, by running out, and speaking with the
 window between?"
 
chia lien from inside took up the string of the conversation. "you
 should ask her," said. "it would verily seem as if there were tiger
 in the room to eat her up."
 
"there's not single person in the room," p'ing erh rejoined, "and what
 shall i stay and do with him?"
 
"it's just the proper thing that there should be one else! isn't it?"
 lady feng remarked grinning sarcastically.
 
"do these words allude to me?" p'ing erh hastily asked, as soon as she
 had heard what she said.
 
lady feng forthwith laughed. "if they don't allude to you," she
 continued, "to whom do they?"
 
"don't press to come out with some nice things!" p'ing erh
 insinuated, and, as she spoke, she did not even raise the portiere (for
 lady feng to enter), but straightway betook herself to the opposite
 side.
 
lady feng lifted the portiere with her own hands, and walked into the
 room. "that girl p'ing erh," she exclaimed, "has gone mad, and if this
 hussey does in real earnest wish to try and get the upper hand of me, it
 would be well for you to mind your skin."
 
chia lien listened to her, as kept reclining on the couch. "i never
 in the least knew," ventured, clapping his hands and laughing, "that
 p'ing erh was so dreadful; and i must, after all, from henceforth look
 up to her with respect!"
 
"it's all through your humouring her," lady feng rejoined; "so i'll
 simply settle scores with you and finish with it."
 
"ts'ui!" ejaculated chia lien at these words, "because you two can't
 agree, must you again make scapegoat of me! well then, i'll get out of
 the way of both of you!"
 
"i'll see where you'll go and hide," lady feng observed.
 
"i've got somewhere to go!" chia lien added; and with these words, he
 was about to go, when lady feng urged: "don't be off! i have something
 to tell you."
 
what it is, is not yet known, but, reader, listen to the account given
 in the next chapter.
 



chapter xxii.
 
upon hearing the text of the stanza, pao-yü comprehends the buddhistic
 spells.
 while the enigmas for the lanterns are being devised, chia cheng is
 grieved by prognostic.
 

chia lien, for we must now prosecute our story, upon hearing lady feng
 observe that she had something to consult about with him, felt
 constrained to halt and to inquire what it was about.
 
"on the 21st," lady feng explained, "is cousin hsüeh's birthday, and
 what do you, after all, purpose doing?"
 
"do i know what to do?" exclaimed chia lien; "you have made, time and
 again, arrangements for ever so many birthdays of grown-up people, and
 do you, really, find yourself on this occasion without any resources?"
 
"birthdays of grown-up people are subject to prescribed rules," lady
 feng expostulated; "but her present birthday is neither one of an adult
 nor that of an infant, and that's why i would like to deliberate with
 you!"
 
chia lien upon hearing this remark, lowered his head and gave himself to
 protracted reflection. "you're indeed grown dull!" cried; "why you've
 precedent ready at hand to suit your case! cousin lin's birthday
 affords precedent, and what you did in former years for cousin lin,
 you can in this instance likewise do for cousin hsüeh, and it will be
 all right."
 
at these words lady feng gave sarcastic smile. "do you, pray, mean to
 insinuate," she added, "that i'm not aware of even this! i too had
 previously come, after some thought, to this conclusion; but old lady
 chia explained, in my hearing yesterday, that having made inquiries
 about all their ages and their birthdays, she learnt that cousin hsüeh
 would this year be fifteen, and that though this was not the birthday,
 which made her of age, she could anyhow well be regarded as being on the
 dawn of the year, in which she would gather up her hair, so that our
 dowager lady enjoined that her anniversary should, as matter of
 course, be celebrated, unlike that of cousin lin."
 
"well, in that case," chia lien suggested, "you had better make few
 additions to what was done for cousin lin!"
 
"that's what i too am thinking of," lady feng replied, "and that's why
 i'm asking your views; for were i, on my own hook, to add anything you
 would again feel hurt for my not have explained things to you."
 
"that will do, that will do!" chia lien rejoined laughing, "none of
 these sham attentions for me! so long as you don't pry into my doings it
 will be enough; and will i go so far as to bear you grudge?"
 
with these words still in his mouth, forthwith went off. but leaving
 him alone we shall now return to shih hsiang-yün. after stay of a
 couple of days, her intention was to go back, but dowager lady chia
 said: "wait until after you have seen the theatrical performance, when
 you can return home."
 
at this proposal, shih hsiang-yün felt constrained to remain, but she,
 at the same time, despatched servant to her home to fetch two pieces
 of needlework, which she had in former days worked with her own hands,
 for birthday present for pao-ch'ai.
 
contrary to all expectations old lady chia had, since the arrival of
 pao-ch'ai, taken quite fancy to her, for her sedateness and good
 nature, and as this happened to be the first birthday which she was
 about to celebrate (in the family) she herself readily contributed
 twenty taels which, after sending for lady feng, she handed over to her,
 to make arrangements for banquet and performance.
 
"a venerable senior like yourself," lady feng thereupon smiled and
 ventured, with view to enhancing her good cheer, "is at liberty to
 celebrate the birthday of child in any way agreeable to you, without
 any one presuming to raise any objection; but what's the use again of
 giving banquet? but since it be your good pleasure and your purpose to
 have it celebrated with éclat, you could, needless to say, your own self
 have spent several taels from the private funds in that old treasury of
 yours! but you now produce those twenty taels, spoiled by damp and
 mould, to play the hostess with, with the view indeed of compelling us
 to supply what's wanted! but hadn't you really been able to contribute
 any more, one would have word to say; but the gold and silver,
 round as well as flat, have with their heavy weight pressed down the
 bottom of the box! and your sole object is to harass us and to extort
 from us. but raise your eyes and look about you; who isn't your
 venerable ladyship's and daughter? and is it likely, pray, that in
 the future there will only be cousin pao-yü to carry you, our old lady,
 on his head, up the wu t'ai shan? you may keep all these things for him
 alone! but though we mayn't at present, deserve that anything should be
 spent upon us, you shouldn't go so far as to place us in any
 perplexities (by compelling us to subscribe). and is this now enough for
 wines, and enough for the theatricals?"
 
as she bandied these words, every one in the whole room burst out
 laughing, and even dowager lady chia broke out in laughter while she
 observed: "do you listen to that mouth? i myself am looked upon as
 having the gift of the gab, but why is it that i can't talk in such a
 wise as to put down this monkey? your mother-in-law herself doesn't dare
 to be so overbearing in her speech; and here you are jabber, jabber with
 me!"
 
"my mother-in-law," explained lady feng, "is also as fond of pao-yü as
 you are, so much so that i haven't anywhere i could go and give vent to
 my grievances; and instead of (showing some regard) you say that i'm
 overbearing in my speech!"
 
with these words, she again enticed dowager lady chia to laugh for a
 while. the old lady continued in the highest of spirits, and, when
 evening came, and they all appeared in her presence to pay their
 obeisance, her ladyship made it point, while the whole company of
 ladies and young ladies were engaged in chatting, to ascertain of
 pao-ch'ai what play she liked to hear, and what things she fancied to
 eat.
 
pao-ch'ai was well aware that dowager lady chia, well up in years though
 she was, delighted in sensational performances, and was partial to sweet
 and tender viands, so that she readily deferred, in every respect, to
 those things, which were to the taste of her ladyship, and enumerated a
 whole number of them, which made the old lady become the more exuberant.
 and the next day, she was the first to send over clothes, nicknacks and
 such presents, while madame wang and lady feng, tai-yü and the other
 girls, as well as the whole number of inmates had all presents for her,
 regulated by their degree of relationship, to which we need not allude
 in detail.
 
when the 21st arrived, stage of an ordinary kind, small but yet handy,
 was improvised in dowager lady chia's inner court, and troupe of young
 actors, who had newly made their début, was retained for the nonce,
 among whom were both those who could sing tunes, slow as well as fast.
 in the drawing rooms of the old lady were then laid out several tables
 for family banquet and entertainment, at which there was not single
 outside guest; and with the exception of mrs. hsüeh, shih hsiang-yün,
 and pao-ch'ai, who were visitors, the rest were all inmates of her
 household.
 
on this day, pao-yü failed, at any early hour, to see anything of lin
 tai-yü, and coming at once to her rooms in search of her, discovered
 her reclining on the stove-couch. "get up," pao-yü pressed her with a
 smile, "and come and have breakfast, for the plays will commence
 shortly; but whichever plays you would like to listen to, do tell so
 that i may be able to choose them."
 
tai-yü smiled sarcastically. "in that case," she rejoined, "you had
 better specially engage troupe and select those i like sung for my
 benefit; for on this occasion you can't be so impertinent as to make use
 of their expense to ask what i like!"
 
"what's there impossible about this?" pao-yü answered smiling; "well,
 to-morrow i'll readily do as you wish, and ask them too to make use of
 what is yours and mine."
 
as passed this remark, pulled her up, and taking her hand in his
 own, they walked out of the room and came and had breakfast. when the
 time arrived to make selection of the plays, dowager lady chia of her
 own motion first asked pao-ch'ai to mark off those she liked; and though
 for time pao-ch'ai declined, yielding the choice to others, she had no
 alternative but to decide, fixing upon play called, "the record of the
 western tour," play of which the old lady was herself very fond. next
 in order, she bade lady feng choose, and lady feng, had, after all, in
 spite of madame wang ranking before her in precedence, to consider old
 lady chia's request, and not to presume to show obstinacy by any
 disobedience. but as she knew well enough that her ladyship had a
 penchant for what was exciting, and that she was still more partial to
 jests, jokes, epigrams, and buffoonery, she therefore hastened to
 precede (madame wang) and to choose play, which was in fact other
 than "liu erh pawns his clothes."
 
dowager lady chia was, of course, still more elated. and after this she
 speedily went on to ask tai-yü to choose. tai-yü likewise concedingly
 yielded her turn in favour of madame wang and the other seniors, to make
 their selections before her, but the old lady expostulated. "to-day,"
 she said, "is primarily an occasion, on which i've brought all of you
 here for your special recreation; and we had better look after our own
 selves and not heed them! for have i, do you imagine, gone to the
 trouble of having performance and laying feast for their special
 benefit? they're already reaping benefit enough by being in here,
 listening to the plays and partaking of the banquet, when they have no
 right to either; and are they to be pressed further to make choice of
 plays?"
 
at these words, the whole company had hearty laugh; after which,
 tai-yü, at length, marked off play; next in order following pao-yü,
 shih hsiang-yün, ying-ch'un, t'an ch'un, hsi ch'un, widow li wan, and
 the rest, each and all of whom made choice of plays, which were sung
 in the costumes necessary for each. when the time came to take their
 places at the banquet, dowager lady chia bade pao-ch'ai make another
 selection, and pao-ch'ai cast her choice upon the play: "lu chih-shen,
 in fit of drunkenness stirs up disturbance up the wu t'ai mountain;"
 whereupon pao-yü interposed, with the remark: "all you fancy is to
 choose plays of this kind;" to which pao-ch'ai rejoined, "you've
 listened to plays all these years to avail! how could you know the
 beauties of this play? the stage effect is grand, but what is still
 better are the apt and elegant passages in it."
 
"i've always had dread of such sensational plays as these!" pao-yü
 retorted.
 
"if you call this play sensational," pao-ch'ai smilingly expostulated,
 "well then you may fitly be looked upon as being connoisseur of
 plays. but come over and i'll tell you. this play constitutes one of a
 set of books, entitled the 'pei tien peng ch'un,' which, as far as
 harmony, musical rests and closes, and tune go, is, it goes without
 saying, perfect; but there's among the elegant compositions ballad
 entitled: 'the parasitic plant,' written in most excellent style; but
 how could you know anything about it?"
 
pao-yü, upon hearing her speak of such points of beauty, hastily drew
 near to her. "my dear cousin," entreated, "recite it and let hear
 it!" whereupon pao-ch'ai went on as follows:
 
my manly tears i will not wipe away,
 but from this place, the scholar's home, i'll stray.
 the bonze for mercy i shall thank; under the lotus altar shave my
 pate;
 with yüan to be the luck i lack; soon in twinkle we shall separate,
 and needy and forlorn i'll come and go, with none to care about my
 fate.
 thither shall i suppliant be for fog wrapper and rain hat; my
 warrant i shall roll,
 and listless with straw shoes and broken bowl, wherever to convert my
 fate may be, i'll stroll.
 
as soon as pao-yü had listened to her recital, was so full of
 enthusiasm, that, clapping his knees with his hands, and shaking his
 head, gave vent to incessant praise; after which went on to extol
 pao-ch'ai, saying: "there's book that you don't know."
 
"be quiet, and listen to the play," lin tai-yü urged; "they haven't yet
 sung about the mountain gate, and you already pretend to be mad!"
 
at these words, hsiang-yün also laughed. but, in due course, the whole
 party watched the performance until evening, when they broke up. dowager
 lady chia was so very much taken with the young actor, who played the
 role of lady, as well as with the one who acted the buffoon, that she
 gave orders that they should be brought in; and, as she looked at them
 closely, she felt so much the more interest in them, that she went on to
 inquire what their ages were. and when the would-be lady (replied) that
 was just eleven, while the would-be buffoon (explained) that was
 just nine, the whole company gave vent for time to expressions of
 sympathy with their lot; while dowager lady chia bade servants bring a
 fresh supply of meats and fruits for both of them, and also gave them,
 besides their wages, two tiaos as present.
 
"this lad," lady feng observed smiling, "is when dressed up (as girl),
 living likeness of certain person; did you notice it just now?"
 
pao-ch'ai was also aware of the fact, but she simply nodded her head
 assentingly and did not say who it was. pao-yü likewise expressed his
 assent by shaking his head, but too did not presume to speak out.
 shih hsiang-yün, however, readily took up the conversation. "he
 resembles," she interposed, "cousin lin's face!" when this remark
 reached pao-yü's ear, hastened to cast an angry scowl at hsiang-yün,
 and to make her sign; while the whole party, upon hearing what had
 been said, indulged in careful and minute scrutiny of (the lad); and as
 they all began to laugh: "the resemblance is indeed striking!" they
 exclaimed.
 
after while, they parted; and when evening came hsiang-yün directed
 ts'ui lü to pack up her clothes.
 
"what's the hurry?" ts'ui lü asked. "there will be ample time to pack
 up, on the day on which we go!"
 
"we'll go to-morrow," hsiang-yün rejoined; "for what's the use of
 remaining here any longer--to look at people's mouths and faces?"
 
pao-yü, at these words, lost time in pressing forward.
 
"my dear cousin," urged; "you're wrong in bearing grudge! my
 cousin lin is girl so very touchy, that though every one else
 distinctly knew (of the resemblance), they wouldn't speak out; and all
 because they were afraid that she would get angry; but unexpectedly out
 you came with it, at moment when off your guard; and how ever couldn't
 she but feel hurt? and it's because i was in dread that you would give
 offence to people that i then winked at you; and now here you are angry
 with me; but isn't that being ungrateful to me? had it been any one
 else, would i have cared whether she had given offence to even ten; that
 would have been none of my business!"
 
hsiang-yün waved her hand: "don't," she added, "come and tell these
 flowery words and this specious talk, for i really can't come up to your
 cousin lin. if others poke fun at her, they all do so with impunity,
 while if i say anything, i at once incur blame. the fact is i shouldn't
 have spoken of her, undeserving as i am; and as she's the daughter of a
 master, while i'm slave, mere servant girl, i've heaped insult upon
 her!"
 
"and yet," pleaded pao-yü, full of perplexity, "i had done it for your
 sake; and through this, i've come in for reproach. but if it were with
 an evil heart i did so, may i at once become ashes, and be trampled upon
 by ten thousands of people!"
 
"in this felicitous firstmonth," hsiang-yün remonstrated, "you shouldn't
 talk so much reckless nonsense! all these worthless despicable oaths,
 disjointed words, and corrupt language, go and tell for the benefit of
 those mean sort of people, who in everything take pleasure in irritating
 others, and who keep you under their thumb! but mind don't drive to
 spit contemptuously at you."
 
as she gave utterance to these words, she betook herself in the inner
 room of dowager lady chia's suite of apartments, where she lay down in
 high dudgeon, and, as pao-yü was so heavy at heart, could not help
 coming again in search of tai-yü; but strange to say, as soon as put
 his foot inside the doorway, was speedily hustled out of it by
 tai-yü, who shut the door in his face.
 
pao-yü was once more unable to fathom her motives, and as stood
 outside the window, kept on calling out: "my dear cousin," in low
 tone of voice; but tai-yü paid not the slightest notice to him so that
 pao-yü became so melancholy that drooped his head, and was plunged in
 silence. and though hsi jen had, at an early hour, come to know the
 circumstances, she could not very well at this juncture tender any
 advice.
 
pao-yü remained standing in such vacant mood that tai-yü imagined that
 had gone back; but when she came to open the door she caught sight of
 pao-yü still waiting in there; and as tai-yü did not feel justified to
 again close the door, pao-yü consequently followed her in.
 
"every thing has," observed, "a why and wherefore; which, when
 spoken out, don't even give people pain; but you will rush into rage,
 and all without any rhyme! but to what really does it owe its rise?"
 
"it's well enough, after all, for you to ask me," tai-yü rejoined with
 an indifferent smile, "but i myself don't know why! but am i here to
 afford you people amusement that you will compare to an actress, and
 make the whole lot have laugh at me?"
 
"i never did liken you to anything," pao-yü protested, "neither did i
 ever laugh at you! and why then will you get angry with me?"
 
"was it necessary that you should have done so much as made the
 comparison," tai-yü urged, "and was there any need of even any laughter
 from you? why, though you mayn't have likened to anything, or had a
 laugh at my expense, you were, yea more dreadful than those who did
 compare (to singing girl) and ridiculed me!"
 
pao-yü could not find anything with which to refute the argument had
 just heard, and tai-yü went on to say. "this offence can, anyhow, be
 condoned; but, what is more, why did you also wink at yün erh? what was
 this idea which you had resolved in your mind? wasn't it perhaps that if
 she played with me, she would be demeaning herself, and making herself
 cheap? she's the daughter of duke or marquis, and we forsooth the
 mean progeny of poor plebeian family; so that, had she diverted
 herself with me, wouldn't she have exposed herself to being depreciated,
 had i, perchance, said anything in retaliation? this was your idea
 wasn't it? but though your purpose was, to be sure, honest enough, that
 girl wouldn't, however, receive any favours from you, but got angry with
 you just as much as i did; and though she made also tool to do you
 good turn, she, on the contrary, asserts that i'm mean by nature and
 take pleasure in irritating people in everything! and you again were
 afraid lest she should have hurt my feelings, but, had i had row with
 her, what would that have been to you? and had she given any offence,
 what concern would that too have been of yours?"
 
when pao-yü heard these words, at once became alive to the fact that
 she too had lent an ear to the private conversation had had short
 while back with hsiang-yün: "all because of my, fears," carefully
 mused within himself, "lest these two should have misunderstanding, i
 was induced to come between them, and act as mediator; but i myself
 have, contrary to my hopes, incurred blame and abuse on both sides! this
 just accords with what i read the other day in the nan hua ching. 'the
 ingenious toil, the wise are full of care; the good-for-nothing seek for
 nothing, they feed on vegetables, and roam where they list; they wander
 purposeless like boat not made fast!' 'the mountain trees,' the text
 goes on to say, 'lead to their own devastation; the spring (conduces) to
 its own plunder; and so on." and the more therefore indulged in
 reflection, the more depressed felt. "now there are only these few
 girls," proceeded to ponder minutely, "and yet, i'm unable to treat
 them in such way as to promote perfect harmony; and what will i
 forsooth do by and by (when there will be more to deal with)!"
 
when had reached this point in his cogitations, (he decided) that it
 was really of avail to agree with her, so that turning round, was
 making his way all alone into his apartments; but lin tai-yü, upon
 noticing that had left her side, readily concluded that reflection
 had marred his spirits and that had so thoroughly lost his temper as
 to be going without even giving vent to single word, and she could not
 restrain herself from feeling inwardly more and more irritated. "after
 you've gone this time," she hastily exclaimed, "don't come again, even
 for whole lifetime; and i won't have you either so much as speak to
 me!"
 
pao-yü paid heed to her, but came back to his rooms, and laying
 himself down on his bed, kept on muttering in state of chagrin; and
 though hsi jen knew full well the reasons of his dejection, she found it
 difficult to summon up courage to say anything to him at the moment, and
 she had alternative but to try and distract him by means of
 irrelevant matters. "the theatricals which you've seen to-day," she
 consequently observed smiling, "will again lead to performances for
 several days, and miss pao-ch'ai will, i'm sure, give return feast."
 
"whether she gives return feast or not," pao-yü rejoined with an
 apathetic smirk, "is concern of mine!"
 
when hsi jen perceived the tone, so unlike that of other days, with
 which these words were pronounced: "what's this that you're saying?" she
 therefore remarked as she gave another smile. "in this pleasant and
 propitious first moon, when all the ladies and young ladies are in high
 glee, how is it that you're again in mood of this sort?"
 
"whether the ladies and my cousins be in high spirits or not," pao-yü
 replied forcing grin, "is also perfectly immaterial to me."
 
"they are all," hsi jen added, smilingly, "pleasant and agreeable, and
 were you also little pleasant and agreeable, wouldn't it conduce to
 the enjoyment of the whole company?"
 
"what about the whole company, and they and i?" pao-yü urged. "they all
 have their mutual friendships; while i, poor fellow, all forlorn, have
 none to care rap for me."
 
his remarks had reached this clause, when inadvertently the tears
 trickled down; and hsi jen realising the state of mind was in, did
 not venture to say anything further. but as soon as pao-yü had reflected
 minutely over the sense and import of this sentence, could not
 refrain from bursting forth into loud fit of crying, and, turning
 himself round, stood up, and, drawing near the table, took up the
 pencil, and eagerly composed these enigmatical lines:
 
if thou wert to test, and i were thee to test,
 our hearts were we to test, and our minds to test,
 when naught more there remains for us to test
 that will yea very well be called test,
 and when there's naught to put, we could say, to the test,
 we will place set up on which our feet to rest.
 
after had finished writing, again gave way to fears that though he
 himself could unfold their meaning, others, who came to peruse these
 lines, would not be able to fathom them, and also went on
 consequently to indite another stanza, in imitation of the "parasitic
 plant," which inscribed at the close of the enigma; and when had
 read it over second time, felt his heart so free of all concern
 that forthwith got into his bed, and went to sleep.
 
but, who would have thought it, tai-yü, upon seeing pao-yü take his
 departure in such an abrupt manner, designedly made use of the excuse
 that she was bent upon finding hsi jen, to come round and see what he
 was up to.
 
"he's gone to sleep long ago!" hsi jen replied.
 
at these words, tai-yü felt inclined to betake herself back at once; but
 hsi jen smiled and said: "please stop, miss. here's slip of paper, and
 see what there is on it!" and speedily taking what pao-yü had written a
 short while back, she handed it over to tai-yü to examine. tai-yü, on
 perusal, discovered that pao-yü had composed it, at the spur of the
 moment, when under the influence of resentment; and she could not help
 thinking it both matter of ridicule as well as of regret; but she
 hastily explained to hsi jen: "this is written for fun, and there's
 nothing of any consequence in it!" and having concluded this remark, she
 readily took it along with her to her room, where she conned it over in
 company with hsiang-yün; handing it also the next day to pao-ch'ai to
 peruse. the burden of what pao-ch'ai read was:
 
in what was concern of mine, i should to thee have paid heed,
 for while i humour this, that one to please i don't succeed!
 act as thy wish may be! go, come whene'er thou list; 'tis naught to
 me.
 sorrow or joy, without limit or bound, to indulge thou art free!
 what is this hazy notion about relatives distant or close?
 for what purpose have i for all these days racked my heart with woes?
 even at this time when i look back and think, my mind pleasure
 knows.
 
after having finished its perusal, she went on to glance at the
 buddhistic stanza, and smiling: "this being," she soliloquised; "has
 awakened to sense of perception; and all through my fault, for it's
 that ballad of mine yesterday which has incited this! but the subtle
 devices in all these rationalistic books have most easy tendency to
 unsettle the natural disposition, and if to-morrow does actually get
 up, and talk lot of insane trash, won't his having fostered this idea
 owe its origin to that ballad of mine; and shan't i have become the
 prime of all guilty people?"
 
saying this, she promptly tore the paper, and, delivering the pieces to
 the servant girls, she bade them go at once and burn them.
 
"you shouldn't have torn it!" tai-yü remonstrated laughingly. "but wait
 and i'll ask him about it! so come along all of you, and i vouch i'll
 make him abandon that idiotic frame of mind and that depraved language."
 
the three of them crossed over, in point of fact, into pao-yü's room,
 and tai-yü was the first to smile and observe. "pao-yü, may i ask you
 something? what is most valuable is precious thing; and what is most
 firm is jade, but what value do you possess and what firmness is innate
 in you?"
 
but as pao-yü could not, say anything by way of reply, two of them
 remarked sneeringly: "with all this doltish bluntness of his will he
 after all absorb himself in abstraction?" while hsiang-yün also clapped
 her hands and laughed, "cousin pao has been discomfited."
 
"the latter part of that apothegm of yours," tai-yü continued, "says:
 
"we would then find some place on which our feet to rest.
 
"which is certainly good; but in my view, its excellence is not as yet
 complete! and i should still tag on two lines at its close;" as she
 proceeded to recite:
 
"if we do not set up some place on which our feet to rest,
 for peace and freedom then it will be best."
 
"there should, in very truth, be this adjunct to make it thoroughly
 explicit!" pao-ch'ai added. "in days of yore, the sixth founder of the
 southern sect, hui neng, came, when went first in search of his
 patron, in the shao chou district; and upon hearing that the fifth
 founder, hung jen, was at huang mei, readily entered his service in
 the capacity of buddhist cook; and when the fifth founder, prompted by a
 wish to select buddhistic successor, bade his neophytes and all the
 bonzes to each compose an enigmatical stanza, the one who occupied the
 upper seat, shen hsiu, recited:
 
"a p'u t'i tree the body is, the heart so like stand of mirror
 bright,
 on which must needs, by constant careful rubbing, not be left dust to
 alight!
 
"and hui neng, who was at this time in the cook-house pounding rice,
 overheard this enigma. 'excellent, it is excellent,' ventured, 'but
 as far as completeness goes it isn't complete;' and having bethought
 himself of an apothegm: 'the p'u t'i, (an expression for buddha or
 intelligence),' proceeded, 'is really tree; and the resplendent
 mirror, (buddhistic term for heart), is likewise stand; and as, in
 fact, they do not constitute any tangible objects, how could they be
 contaminated by particles of dust?' whereupon the fifth founder at once
 took his robe and clap-dish and handed them to him. well, the text now
 of this enigma presents too this identical idea, for the simple fact is
 that those lines full of subtleties of short while back are not, as
 yet, perfected or brought to an issue, and do you forsooth readily give
 up the task in this manner?"
 
"he hasn't been able to make any reply," tai-yü rejoined sneeringly,
 "and must therefore be held to be discomfited; but were even to make
 suitable answer now, there would be nothing out of the common about it!
 anyhow, from this time forth you mustn't talk about buddhistic spells,
 for what even we two know and are able to do, you don't as yet know and
 can't do; and do you go and concern yourself with abstraction?"
 
pao-yü had, in his own mind, been under the impression that had
 attained perception, but when was unawares and all of sudden
 subjected to this question by tai-yü, soon found it beyond his power
 to give any ready answer. and when pao-ch'ai furthermore came out with a
 religious disquisition, by way of illustration, and this on subjects, in
 all of which had hitherto not seen them display any ability, he
 communed within himself: "if with their knowledge, which is indeed in
 advance of that of mine, they haven't, as yet, attained perception, what
 need is there for now to bring upon myself labour and vexation?"
 
"who has, pray," hastily inquired smilingly, after arriving at the
 end of his reflections, "indulged in buddhistic mysteries? what i did
 amounts to nothing more than nonsensical trash, written, at the spur of
 the moment, and nothing else."
 
at the close of this remark all four came to be again on the same terms
 as of old; but suddenly servant announced that the empress (yüan
 ch'un) had despatched messenger to bring over lantern-conundrum with
 the directions that they should all go and guess it, and that after they
 had found it out, they should each also devise one and send it in. at
 these words, the four of them left the room with hasty step, and
 adjourned into dowager lady chia's drawing room, where they discovered a
 young eunuch, holding four-cornered, flat-topped lantern, of white
 gauze, which had been specially fabricated for lantern riddles. on the
 front side, there was already conundrum, and the whole company were
 vying with each other in looking at it and making wild guesses; when the
 young eunuch went on to transmit his orders, saying: "young ladies, you
 should not speak out when you are guessing; but each one of you should
 secretly write down the solutions for to wrap them up, and take them
 all in together to await her majesty's personal inspection as to whether
 they be correct or not."
 
upon listening to these words, pao-ch'ai drew near, and perceived at a
 glance, that it consisted of stanza of four lines, with seven
 characters in each; but though there was novelty or remarkable
 feature about it, she felt constrained to outwardly give utterance to
 words of praise. "it's hard to guess!" she simply added, while she
 pretended to be plunged in thought, for the fact is that as soon as she
 had cast her eye upon it, she had at once solved it. pao-yü, tai-yü,
 hsiang-yün, and t'an-ch'un, had all four also hit upon the answer, and
 each had secretly put it in writing; and chia huan, chia lan and the
 others were at the same time sent for, and every one of them set to work
 to exert the energies of his mind, and, when they arrived at guess,
 they noted it down on paper; after which every individual member of the
 family made choice of some object, and composed riddle, which was
 transcribed in large round hand, and affixed on the lantern. this
 done, the eunuch took his departure, and when evening drew near, came
 out and delivered the commands of the imperial consort. "the conundrum,"
 said, "written by her highness, the other day, has been solved by
 every one, with the exception of miss secunda and master tertius, who
 made wrong guess. those composed by you, young ladies, have likewise
 all been guessed; but her majesty does not know whether her solutions
 are right or not." while speaking, again produced the riddles, which
 had been written by them, among which were those which had been solved,
 as well as those which had not been solved; and the eunuch, in like
 manner, took the presents, conferred by the imperial consort, and handed
 them over to those who had guessed right. to each person was assigned a
 bamboo vase, inscribed with verses, which had been manufactured for
 palace use, as well as articles of bamboo for tea; with the exception of
 ying-ch'un and chia huan, who were the only two persons who did not
 receive any. but as ying-ch'un looked upon the whole thing as joke and
 trifle, she did not trouble her mind on that score, but chia huan at
 once felt very disconsolate.
 
"this one devised by mr. tertius," the eunuch was further heard to say,
 "is not properly done; and as her majesty herself has been unable to
 guess it she commanded to bring it back, and ask mr. tertius what it
 is about."
 
after the party had listened to these words, they all pressed forward to
 see what had been written. the burden of it was this:
 
the elder brother has horns only eight;
 the second brother has horns only two;
 the elder brother on the bed doth sit;
 inside the room the second likes to squat.
 
after perusal of these lines, they broke out, with one voice, into a
 loud fit of laughter; and chia huan had to explain to the eunuch that
 the one was pillow, and the other the head of an animal. having
 committed the explanation to memory and accepted cup of tea, the
 eunuch took his departure; and old lady chia, noticing in what buoyant
 spirits yüan ch'un was, felt herself so much the more elated, that
 issuing forthwith directions to devise, with every despatch, small but
 ingenious lantern of fine texture in the shape of screen, and put it
 in the hall, she bade each of her grandchildren secretly compose a
 conundrum, copy it out clean, and affix it on the frame of the lantern;
 and she had subsequently scented tea and fine fruits, as well as every
 kind of nicknacks, got ready, as prizes for those who guessed right.
 
and when chia cheng came from court and found the old lady in such high
 glee also came over in the evening, as the season was furthermore
 holiday time, to avail himself of her good cheer to reap some enjoyment.
 in the upper part of the room seated themselves, at one table dowager
 lady chia, chia cheng, and pao-yü; madame wang, pao-ch'ai, tai-yü,
 hsiang-yün sat round another table, and ying-ch'un, tan-ch'un and hsi
 ch'un the three of them, occupied separate table, and both these
 tables were laid in the lower part, while below, all over the floor,
 stood matrons and waiting-maids for li kung-ts'ai and hsi-feng were both
 seated in the inner section of the hall, at another table.
 
chia chen failed to see chia lan, and therefore inquired: "how is it
 i don't see brother lan," whereupon the female servants, standing below,
 hastily entered the inner room and made inquiries of widow li. "he
 says," mrs. li stood up and rejoined with smile, "that as your master
 didn't go just then to ask him round, has wish to come!" and when
 matron delivered the reply to chia cheng; the whole company exclaimed
 much amused: "how obstinate and perverse his natural disposition is!"
 but chia cheng lost time in sending chia huan, together with two
 matrons, to fetch chia lan; and, on his arrival, dowager lady chia bade
 him sit by her side, and, taking handful of fruits, she gave them to
 him to eat; after which the party chatted, laughed, and enjoyed
 themselves.
 
ordinarily, there was one but pao-yü to say much or talk at any
 length, but on this day, with chia cheng present, his remarks were
 limited to assents. and as to the rest, hsiang-yün had, though young
 girl, and of delicate physique, nevertheless ever been very fond of
 talking and discussing; but, on this instance, chia cheng was at the
 feast, so that she also held her tongue and restrained her words. as for
 tai-yü she was naturally peevish and listless, and not very much
 inclined to indulge in conversation; while pao-ch'ai, who had never been
 reckless in her words or frivolous in her deportment, likewise behaved
 on the present occasion in her usual dignified manner. hence it was that
 this banquet, although family party, given for the sake of relaxation,
 assumed contrariwise an appearance of restraint, and as old lady chia
 was herself too well aware that it was to be ascribed to the presence of
 chia cheng alone, she therefore, after the wine had gone round three
 times, forthwith hurried off chia cheng to retire to rest.
 
less cognisant was chia cheng himself that the old lady's motives in
 packing him off were to afford favourable opportunity to the young
 ladies and young men to enjoy themselves, and that is why, forcing a
 smile, observed: "having to-day heard that your venerable ladyship
 had got up in here large assortment of excellent riddles, on the
 occasion of the spring festival of lanterns, i too consequently prepared
 prizes, as well as banquet, and came with the express purpose of
 joining the company; and why don't you in some way confer fraction of
 the fond love, which you cherish for your grandsons and granddaughters,
 upon also, your son?"
 
"when you're here," old lady chia replied smilingly, "they won't venture
 to chat or laugh; and unless you go, you'll really fill with intense
 dejection! but if you feel inclined to guess conundrums, well, i'll tell
 you one for you to solve; but if you don't guess right, mind, you'll be
 mulcted!"
 
"of course i'll submit to the penalty," chia cheng rejoined eagerly, as
 laughed, "but if i do guess right, i must in like manner receive a
 reward!"
 
"this goes without saying!" dowager lady chia added; whereupon she went
 on to recite:
 
the monkey's body gently rests on the tree top!
 
"this refers," she said, "to the name of fruit."
 
chia cheng was already aware that it was lichee, but designedly
 made few guesses at random, and was fined several things; but he
 subsequently gave, at length, the right answer, and also obtained a
 present from her ladyship.
 
in due course too set forth this conundrum for old lady chia to
 guess:
 
correct its body is in appearance,
 both firm and solid is it in substance;
 to words, it is true, it cannot give vent,
 but spoken to, it always does assent.
 
when had done reciting it, communicated the answer in an undertone
 to pao-yü; and pao-yü fathoming what his intention was, gently too told
 his grandmother chia, and her ladyship finding, after some reflection,
 that there was really mistake about it, readily remarked that it was
 an inkslab.
 
"after all," chia cheng smiled; "your venerable ladyship it is who can
 hit the right answer with one guess!" and turning his head round, "be
 quick," cried, "and bring the prizes and present them!" whereupon the
 married women and waiting-maids below assented with one voice, and they
 simultaneously handed up the large trays and small boxes.
 
old lady chia passed the things, one by one, under inspection; and
 finding that they consisted of various kinds of articles, novel and
 ingenious, of use and of ornament, in vogue during the lantern festival,
 her heart was so deeply elated that with alacrity she shouted, "pour a
 glass of wine for your master!"
 
pao-yü took hold of the decanter, while ying ch'un presented the cup of
 wine.
 
"look on that screen!" continued dowager lady chia, "all those riddles
 have been written by the young ladies; so go and guess them for my
 benefit!"
 
chia cheng signified his obedience, and rising and walking up to the
 front of the screen, noticed the first riddle, which was one composed
 by the imperial consort yüan, in this strain:
 
the pluck of devils to repress in influence it abounds,
 like bound silk is its frame, and like thunder its breath resounds.
 but one report rattles, and men are lo! in fear and dread;
 transformed to ashes 'tis what time to see you turn the head.
 
"is this cracker?" chia cheng inquired.
 
"it is," pao-yü assented.
 
chia cheng then went on to peruse that of ying-ch'un's, which referred
 to an article of use:
 
exhaustless is the principle of heavenly calculations and of human
 skill;
 skill may exist, but without proper practice the result to find hard
 yet
 will be!
 whence cometh all this mixed confusion on day so still?
 simply it is because the figures yin and yang do not agree.
 
"it's an abacus," chia cheng observed.
 
"quite so!" replied ying ch'un smiling; after which they also conned the
 one below, by t'an-ch'un, which ran thus and had something to do with an
 object:
 
this is the time when 'neath the stairs the pages their heads raise!
 the term of "pure brightness" is the meetest time this thing to make!
 the vagrant silk it snaps, and slack, without tension it strays!
 the east wind don't begrudge because its farewell it did take!
 
"it would seem," chia cheng suggested, "as if that must be kite!"
 
"it is," answered t'an c'h'un; whereupon chia cheng read the one below,
 which was written by tai-yü to this effect and bore upon some thing:
 
after the audience, his two sleeves who brings with fumes replete?
 both by the lute and in the quilt, it lacks luck to abide!
 the dawn it marks; reports from cock and man renders effete!
 at midnight, maids trouble have new one to provide!
 the head, it glows during the day, as well as in the night!
 its heart, it burns from day to day and 'gain from year to year!
 time swiftly flies and mete it is that we should hold it dear!
 changes might come, but it defies wind, rain, days dark or bright!
 
"isn't this scented stick to show the watch?" chia cheng inquired.
 
"yes!" assented pao-yü, speaking on tai-yü's behalf; and chia cheng
 thereupon prosecuted the perusal of conundrum, which ran as follows,
 and referred to an object;
 
with the south, it sits face to face,
 and the north, the while, it doth face;
 if the figure be sad, it also is sad,
 if the figure be glad, it likewise is glad!
 
"splendid! splendid!" exclaimed chia cheng, "my guess is that it's a
 looking-glass. it's excellently done!"
 
pao-yü smiled. "it is looking glass!" rejoined.
 
"this is, however, anonymous; whose work is it?" chia cheng went on to
 ask, and dowager lady chia interposed: "this, i fancy, must have been
 composed by pao-yü," and chia cheng then said not word, but continued
 reading the following conundrum, which was that devised by pao-ch'ai, on
 some article or other:
 
eyes though it has; eyeballs it has none, and empty 'tis inside!
 the lotus flowers out of the water peep, and they with gladness meet,
 but when dryandra leaves begin to drop, they then part and divide,
 for fond pair they are, but, united, winter they cannot greet.
 
when chia cheng finished scanning it, gave way to reflection. "this
 object," pondered, "must surely be limited in use! but for persons of
 tender years to indulge in all this kind of language, would seem to be
 still less propitious; for they cannot, in my views, be any of them the
 sort of people to enjoy happiness and longevity!" when his reflections
 reached this point, felt the more dejected, and plainly betrayed a
 sad appearance, and all did was to droop his head and to plunge in a
 brown study.
 
but upon perceiving the frame of mind in which chia cheng was, dowager
 lady chia arrived at the conclusion that must be fatigued; and
 fearing, on the other hand, that if she detained him, the whole party of
 young ladies would lack the spirit to enjoy themselves, she there and
 then faced chia cheng and suggested: "there's need really for you to
 remain here any longer, and you had better retire to rest; and let us
 sit while longer; after which, we too will break up!"
 
as soon as chia cheng caught this hint, speedily assented several
 consecutive yes's; and when had further done his best to induce old
 lady chia to have cup of wine, eventually withdrew out of the hall.
 on his return to his bedroom, could do nothing else than give way to
 cogitation, and, as turned this and turned that over in his mind, he
 got still more sad and pained.
 
"amuse yourselves now!" readily exclaimed dowager lady chia, during this
 while, after seeing chia cheng off; but this remark was barely finished,
 when she caught sight of pao-yü run up to the lantern screen, and give
 vent, as gesticulated with his hands and kicked his feet about, to
 any criticisms that first came to his lips. "in this," remarked,
 "this line isn't happy; and that one, hasn't been suitably solved!"
 while behaved just like monkey, whose fetters had been let loose.
 
"were the whole party after all," hastily ventured tai-yü, "to sit down,
 as we did short while back and chat and laugh; wouldn't that be more
 in accordance with good manners?"
 
lady feng thereupon egressed from the room in the inner end and
 interposed her remarks. "such being as you are," she said, "shouldn't
 surely be allowed by mr. chia cheng, an inch or step from his side,
 and then you'll be all right. but just then it slipped my memory, for
 why didn't i, when your father was present, instigate him to bid you
 compose rhythmical enigma; and you would, i have doubt, have been
 up to this moment in state of perspiration!"
 
at these words, pao-yü lost all patience, and laying hold of lady feng,
 hustled her about for few moments.
 
but old lady chia went on for some time to bandy words with li
 kung-ts'ai, with the whole company of young ladies and the rest, so that
 she, in fact, felt considerably tired and worn out; and when she heard
 that the fourth watch had already drawn nigh, she consequently issued
 directions that the eatables should be cleared away and given to the
 crowd of servants, and suggested, as she readily rose to her feet, "let
 us go and rest! for the next day is also feast, and we must get up at
 an early hour; and to-morrow evening we can enjoy ourselves again!"
 whereupon the whole company dispersed.
 
but now, reader, listen to the sequel given in the chapter which
 follows.
 



chapter xxiii.
 
pao-yü and tai-yü make use of some beautiful passages from the record
 of the western side-building to bandy jokes.
 the excellent ballads sung in the peony pavilion touch the tender
 heart of tai-yü.
 

soon after the day on which chia yuan-ch'un honoured the garden of broad
 vista with visit, and her return to the palace, so our story goes, she
 forthwith desired that t'an-ch'un should make careful copy, in
 consecutive order, of the verses, which had been composed and read out
 on that occasion, in order that she herself should assign them their
 rank, and adjudge the good and bad. and she also directed that an
 inscription should be engraved on stone, in the broad vista park, to
 serve in future years as record of the pleasant and felicitous event;
 and chia cheng, therefore, gave orders to servants to go far and wide,
 and select skilful artificers and renowned workmen, to polish the stone
 and engrave the characters in the garden of broad vista; while chia chen
 put himself at the head of chia jung, chia p'ing and others to
 superintend the work. and as chia had, on the other hand, the control
 of wen kuan and the rest of the singing girls, twelve in all, as well as
 of their costumes and other properties, had leisure to attend to
 anything else, and consequently once again sent for chia ch'ang and chia
 ling to come and act as overseers.
 
on certain day, the works were taken in hand for rubbing the stones
 smooth with wax, for carving the inscription, and tracing it with
 vermilion, but without entering into details on these matters too
 minutely, we will return to the two places, the yu huang temple and the
 ta mo monastery. the company of twelve young bonzes and twelve young
 taoist priests had now moved out of the garden of broad vista, and chia
 cheng was meditating upon distributing them to various temples to live
 apart, when unexpectedly chia ch'in's mother, née chou,--who resided in
 the back street, and had been at the time contemplating to pay visit
 to chia cheng on this side so as to obtain some charge, be it either
 large or small, for her to look after, that too should be put in
 the way of turning up some money to meet his expenses with,--came, as
 luck would have it, to hear that some work was in hand in this mansion,
 and lost time in driving over in curricle and making her appeal to
 lady feng. and as lady feng remembered that she had all along not
 presumed on her position to put on airs, she willingly acceded to her
 request, and after calling to memory some suitable remarks, she at once
 went to make her report to madame wang: "these young bonzes and taoist
 priests," she said, "can by means be sent over to other places; for
 were the imperial consort to come out at an unexpected moment, they
 would then be required to perform services; and in the event of their
 being scattered, there will, when the time comes to requisition their
 help, again be difficulties in the way; and my idea is that it would be
 better to send them all to the family temple, the iron fence temple; and
 every month all there will be to do will be to depute some one to take
 over few taels for them to buy firewood and rice with, that's all, and
 when there's even sound of their being required uttered, some one can
 at once go and tell them just one word 'come,' and they will come
 without the least trouble!"
 
madame wang gave patient ear to this proposal, and, in due course,
 consulted with chia cheng.
 
"you've really," smiled chia cheng at these words, "reminded how i
 should act! yes, let this be done!" and there and then sent for chia
 lien.
 
chia lien was, at the time, having his meal with lady feng, but as soon
 as heard that was wanted, put by his rice and was just walking
 off, when lady feng clutched him and pulled him back. "wait while,"
 she observed with smirk, "and listen to what i've got to tell you! if
 it's about anything else, i've nothing to do with it; but if it be about
 the young bonzes and young taoists, you must, in this particular matter,
 please comply with this suggestion of mine," after which, she went on in
 this way and that way to put him up to whole lot of hints.
 
"i know nothing about it," chia lien rejoined smilingly, "and as you
 have the knack you yourself had better go and tell him!"
 
but as soon as lady feng heard this remark, she stiffened her head and
 threw down the chopsticks; and, with an expression on her cheeks, which
 looked like smile and yet not smile, she glanced angrily at chia
 lien. "are you speaking in earnest," she inquired, "or are you only
 jesting?"
 
"yün erh, the of our fifth sister-in-law of the western porch, has
 come and appealed to two or three times, asking for something to look
 after," chia lien laughed, "and i assented and bade him wait; and now,
 after great deal of trouble, this job has turned up; and there you are
 once again snatching it away!"
 
"compose your mind," lady feng observed grinning, "for the imperial
 consort has hinted that directions should be given for the planting, in
 the north-east corner of the park, of further plentiful supply of pine
 and cedar trees, and that orders should also be issued for the addition,
 round the base of the tower, of large number of flowers and plants and
 such like; and when this job turns up, i can safely tell you that yun
 erh will be called to assume control of these works."
 
"well if that be really so," chia lien rejoined, "it will after all do!
 but there's only one thing; all i was up to last night was simply to
 have some fun with you, but you obstinately and perversely wouldn't."
 
lady feng, upon hearing these words, burst out laughing with sound of
 ch'ih, and spurting disdainfully at chia lien, she lowered her head and
 went on at once with her meal; during which time chia lien speedily
 walked away laughing the while, and betook himself to the front, where
 saw chia cheng. it was, indeed, about the young bonzes, and chia lien
 readily carried out lady feng's suggestion. "as from all appearances,"
 continued, "ch'in erh has, actually, so vastly improved, this job
 should, after all, be entrusted to his care and management; and provided
 that in observance with the inside custom ch'in erh were each day told
 to receive the advances, things will go on all right." and as chia cheng
 had never had much attention to give to such matters of detail, he, as
 soon as heard what chia lien had to say, immediately signified his
 approval and assent. and chia lien, on his return to his quarters,
 communicated the issue to lady feng; whereupon lady feng at once sent
 some one to go and notify dame chou.
 
chia ch'in came, in due course, to pay visit to chia lien and his
 wife, and was incessant in his expressions of gratitude; and lady feng
 bestowed upon him further favour by giving him, as first instalment,
 an advance of the funds necessary for three months' outlay, for which
 she bade him write receipt; while chia lien filled up cheque and
 signed it; and counter-order was simultaneously issued, and came
 out into the treasury where the sum specified for three months'
 supplies, amounting to three hundred taels, was paid out in pure ingots.
 
chia ch'in took the first piece of silver that came under his hand, and
 gave it to the men in charge of the scales, with which told them to
 have cup of tea, and bidding, shortly after, boy-servant take the
 money to his home, held consultation with his mother; after which, he
 hired donkey for himself to ride on, and also bespoke several
 carriages, and came to the back gate of the jung kuo mansion; where
 having called out the twenty young priests, they got into the carriages,
 and sped straightway beyond the city walls, to the temple of the iron
 fence, where nothing of any note transpired at the time.
 
but we will now notice chia yüan-ch'un, within the precincts of the
 palace. when she had arranged the verses composed in the park of broad
 vista in their order of merit, she suddenly recollected that the sights
 in the garden were sure, ever since her visit through them, to be
 diligently and respectfully kept locked up by her father and mother; and
 that by not allowing any one to go in was not an injustice done to this
 garden? "besides," (she pondered), "in that household, there are at
 present several young ladies, capable of composing odes, and able to
 write poetry, and why should not permission be extended to them to go
 and take their quarters in it; in order too that those winsome persons
 might not be deprived of good cheer, and that the flowers and willows
 may not lack any one to admire them!"
 
but remembering likewise that pao-yü had from his infancy grown up among
 that crowd of female cousins, and was such contrast to the rest of his
 male cousins that were not allowed to move into it, would, she
 also apprehended, be made to feel forlorn; and dreading lest his
 grandmother and his mother should be displeased at heart, she thought it
 imperative that too should be permitted to take up his quarters
 inside, so that things should be put on satisfactory footing; and
 directing the eunuch hsia chung to go to the jung mansion and deliver
 her commands, she expressed the wish that pao-ch'ai and the other girls
 should live in the garden and that it should not be kept closed, and
 urged that pao-yü should also shift into it, at his own pleasure, for
 the prosecution of his studies. and chia cheng and madame wang, upon
 receiving her commands, hastened, after the departure of hsia chung, to
 explain them to dowager lady chia, and to despatch servants into the
 garden to tidy every place, to dust, to sweep, and to lay out the
 portieres and bed-curtains. the tidings were heard by the rest even with
 perfect equanimity, but pao-yü was immoderately delighted; and was
 engaged in deliberation with dowager lady chia as to this necessary and
 to that requirement, when suddenly they descried waiting-maid arrive,
 who announced: "master wishes to see pao-yü."
 
pao-yü gazed vacantly for while. his spirits simultaneously were swept
 away; his countenance changed colour; and clinging to old lady chia, he
 readily wriggled her about, just as one would twist the sugar (to make
 sweetmeats with), and could not, for the very death of him, summon up
 courage to go; so that her ladyship had alternative but to try and
 reassure him. "my precious darling" she urged, "just you go, and i'll
 stand by you! won't venture to be hard upon you; and besides, you've
 devised these excellent literary compositions; and i presume as her
 majesty has desired that you should move into the garden, his object is
 to give you few words of advice; simply because fears that you
 might be up to pranks in those grounds. but to all tells you,
 whatever you do, mind you acquiesce and it will be all right!"
 
and as she tried to compose him, she at the same time called two old
 nurses and enjoined them to take pao-yü over with due care, "and don't
 let his father," she added, "frighten him!"
 
the old nurses expressed their obedience, and pao-yü felt constrained to
 walk ahead; and with one step scarcely progressing three inches, he
 leisurely came over to this side. strange coincidence chia cheng was in
 madame wang's apartments consulting with her upon some matter or other,
 and chin ch'uan-erh, ts'ai yun, ts'ai feng, ts'ai luan, hsiu feng and
 the whole number of waiting-maids were all standing outside under the
 verandah. as soon as they caught sight of pao-yü, they puckered up their
 mouths and laughed at him; while chin ch'uan grasped pao-yü with one
 hand, and remarked in low tone of voice: "on these lips of mine has
 just been rubbed cosmetic, soaked with perfume, and are you now inclined
 to lick it or not?" whereupon ts'ai yün pushed off chin ch'uan with one
 shove, as she interposed laughingly, "a person's heart is at this moment
 in low spirits and do you still go on cracking jokes at him? but avail
 yourself of this opportunity when master is in good cheer to make haste
 and get in!"
 
pao-yü had help but to sidle against the door and walk in. chia cheng
 and madame wang were, in fact, both in the inner rooms, and dame chou
 raised the portière. pao-yü stepped in gingerly and perceived chia cheng
 and madame wang sitting opposite to each other, on the stove-couch,
 engaged in conversation; while below on row of chairs sat ying ch'un,
 t'an ch'un, hsi ch'un and chia huan; but though all four of them were
 seated in there only t'an ch'un, hsi ch'un and chia huan rose to their
 feet, as soon as they saw him make his appearance in the room; and when
 chia cheng raised his eyes and noticed pao-yü standing in front of him,
 with gait full of ease and with those winsome looks of his, so
 captivating, once again realised what mean being chia huan was, and
 how coarse his deportment. but suddenly also bethought himself of
 chia chu, and as reflected too that madame wang had only this of
 her own flesh and blood, upon whom she ever doated as upon gem, and
 that his own beard had already begun to get hoary, the consequence was
 that unwittingly stifled, well nigh entirely, the feeling of hatred
 and dislike, which, during the few recent years had ordinarily
 fostered towards pao-yü. and after long pause, "her majesty," he
 observed, "bade you day after day ramble about outside to disport
 yourself, with the result that you gradually became remiss and lazy; but
 now her desire is that we should keep you under strict control, and that
 in prosecuting your studies in the company of your cousins in the
 garden, you should carefully exert your brains to learn; so that if you
 don't again attend to your duties, and mind your regular tasks, you had
 better be on your guard!" pao-yü assented several consecutive yes's;
 whereupon madame wang drew him by her side and made him sit down, and
 while his three cousins resumed the seats they previously occupied:
 "have you finished all the pills you had been taking short while
 back?" madame wang inquired, as she rubbed pao-yü's neck.
 
"there's still one pill remaining," pao-yü explained by way of reply.
 
"you had better," madame wang added, "fetch ten more pills tomorrow
 morning; and every day about bedtime tell hsi jen to give them to you;
 and when you've had one you can go to sleep!"
 
"ever since you, mother, bade take them," pao-yü rejoined, "hsi jen
 has daily sent one, when i was about to turn in."
 
"who's this called hsi jen?" chia chen thereupon ascertained.
 
"she's waiting-maid!" madame wang answered.
 
"a servant girl," chia cheng remonstrated, "can be called by whatever
 name one chooses; anything is good enough; but who's it who has started
 this kind of pretentious name!"
 
madame wang noticed that chia cheng was not in happy frame of mind, so
 that she forthwith tried to screen matters for pao-yü, by saying: "it's
 our old lady who has originated it!"
 
"how can it possibly be," chia cheng exclaimed, "that her ladyship knows
 anything about such kind of language? it must, for certainty, be
 pao-yü!"
 
pao-yü perceiving that could not conceal the truth from him, was
 under the necessity of standing up and of explaining; "as i have all
 along read verses, i remembered the line written by an old poet:
 
"what time the smell of flowers wafts itself into man, one knows the
 day is warm.
 
"and as this waiting-maid's surname was hua (flower), i readily gave her
 the name, on the strength of this sentiment."
 
"when you get back," madame wang speedily suggested addressing pao-yü,
 "change it and have done; and you, sir, needn't lose your temper over
 such trivial matter!"
 
"it doesn't really matter in the least," chia cheng continued; "so that
 there's necessity of changing it; but it's evident that pao-yü
 doesn't apply his mind to legitimate pursuits, but mainly devotes his
 energies to such voluptuous expressions and wanton verses!" and as he
 finished these words, abruptly shouted out: "you brute-like child of
 retribution! don't you yet get out of this?"
 
"get away, off with you!" madame wang in like manner hastened to urge;
 "our dowager lady is waiting, i fear, for you to have her repast!"
 
pao-yü assented, and, with gentle step, withdrew out of the room,
 laughing at chin ch'uan-erh, as put out his tongue; and leading off
 the two nurses, went off on his way like streak of smoke. but no
 sooner had reached the door of the corridor than espied hsi jen
 standing leaning against the side; who perceiving pao-yü come back safe
 and sound heaped smile upon smile, and asked: "what did want you
 for?"
 
"there was nothing much," pao-yü explained, "he simply feared that i
 would, when i get into the garden, be up to mischief, and gave all
 sorts of advice;" and, as while explained matters, they came into the
 presence of lady chia, gave her clear account, from first to last,
 of what had transpired. but when saw that lin tai-yü was at the
 moment in the room, pao-yü speedily inquired of her: "which place do you
 think best to live in?"
 
tai-yü had just been cogitating on this subject, so that when she
 unexpectedly heard pao-yü's inquiry, she forthwith rejoined with a
 smile: "my own idea is that the hsio hsiang kuan is best; for i'm fond
 of those clusters of bamboos, which hide from view the tortuous
 balustrade and make the place more secluded and peaceful than any
 other!"
 
pao-yü at these words clapped his hands and smiled. "that just meets
 with my own views!" remarked; "i too would like you to go and live in
 there; and as i am to stay in the i hung yuan, we two will be, in the
 first place, near each other; and next, both in quiet and secluded
 spots."
 
while the two of them were conversing, servant came, sent over by chia
 cheng, to report to dowager lady chia that: "the 22nd of the second moon
 was propitious day for pao-yü and the young ladies to shift their
 quarters into the garden; that during these few days, servants should be
 sent in to put things in their proper places and to clean; that hsueh
 pao-ch'ai should put up in the heng wu court; that lin tai-yü was to
 live in the hsiao hsiang lodge; that chia ying-ch'un should move into
 the cho chin two-storied building; that t'an ch'un should put up in the
 ch'iu yen library; that hsi ch'un should take up her quarters in the
 liao feng house; that widow li should live in the tao hsiang village,
 and that pao-yü was to live in the i hung court. that at every place two
 old nurses should be added and four servant-girls; that exclusive of the
 nurse and personal waiting-maid of each, there should, in addition, be
 servants, whose special duties should be to put things straight and to
 sweep the place; and that on the 22nd, they should all, in body, move
 into the garden."
 
when this season drew near, the interior of the grounds, with the
 flowers waving like embroidered sashes, and the willows fanned by the
 fragrant breeze, was more as desolate and silent as it had been in
 previous days; but without indulging in any further irrelevant details,
 we shall now go back to pao-yü.
 
ever since shifted his quarters into the park, his heart was full of
 joy, and his mind of contentment, fostering none of those extraordinary
 ideas, whose tendency could be to give birth to longings and hankerings.
 day after day, simply indulged, in the company of his female cousins
 and the waiting-maids, in either reading his books, or writing
 characters, or in thrumming the lute, playing chess, drawing pictures
 and scanning verses, even in drawing patterns of argus pheasants, in
 embroidering phoenixes, contesting with them in searching for strange
 plants, and gathering flowers, in humming poetry with gentle tone,
 singing ballads with soft voice, dissecting characters, and in playing
 at mora, so that, being free to go everywhere and anywhere, was of
 course completely happy. from his pen emanate four ballads on the times
 of the four seasons, which, although they could not be looked upon as
 first-rate, afford anyhow correct idea of his sentiments, and true
 account of the scenery.
 
the ballad on the spring night runs as follows:
 
the silken curtains, thin as russet silk, at random are spread out.
 the croak of frogs from the adjoining lane but faintly strikes the
 ear.
 the pillow slight chill pervades, for rain outside the window falls.
 the landscape, which now meets the eye, is like that seen in dreams by
 man.
 in plenteous streams the candles' tears do drop, but for whom do they
 weep?
 each particle of grief felt by the flowers is due to anger against me.
 it's all because the maids have by indulgence indolent been made.
 the cover over i'll pull, as i am loth to laugh and talk for long.
 
this is the description of the aspect of nature on summer night:
 
the beauteous girl, weary of needlework, quiet is plunged in long
 dream.
 the parrot in the golden cage doth shout that it is time the tea to
 brew.
 the lustrous windows with the musky moon like open palace-mirrors
 look;
 the room abounds with fumes of sandalwood and all kinds of imperial
 scents.
 from the cups made of amber is poured out the slippery dew from the
 lotus.
 the banisters of glass, the cool zephyr enjoy flapped by the willow
 trees.
 in the stream-spanning kiosk, the curtains everywhere all at one time
 do wave.
 in the vermilion tower the blinds the maidens roll, for they have made
 the night's toilette.
 
the landscape of an autumnal evening is thus depicted:
 
in the interior of the chiang yün house are hushed all clamorous din
 and noise.
 the sheen, which from selene flows, pervades the windows of carnation
 gauze.
 the moss-locked, streaked rocks shelter afford to the cranes, plunged
 in sleep.
 the dew, blown on the t'ung tree by the well, doth wet the roosting
 rooks.
 wrapped in quilt, the maid comes the gold phoenix coverlet to
 spread.
 the girl, who on the rails did lean, on her return drops the
 kingfisher flowers!
 this quiet night his eyes in sleep cannot close, as doth long
 for wine.
 the smoke is stifled, and the fire restirred, when tea is ordered to
 be brewed.
 
the picture of winter night is in this strain:
 
the sleep of the plum trees, the dream of the bamboos the third watch
 have already reached.
 under the embroidered quilt and the kingfisher coverlet one can't
 sleep for the cold.
 the shadow of fir trees pervades the court, but cranes are all that
 meet the eye.
 both far and wide the pear blossom covers the ground, but yet the hawk
 cannot be heard.
 the wish, verses to write, fostered by the damsel with the green
 sleeves, has waxéd cold.
 the master, with the gold sable pelisse, cannot endure much wine.
 but yet doth rejoice that his attendant knows the way to brew the
 tea.
 the newly-fallen snow is swept what time for tea the water must be
 boiled.
 
but putting aside pao-yü, as leisurely was occupied in scanning some
 verses, we will now allude to all these ballads. there lived, at that
 time, class of people, whose wont was to servilely court the
 influential and wealthy, and who, upon perceiving that the verses were
 composed by young lad of the jung kuo mansion, of only twelve or
 thirteen years of age, had copies made, and taking them outside sang
 their praise far and wide. there were besides another sort of
 light-headed young men, whose heart was so set upon licentious and
 seductive lines, that they even inscribed them on fans and screen-walls,
 and time and again kept on humming them and extolling them. and to the
 above reasons must therefore be ascribed the fact that persons came in
 search of stanzas and in quest of manuscripts, to apply for sketches and
 to beg for poetical compositions, to the increasing satisfaction of
 pao-yü, who day after day, when at home, devoted his time and attention
 to these extraneous matters. but who would have anticipated that he
 could ever in his quiet seclusion have become prey to spirit of
 restlessness? of sudden, one day began to feel discontent, finding
 fault with this and turning up his nose at that; and going in and coming
 out was simply full of ennui. and as all the girls in the garden were
 just in the prime of youth, and at time of life when, artless and
 unaffected, they sat and reclined without regard to retirement, and
 disported themselves and joked without heed, how could they ever have
 come to read the secrets which at this time occupied place in the
 heart of pao-yü? but so unhappy was pao-yü within himself that soon
 felt loth to stay in the garden, and took to gadding about outside like
 an evil spirit; but behaved also the while in an idiotic manner.
 
ming yen, upon seeing him go on in this way, felt prompted, with the
 idea of affording his mind some distraction, to think of this and to
 devise that expedient; but everything had been indulged in with surfeit
 by pao-yü, and there was only this resource, (that suggested itself to
 him,) of which pao-yü had not as yet had any experience. bringing his
 reflections to close, forthwith came over to bookshop, and
 selecting novels, both of old and of the present age, traditions
 intended for outside circulation on fei yen, ho te, wu tse-t'ien, and
 yang kuei-fei, as well as books of light literature consisting of
 strange legends, purchased good number of them with the express
 purpose of enticing pao-yü to read them. as soon as pao-yü caught sight
 of them, felt as if had obtained some gem or jewel. "but you
 mustn't," ming yen went on to enjoin him, "take them into the garden;
 for if any one were to come to know anything about them, i shall then
 suffer more than i can bear; and you should, when you go along, hide
 them in your clothes!"
 
but would pao-yü agree to not introducing them into the garden? so after
 much wavering, picked out only several volumes of those whose style
 was more refined, and took them in, and threw them over the top of his
 bed for him to peruse when one was present; while those coarse and
 very indecent ones, concealed in bundle in the outer library.
 
on one day, which happened to be the middle decade of the third moon,
 pao-yü, after breakfast, took book, the "hui chen chi," in his hand
 and walked as far as the bridge of the hsin fang lock. seating himself
 on block of rock, that lay under the peach trees in that quarter, he
 opened the hui chen chi and began to read it carefully from the
 beginning. but just as came to the passage: "the falling red
 (flowers) have formed heap," felt gust of wind blow through the
 trees, bringing down whole bushel of peach blossoms; and, as they
 fell, his whole person, the entire surface of the book as well as a
 large extent of ground were simply bestrewn with petals of the blossoms.
 pao-yü was bent upon shaking them down; but as feared lest they
 should be trodden under foot, felt constrained to carry the petals in
 his coat and walk to the bank of the pond and throw them into the
 stream. the petals floated on the surface of the water, and, after
 whirling and swaying here and there, they at length ran out by the hsin
 fang lock. but, on his return under the tree, found the ground again
 one mass of petals, and pao-yü was just hesitating what to do, when he
 heard some one behind his back inquire, "what are you up to here?" and
 as soon as pao-yü turned his head round, discovered that it was lin
 tai-yü, who had come over carrying on her shoulder hoe for raking
 flowers, that on this hoe was suspended gauze-bag, and that in her
 hand she held broom.
 
"that's right, well done!" pao-yü remarked smiling; "come and sweep
 these flowers, and throw them into the water yonder. i've just thrown a
 lot in there myself!"
 
"it isn't right," lin tai-yü rejoined, "to throw them into the water.
 the water, which you see, is clean enough here, but as soon as it finds
 its way out, where are situated other people's grounds, what isn't there
 in it? so that you would be misusing these flowers just as much as if
 you left them here! but in that corner, i have dug hole for flowers,
 and i'll now sweep these and put them into this gauze-bag and bury them
 in there; and, in course of many days, they will also become converted
 into earth, and won't this be clean way (of disposing of them)?"
 
pao-yü, after listening to these words, felt inexpressibly delighted.
 "wait!" smiled, "until i put down my book, and i'll help you to clear
 them up!"
 
"what's the book?" tai-yü inquired.
 
pao-yü at this question was so taken aback that had time to
 conceal it. "it's," replied hastily, "the chung yung and the ta
 hsüeh!"
 
"are you going again to play the fool with me? be quick and give it to
 to see; and this will be ever so much better way!"
 
"cousin," pao-yü replied, "as far as you yourself are concerned i don't
 mind you, but after you've seen it, please don't tell any one else. it's
 really written in beautiful style; and were you to once begin reading
 it, why even for your very rice you wouldn't have thought?"
 
as spoke, handed it to her; and tai-yü deposited all the flowers
 on the ground, took over the book, and read it from the very first page;
 and the more she perused it, she got so much the more fascinated by it,
 that in time she had finished reading sixteen whole chapters. but
 aroused as she was to state of rapture by the diction, what remained
 even of the fascination was enough to overpower her senses; and though
 she had finished reading, she nevertheless continued in state of
 abstraction, and still kept on gently recalling the text to mind, and
 humming it to herself.
 
"cousin, tell is it nice or not?" pao-yü grinned.
 
"it is indeed full of zest!" lin tai-yü replied exultingly.
 
"i'm that very sad and very sickly person," pao-yü explained laughing,
 "while you are that beauty who could subvert the empire and overthrow
 the city."
 
lin tai-yü became, at these words, unconsciously crimson all over her
 cheeks, even up to her very ears; and raising, at the same moment, her
 two eyebrows, which seemed to knit and yet not to knit, and opening wide
 those eyes, which seemed to stare and yet not to stare, while her
 peach-like cheeks bore an angry look and on her thin-skinned face lurked
 displeasure, she pointed at pao-yü and exclaimed: "you do deserve death,
 for the rubbish you talk! without any provocation you bring up these
 licentious expressions and wanton ballads to give vent to all this
 insolent rot, in order to insult me; but i'll go and tell uncle and
 aunt."
 
as soon as she pronounced the two words "insult me," her eyeballs at
 once were suffused with purple, and turning herself round she there and
 then walked away; which filled pao-yü with so much distress that he
 jumped forward to impede her progress, as pleaded: "my dear cousin, i
 earnestly entreat you to spare this time! i've indeed said what i
 shouldn't; but if i had any intention to insult you, i'll throw myself
 to-morrow into the pond, and let the scabby-headed turtle eat up, so
 that i become transformed into large tortoise. and when you shall have
 by and by become the consort of an officer of the first degree, and you
 shall have fallen ill from old age and returned to the west, i'll come
 to your tomb and bear your stone tablet for ever on my back!"
 
as uttered these words, lin tai-yü burst out laughing with sound of
 "pu ch'ih," and rubbing her eyes, she sneeringly remarked: "i too can
 come out with this same tune; but will you now still go on talking
 nonsense? pshaw! you're, in very truth, like spear-head, (which looks)
 like silver, (but is really soft as) wax!"
 
"go on, go on!" pao-yü smiled after this remark; "and what you've said,
 i too will go and tell!"
 
"you maintain," lin tai-yü rejoined sarcastically, "that after glancing
 at anything you're able to recite it; and do you mean to say that i
 can't even do so much as take in ten lines with one gaze?"
 
pao-yü smiled and put his book away, urging: "let's do what's right and
 proper, and at once take the flowers and bury them; and don't let us
 allude to these things!"
 
forthwith the two of them gathered the fallen blossoms; but sooner
 had they interred them properly than they espied hsi jen coming, who
 went on to observe: "where haven't i looked for you? what! have you
 found your way as far as this! but our senior master, mr. chia she, over
 there isn't well; and the young ladies have all gone over to pay their
 respects, and our old lady has asked that you should be sent over; so go
 back at once and change your clothes!"
 
when pao-yü heard what she said, hastily picked up his books, and
 saying good bye to tai-yü, came along with hsi jen, back into his
 room, where we will leave him to effect the necessary change in his
 costume. but during this while, lin tai-yü was, after having seen pao-yü
 walk away, and heard that all her cousins were likewise not in their
 rooms, wending her way back alone, in dull and dejected mood, towards
 her apartment, when upon reaching the outside corner of the wall of the
 pear fragrance court, she caught, issuing from inside the walls, the
 harmonious strains of the fife and the melodious modulations of voices
 singing. lin tai-yü readily knew that it was the twelve singing-girls
 rehearsing play; and though she did not give her mind to go and
 listen, yet couple of lines were of sudden blown into her ears, and
 with such clearness, that even one word did not escape. their burden was
 this:
 
these troth are beauteous purple and fine carmine flowers, which in
 this way all round do bloom,
 and all together lie ensconced along the broken well, and the
 dilapidated wall!
 
but the moment lin tai-yü heard these lines, she was, in fact, so
 intensely affected and agitated that she at once halted and lending an
 ear listened attentively to what they went on to sing, which ran thus:
 
glorious day this is, and pretty scene, but sad i feel at heart!
 contentment and pleasure are to be found in whose family courts?
 
after overhearing these two lines, she unconsciously nodded her head,
 and sighed, and mused in her own mind. "really," she thought, "there is
 fine diction even in plays! but unfortunately what men in this world
 simply know is to see play, and they don't seem to be able to enjoy
 the beauties contained in them."
 
at the conclusion of this train of thought, she experienced again a
 sting of regret, (as she fancied) she should not have given way to such
 idle thoughts and missed attending to the ballads; but when she once
 more came to listen, the song, by some coincidence, went on thus:
 
it's all because thy loveliness is like flower and like the comely
 spring,
 that years roll swiftly by just like running stream.
 
when this couplet struck tai-yu's ear, her heart felt suddenly prey to
 excitement and her soul to emotion; and upon further hearing the words:
 
alone you sit in the secluded inner rooms to self-compassion giving
 way.
 
--and other such lines, she became still more as if inebriated, and like
 as if out of her head, and unable to stand on her feet, she speedily
 stooped her body, and, taking seat on block of stone, she minutely
 pondered over the rich beauty of the eight characters:
 
it's all because thy loveliness is like flower and like the comely
 spring,
 that years roll swiftly by just like running stream.
 
of sudden, she likewise bethought herself of the line:
 
water flows away and flowers decay, for both feelings have.
 
--which she had read some days back in poem of an ancient writer, and
 also of the passage:
 
when on the running stream the flowers do fall, spring then is past
 and gone;
 
--and of:
 
heaven (differs from) the human race,
 
--which also appeared in that work; and besides these, the lines, which
 she had short while back read in the hsi hiang chi:
 
the flowers, lo, fall, and on their course the waters red do flow!
 petty misfortunes of ten thousand kinds (my heart assail!)
 
both simultaneously flashed through her memory; and, collating them all
 together, she meditated on them minutely, until suddenly her heart was
 stricken with pain and her soul fleeted away, while from her eyes
 trickled down drops of tears. but while nothing could dispel her present
 state of mind, she unexpectedly realised that some one from behind gave
 her tap; and, turning her head round to look, she found that it was a
 young girl; but who it was, the next chapter will make known.
 



chapter xxiv.
 
the drunken chin kang makes light of lucre and shows preference for
 generosity.
 the foolish girl mislays her handkerchief and arouses mutual thoughts.
 


but to return to our narrative. lin tai-yü's sentimental reflections
 were the while reeling and ravelling in an intricate maze, when
 unexpectedly some one from behind gave her tap, saying: "what are you
 up to all alone here?" which took lin tai-yu so much by surprise that
 she gave start, and turning her head round to look and noticing that
 it was hsiang ling and one else; "you stupid girl!" lin tai-yü
 replied, "you've given such fright! but where do you come from at
 this time?"
 
hsiang ling giggled and smirked. "i've come," she added, "in search of
 our young lady, but i can't find her anywhere. but your tzu chuan is
 also looking after you; and she says that lady secunda has sent a
 present to you of some tea. but you had better go back home and sit
 down."
 
as she spoke, she took tai-yü by the hand, and they came along back to
 the hsiao hsiang kuan; where lady feng had indeed sent her two small
 catties of new season tea, of superior quality. but lin tai-yü sat
 down, in company with hsiang ling, and began to converse on the merits
 of this tapestry and the fineness of that embroidery; and after they had
 also had game at chess, and read few sentences out of book, hsiang
 ling took her departure. but we need not speak of either of them, but
 return now to pao-yü. having been found, and brought back home, by hsi
 jen, discovered yuan yang reclining on the bed, in the act of
 examining hsi jen's needlework; but when she perceived pao-yü arrive,
 she forthwith remarked: "where have you been? her venerable ladyship is
 waiting for you to tell you to go over and pay your obeisance to our
 senior master, and don't you still make haste to go and change your
 clothes and be off!"
 
hsi jen at once walked into the room to fetch his clothes, and pao-yü
 sat on the edge of the bed, and pushed his shoes off with his toes; and,
 while waiting for his boots to put them on, turned round and
 perceiving that yüan yang, who was clad in light red silk jacket and a
 green satin waistcoat, and girdled with white crepe sash, had her face
 turned the other way, and her head lowered giving her attention to the
 criticism of the needlework, while round her neck she wore collar with
 embroidery, pao-yü readily pressed his face against the nape of her
 neck, and as sniffed the perfume about it, did not stay his hand
 from stroking her neck, which in whiteness and smoothness was not below
 that of hsi jen; and as approached her, "my dear girl," said
 smiling and with drivelling face, "do let lick the cosmetic off
 your mouth!" clinging to her person, as uttered these words, like
 twisted sweetmeat.
 
"hsi jen!" cried yüan yang at once, "come out and see! you've been with
 him whole lifetime, and don't you give him any advice; but let him
 still behave in this fashion!" whereupon, hsi jen walked out, clasping
 the clothes, and turning to pao-yü, she observed, "i advise you in this
 way and it's good, i advise you in that way and you don't mend; and
 what do you mean to do after all? but if you again behave like this, it
 will then, in fact, be impossible for to live any longer in this
 place!"
 
as she tendered these words of counsel, she urged him to put his clothes
 on, and, after had changed, betook himself, along with yuan yang,
 to the front part of the mansion, and bade good-bye to dowager lady
 chia; after which went outside, where the attendants and horses were
 all in readiness; but when was about to mount his steed, perceived
 chia lien back from his visit and in the act of dismounting; and as the
 two of them stood face to face, and mutually exchanged some inquiries,
 they saw some one come round from the side, and say: "my respects to
 you, uncle pao-yü!"
 
when pao-yü came to look at him, noticed that this person had an
 oblong face, that his body was tall and lanky, that his age was only
 eighteen or nineteen, and that possessed, in real truth, an air of
 refinement and elegance; but though his features were, after all,
 exceedingly familiar, could not recall to mind to what branch of the
 family belonged, and what his name was.
 
"what are you staring vacantly for?" chia lien inquired laughing.
 
"don't you even recognise him? he's yün erh, the of our fifth
 sister-in-law, who lives in the back court!"
 
"of course!" pao-yü assented complacently. "how is it that i had
 forgotten just now!" and having gone on to ask how his mother was, and
 what work had to do at present; "i've come in search of uncle
 secundus, to tell him something," chia yün replied, as pointed at
 chia lien.
 
"you've really improved vastly from what you were before," added pao-yü
 smiling; "you verily look just is if you were my son!"
 
"how very barefaced!" chia lien exclaimed as burst out laughing;
 "here's person four or five years your senior to be made your son!"
 
"how far are you in your teens this year?" pao-yü inquired with smile.
 
"eighteen!" chia yün rejoined.
 
this chia yün was, in real deed, sharp and quick-witted; and when he
 heard pao-yü remark that looked like his son, readily gave a
 sarcastic smile and observed, "the proverb is true which says, 'the
 grandfather is rocked in the cradle while the grandson leans on a
 staff.' but though old enough in years, i'm nevertheless like a
 mountain, which, in spite of its height, cannot screen the sun from
 view. besides, since my father's death, i've had one to look after
 me, and were you, uncle pao, not to disdain your doltish nephew, and to
 acknowledge as your son, it would be your nephew's good fortune!"
 
"have you heard what said?" chia lien interposed cynically. "but to
 acknowledge him as is easy question to settle!" and with these
 words, walked in; whereupon pao-yü smilingly said: "to-morrow when
 you have nothing to do, just come and look up; but don't go and play
 any devilish pranks with them! i've just now leisure, so come
 to-morrow, into the library, where i'll have chat with you for whole
 day, and take you into the garden for some fun!"
 
with this remark still on his lips, laid hold of the saddle and
 mounted his horse; and, followed by the whole bevy of pages, crossed
 over to chia she's on this side; where having discovered that chia she
 had nothing more the matter with him than chill which had suddenly
 contracted, commenced by delivering dowager lady chia's message, and
 next paid his own obeisance. chia she, at first, stood up and made
 suitable answer to her venerable ladyship's inquiries, and then calling
 servant, "take the gentleman," said, "into my lady's apartment to
 sit down."
 
pao-yü withdrew out of the room, and came by the back to the upper
 apartment; and as soon as madame hsing caught sight of him, she, before
 everything else, rose to her feet and asked after old lady chia's
 health; after which, pao-yü made his own salutation, and madame hsing
 drew him on to the stove-couch, where she induced him to take seat,
 and eventually inquired after the other inmates, and also gave orders to
 serve the tea. but scarcely had they had tea, before they perceived chia
 tsung come in to pay his respects to pao-yü.
 
"where could one find such living monkey as this!" madame hsing
 remarked; "is that nurse of yours dead and gone that she doesn't even
 keep you clean and tidy, and that she lets you go about with those
 eyebrows of yours so black and that mouth so filthy! you scarcely look
 like the child of great family of scholars."
 
while she spoke, she perceived both chia huan and chia lan, one of whom
 was young uncle and the other his nephew, also advance and present
 their compliments, and madame hsing bade the two of them sit down on the
 chairs. but when chia huan noticed that pao-yü sat on the same rug with
 madame hsing, and that her ladyship was further caressing and petting
 him in every possible manner, soon felt so very unhappy at heart,
 that, after sitting for short time, forthwith made sign to chia
 lan that would like to go; and as chia lan could not but humour him,
 they both got up together to take their leave. but when pao-yü perceived
 them rise, too felt wish to go back along with them, but madame
 hsing remarked smilingly, "you had better sit while as i've something
 more to tell you," so that pao-yü had alternative but to stay. "when
 you get back," madame hsing added, addressing the other two, "present,
 each one of you, my regards to your respective mothers. the young
 ladies, your cousins, are all here making such row that my head is
 dazed, so that i won't to-day keep you to have your repast here." to
 which chia huan and chia lan assented and quickly walked out.
 
"if it be really the case that all my cousins have come over," pao-yü
 ventured with smirk, "how is it that i don't see them?"
 
"after sitting here for while," madame hsing explained, "they all went
 at the back; but in what rooms they have gone, i don't know."
 
"my senior aunt, you said you had something to tell me, pao-yü observed;
 what's it, i wonder?"
 
"what can there possibly be to tell you?" madame hsing laughed; "it was
 simply to make you wait and have your repast with the young ladies and
 then go; but there's also fine plaything that i'll give you to take
 back to amuse yourself with."
 
these two, the aunt and her nephew, were going on with their colloquy
 when, much to their surprise, it was time for dinner and the young
 ladies were all invited to come. the tables and chairs were put in their
 places, and the cups and plates were arranged in proper order; and,
 after the mother, her daughter and the cousins had finished their meal,
 pao-yü bade good-bye to chia she and returned home in company with all
 the young ladies; and when they had said good-night to dowager lady
 chia, madame wang and the others, they each went back into their rooms
 and retired to rest; where we shall leave them without any further
 comment and speak of chia yün's visit to the mansion. as soon as saw
 chia lien, inquired what business it was that had turned up, and chia
 lien consequently explained: "the other day something did actually
 present itself, but as it happened that your aunt had again and again
 entreated me, i gave it to chia ch'in; as she promised that there
 would be by and by in the garden several other spots where flowers and
 trees would be planted; and that when this job did occur, she would, for
 certainty, give it to you and finish!"
 
chia yün, upon hearing these words, suggested after short pause; "if
 that be so, there's nothing for to do than to wait; but, uncle, you
 too mustn't make any allusion beforehand in the presence of aunt to my
 having come to-day to make any inquiries; for there will really be ample
 time to speak to her when the job turns up!"
 
"why should i allude to it?" chia lien rejoined. "have i forsooth got
 all this leisure to talk of irrelevant matters! but to-morrow, besides,
 i've got to go as far as hsing yi for turn, and it's absolutely
 necessary that i should hurriedly come back the very same day; so off
 with you now and go and wait; and the day after to-morrow, after the
 watch has been set, come and ask for news; but mind at any earlier hour,
 i shan't have any leisure!" with these words, hastily went at the
 back to change his clothes. and from the time chia yun put his foot out
 of the door of the jung kuo mansion, was, the whole way homeward,
 plunged in deep thought; but having bethought himself of some expedient,
 straightway wended his steps towards the house of his maternal uncle,
 pu shih-jen. this pu shih-jen, it must be explained, kept, at the
 present date, shop for the sale of spices. had just returned home
 from his shop, and as soon as noticed chia yun, inquired of him
 what business brought him there.
 
"there's something," chia yun replied, "in which i would like to crave
 your assistance, uncle; i'm in need of some baroos camphor and musk, so
 please, uncle, give on credit four ounces of each kind, and on the
 festival of the eighth moon, i'll bring you the amount in full."
 
pu shih-jen gave sardonic smile. "don't," said, "again allude to
 any such thing as selling on tick! some time back partner in our
 establishment got several ounces of goods for his relatives on credit,
 and up to this date the bill hasn't as yet been settled; the result
 being that we've all had to make the amount good, so that we've entered
 into an agreement that we should more allow any one to obtain on tick
 anything on behalf of either relative or friend, and that whoever acted
 contrary to this resolution should be, at once, fined twenty taels, with
 which to stand treat. besides, the stock of these articles is now
 short, and were you also to come, with ready money to this our mean shop
 to buy any, we wouldn't even have as much to give you. the best way
 therefore is for you to go elsewhere. this is one side of the question;
 for on the other, you can't have anything above-board in view; and were
 you to obtain what you want as loan you would again go and play the
 giddy dog! but you'll simply say that on every occasion your uncle sees
 you, avails himself of it to find fault with you, but young fellow
 like you doesn't know what's good and what is bad; and you should,
 besides, make up your mind to earn few cash, wherewith to clothe and
 feed yourself, so that, when i see you, i too may rejoice!"
 
"what you, uncle, say," chia yun rejoined smiling, "is perfectly right;
 the only thing is that at the time of my father's death, i was likewise
 so young in years that i couldn't understand anything; but later on, i
 heard my mother explain how that for everything, it was lucky that you,
 after all, my uncles, went over to our house and devised the ways and
 means, and managed the funeral; and is it likely you, uncle, aren't
 aware of these things? besides, have i forsooth had single acre of
 land or couple of houses, the value of which i've run through as soon
 as it came into my hands? an ingenious wife cannot make boiled rice
 without raw rice; and what would you have do? it's your good fortune
 however that you've got to deal with one such as i am, for had it been
 any one else barefaced and shameless, would have come, twice every
 three days, to worry you, uncle, by asking for two pints of rice and two
 of beans, and you then, uncle, would have had help for it."
 
"my dear child," pu shih-jen exclaimed, "had i anything that i could
 call my own, your uncle as i am, wouldn't i feel bound to do something
 for you? i've day after day mentioned to your aunt that the misfortune
 was that you had resources. but should you ever succeed in making up
 your mind, you should go into that mighty household of yours, and when
 the gentlemen aren't looking, forthwith pocket your pride and hobnob
 with those managers, or possibly with the butlers, as you may, even
 through them, be able to get some charge or other! the other day, when i
 was out of town, i came across that old quartus of the third branch of
 the family, astride of tall donkey, at the head of four or five
 carriages, in which were about forty to fifty bonzes and taoist priests
 on their way to the family fane, and that man can't lack brains, for
 such charge to have fallen to his share!"
 
chia yün, upon hearing these words, indulged in long and revolting
 rigmarole, and then got up to take his leave.
 
"what are you in such hurry for?" pu shih-jen remarked. "have your
 meal and then go!"
 
but this remark was scarcely ended when they heard his wife say: "are
 you again in the clouds? when i heard that there was rice, i bought
 half catty of dry rice paste, and brought it here for you to eat; and
 do you pray now still put on the airs of well-to-do, and keep your
 nephew to feel the pangs of hunger?"
 
"well, then, buy half catty more, and add to what there is, that's
 all," pu shih-jen continued; whereupon her mother explained to her
 daughter, yin chieh, "go over to mrs. wang's opposite, and ask her if
 she has any cash, to lend us twenty or thirty of them; and to-morrow,
 when they're brought over, we'll repay her."
 
but while the husband and wife were carrying on this conversation, chia
 yün had, at an early period, repeated several times: "there's need to
 go to this trouble," and off went, leaving trace or shadow behind.
 but without passing any further remarks on the husband and wife of the
 pu family, we will now confine ourselves to chia yün. having gone in
 high dudgeon out of the door of his uncle's house, started straight
 on his way back home; but while distressed in mind, and preoccupied with
 his thoughts, paced on with drooping head, unexpectedly came into
 collision with drunken fellow, who gripped chia yün, and began to
 abuse him, crying: "are your eyes gone blind, that you come bang against
 me?"
 
the tone of voice, when it reached chia yün ears, sounded like that of
 some one with whom was intimate; and, on careful scrutiny, found,
 in fact, that it was his next-door neighbour, erh. this erh was a
 dissolute knave, whose only idea was to give out money at heavy rates of
 interest and to have his meals in the gambling dens. his sole delight
 was to drink and to fight.
 
was, at this very moment, coming back home from the house of a
 creditor, whom had dunned, and was already far gone with drink, so
 that when, at an unforeseen moment, chia yün ran against him, meant
 there and then to start scuffle with him.
 
"old erh!" chia yün shouted, "stay your hand; it's i who have hustled
 against you."
 
as soon as erh heard the tone of his voice, opened wide his
 drunken eyes and gave him look; and realising that it was chia yün, he
 hastened to loosen his grasp and to remark with smile, as staggered
 about, "is it you indeed, master chia secundus? where were you off to
 now?"
 
"i couldn't tell you!" chia yün rejoined; "i've again brought
 displeasure upon me, and all through fault of mine."
 
"never mind!" urged erh, "if you're in any trouble you just tell me,
 and i'll give vent to your spite for you; for in these three streets,
 and six lanes, matter who may give offence to any neighbours of mine,
 of me, erh, the drunken chin kang, i'll wager that i compel that
 man's family to disperse, and his home to break up!"
 
"old ni, don't lose your temper," chia yün protested, "but listen and
 let tell you what happened!" after which, went on to tell erh
 the whole affair with pu shih-jen. as soon as erh heard him, got
 into frightful rage; "were not," shouted, "relative of yours,
 master secundus, i would readily give him bit of my mind! really
 resentment will stifle my breath! but never mind! you needn't however
 distress yourself. i've got here few taels ready at hand, which, if
 you require, don't scruple to take; and from such good neighbours as you
 are, i won't ask any interest upon this money."
 
with this remark still on his lips, produced from his pouch bundle
 of silver.
 
"ni erh has, it is true, ever been rogue," chia yün reflected in his
 own mind, "but as is regulated in his dealings by due regard to
 persons, enjoys, to great degree, the reputation of generosity; and
 were i to-day not to accept this favour of his, he'll, i fear, be put to
 shame; and it won't contrariwise be nice on my part! and isn't it better
 that i should make use of his money, and by and by i can repay him
 double, and things will be all right!"
 
"old erh," therefore observed aloud with smile, "you're really a
 fine fellow, and as you've shown such eminent consideration, how can
 i presume not to accept your offer! on my return home, i'll write the
 customary i.o.u., and send it to you, and all will be in order."
 
erh gave broad grin. "it's only fifteen taels and three mace," he
 answered, "and if you insist upon writing an i.o.u., i won't then lend
 it to you!"
 
chia yün at these words, took over the money, smiling the while. "i'll
 readily," retorted, "comply with your wishes and have done; for
 what's the use of exasperating you!"
 
"well then that will be all right!" erh laughed; "but the day is
 getting dark; and i shan't ask you to have cup of tea or stand you a
 drink, for i've some small things more to settle. as for me, i'm going
 over there, but you, after all, should please wend your way homewards;
 and i shall also request you to take message for to my people. tell
 them to close the doors and turn in, as i'm not returning home; and that
 in the event of anything occurring, to bid our daughter come over
 to-morrow, as soon as it is daylight, to short-legged wang's house, the
 horse-dealer's, in search of me!" and as uttered this remark he
 walked away, stumbling and hobbling along. but we will leave him without
 further notice and allude to chia yün.
 
had, at quite an unexpected juncture, met this piece of luck, so that
 his heart was, of course, delighted to the utmost degree. "this erh,"
 mused, "is really good enough sort of fellow, but what i dread is
 that may have been open-handed in his fit of drunkenness, and that he
 mayn't, by and by, ask for his money to be paid twice over; and what
 will i do then? never mind," suddenly went on to ponder, "when that
 job has become an accomplished fact, i shall even have the means to pay
 him back double the original amount."
 
prompted by this resolution, came over to money-shop, and when he
 had the silver weighed, and discrepancy was discovered in the weight,
 was still more elated at heart; and on his way back, first and
 foremost delivered erh's message to his wife, and then returned to
 his own home, where found his mother seated all alone on a
 stove-couch spinning thread. as soon as she saw him enter, she inquired
 where had been the whole day long, in reply to which chia yün,
 fearing lest his parent should be angry, forthwith made allusion to
 what transpired with pu shih-jen, but simply explained that had been
 in the western mansion, waiting for his uncle secundus, lien. this over,
 asked his mother whether she had had her meal or not, and his parent
 said by way of reply: "i've had it, but i've kept something for you in
 there," and calling to the servant-maid, she bade her bring it round,
 and set it before him to eat. but as it was already dark, when the lamps
 had to be lit, chia yün, after partaking of his meal, got ready and
 turned in.
 
nothing of any notice transpired the whole night; but the next day, as
 soon it was dawn, got up, washed his face, and came to the main
 street, outside the south gate, and purchasing some musk from a
 perfumery shop, he, with rapid stride, entered the jung kuo mansion; and
 having, as result of his inquiries, found out that chia lien had gone
 out of doors, chia yün readily betook himself to the back, in front of
 the door of chia lien's court, where saw several servant-lads, with
 immense brooms in their hands, engaged in that place in sweeping the
 court. but as suddenly caught sight of chou jui's wife appear outside
 the door, and call out to the young boys; "don't sweep now, our lady is
 coming out," chia yün eagerly walked up to her and inquired, with face
 beaming with smiles: "where's aunt secunda going to?"
 
to this inquiry, chou jui's wife explained: "our old lady has sent for
 her, and i expect, it must be for her to cut some piece of cloth or
 other." but while she yet spoke, they perceived whole bevy of people,
 pressing round lady feng, as she egressed from the apartment.
 
chia yün was perfectly aware that lady feng took pleasure in flattery,
 and delighted in display, so that hastily dropping his arms, with all
 reverence, thrust himself forward and paid his respects to her. but lady
 feng did not even so much as turn to look at him with straight eyes; but
 continued, as hitherto, her way onwards, simply confining herself to
 ascertaining whether his mother was all right, and adding: "how is it
 that she doesn't come to our house for stroll?"
 
"the thing is," chia yün replied, "that she's not well: she, however,
 often thinks fondly of you, aunt, and longs to see you; but as for
 coming round, she's quite unable to do so."
 
"you have, indeed, the knack of telling lies!" lady feng laughed with
 irony; "for hadn't i alluded to her, she would never have thought of
 me!"
 
"isn't your nephew afraid," chia yün protested smilingly, "of being
 blasted by lightning to have the audacity of telling lies in the
 presence of an elder! even so late as yesterday evening, she alluded to
 you, aunt! 'though naturally,' she said, 'of weak constitution, you
 had, however, plenty to attend to! that it's thanks to your supremely
 eminent energies, aunt, that you're, after all, able to manage
 everything in such perfect manner; and that had you ever made the
 slightest slip, there would have long ago crept up, goodness knows, what
 troubles!'"
 
as soon as lady feng heard these words, her whole face beamed with
 smiles, and she unconsciously halted her steps, while she proceeded to
 ask: "how is it that, both your mother and yourself, tattle about me
 behind my back, without rhyme or reason?"
 
"there's reason for it," chia yün observed, "which is simply this.
 i've an excellent friend with considerable money of his own at home, who
 recently kept perfumery shop; but as obtained, by purchase, the
 rank of deputy sub-prefect, was, the other day, selected for post
 in yunnan, in some prefecture or other unknown to me; whither has
 gone together with his family. even closed this shop of his, and
 forthwith collecting all his wares, gave away, what could give
 away, and what had to sell at discount, was sold at loss; while
 such valuable articles, as these, were all presented to relatives or
 friends; and that's why it is that i came in for some baroos camphor and
 musk. but i at the time, deliberated with my mother that to sell them
 below their price would be pity, and that if we wished to give them as
 present to any one, there was one good enough to use such perfumes.
 but remembering how you, aunt, had all along in years gone by, even to
 this day, to spend large bundles of silver, in purchasing such articles,
 and how, not to speak of this year with an imperial consort in the
 palace, what's even required for this dragon boat festival, will also
 necessitate the addition of hundred times as much as the quantity of
 previous years, i therefore present them to you, aunt, as token of my
 esteem!"
 
with these words still on his lips, simultaneously produced an
 ornamented box, which handed over to her. and as lady feng was, at
 this time, making preparations for presents for the occasion of the
 dragon boat festival, for which perfumes were obligatory, she, with all
 promptitude, directed feng erh: "receive mr. yün's present and take it
 home and hand it over to p'ing erh. to one," she consequently added,
 "who seems to so full of discrimination, it isn't wonder that your
 uncle is repeatedly alluding, and that speaks highly of you; how that
 you talk with all intelligence and that you have experience stored up in
 your mind."
 
chia yün upon hearing this propitious language, hastily drew near one
 step, and designedly asked: "does really uncle often refer to me?"
 
the moment lady feng caught this question, she was at once inclined to
 tell him all about the charge to be entrusted to him, but on second
 thought, she again felt apprehensive lest she should be looked lightly
 upon by him, by simply insinuating that she had promptly and needlessly
 promised him something to do, so soon as she got little scented ware;
 and this consideration urged her to once more restrain her tongue, so
 that she never made the slightest reference even to so much as one word
 about his having been chosen to look after the works of planting the
 flowers and trees. and after confining herself to making the first few
 irrelevant remarks which came to her lips, she hastily betook herself
 into dowager lady chia's apartments.
 
chia yün himself did not feel as if could very well advert to the
 subject, with the result that had alternative but to retrace his
 steps homewards. but as when had seen pao-yü the previous day, had
 asked him to go into the outer library and wait for him, therefore
 finished his meal and then once again entered the mansion and came over
 into the i hsia study, situated outside the ceremonial gate, over at old
 lady chia's part of the compound, where discovered the two lads ming
 yen, whose name had been changed into pei ming, and chu playing at
 chess, and just arguing about the capture of castle; and besides them,
 yin ch'uan, sao hua, t'iao yün, pan ho, these four or five of them, up
 to larks, stealing the young birds from the nests under the eaves of the
 house.
 
as soon as chia yün entered the court, stamped his foot and shouted,
 "the monkeys are up to mischief! here i am, i've come;" and when the
 company of servant-boys perceived him, they one and all promptly
 dispersed; while chia yün walked into the library, and seating himself
 at once in chair, inquired, "has your master secundus, mr. pao,
 come down?"
 
"he hasn't been down here at all to-day," pei ming replied, "but if you,
 mr. secundus, have anything to tell him, i'll go and see what he's up to
 for you."
 
saying this there and then left the room; and chia yün meanwhile gave
 himself to the inspection of the pictures and nicknacks. but some
 considerable time elapsed, and yet did not see him arrive; and
 noticing besides that the other lads had all gone to romp, was just
 plunged in state of despondency, when heard outside the door a
 voice cry out, with winning tone, and tender accents: "my elder
 brother!"
 
chia yün looked out, and saw that it was servant-maid of fifteen or
 sixteen, who was indeed extremely winsome and spruce. as soon however as
 the maid caught glimpse of chia yün, she speedily turned herself round
 and withdrew out of sight. but, as luck would have it, it happened that
 pei ming was coming along, and seeing the servant-maid in front of the
 door, observed: "welcome, welcome! i was quite at loss how to get
 any news of pao-yü." and as chia yün discerned pei ming, hastily too,
 ran out in pursuit of him, and ascertained what was up; whereupon pei
 ming returned for answer: "i waited whole day long, and not single
 soul came over; but this girl is attached to master secundus' (mr.
 pao's) rooms!" and, "my dear girl," consequently went on to say, "go
 in and take message. say that mr. secundus, who lives under the
 portico, has come!"
 
the servant-maid, upon hearing these words, knew at once that was a
 young gentleman belonging to the family in which she served, and she did
 not skulk out of sight, as she had done in the first instance; but with
 gaze sufficient to kill, she fixed her two eyes upon chia yün, when
 she heard chia yün interpose: "what about over the portico and under the
 portico; you just tell him that yün erh is come, that's all."
 
after while this girl gave sarcastic smile. "my idea is," she
 ventured, "that you, master secundus, should really, if it so please
 you, go back, and come again to-morrow; and to-night, if i find time,
 i'll just put in word with him!"
 
"what's this that you're driving at?" pei ming then shouted.
 
and the maid rejoined: "he's not even had siesta to-day, so that he'll
 have his dinner at an early hour, and won't come down again in the
 evening; and is it likely that you would have master secundus wait here
 and suffer hunger? and isn't it better than should return home? the
 right thing is that should come to-morrow; for were even by and by
 some one to turn up, who could take message, that person would simply
 acquiesce with the lips, but would be willing to deliver the message
 in for you?"
 
chia yün, upon finding how concise and yet how well expressed this
 girl's remarks had been, was bent upon inquiring what her name was; but
 as she was maid employed in pao-yü's apartments, did not therefore
 feel justified in asking the question, and had other course but to
 add, "what you say is quite right, i'll come to-morrow!" and as he
 spoke, there and then was making his way outside, when pei ming
 remarked: "i'll go and pour cup of tea; and master secundus, have your
 tea and then go."
 
chia yün turned his head round, as kept on his way, and said by way
 of rejoinder: "i won't have any tea; for i've besides something more to
 attend to!" and while with his lips uttered these words, he, with his
 eyes, stared at the servant-girl, who was still standing in there.
 
chia yün wended his steps straightway home; and the next day, came to
 the front entrance, where, by strange coincidence, met lady feng on
 her way to the opposite side to pay her respects. she had just mounted
 her carriage, but perceiving chia yün arrive, she eagerly bade servant
 stop him, and, with the window between them, she smiled and observed:
 "yün erh, you're indeed bold in playing your pranks with me! i thought
 it strange that you should give presents; but the fact is you had a
 favour to ask of me; and your uncle told even yesterday that you had
 appealed to him!"
 
chia yün smiled. "of my appeal to uncle, you needn't, aunt, make any
 mention; for i'm at this moment full of regret at having made it. had i
 known, at an early hour, that things would have come to this pass, i
 would, from the very first, have made my request to you, aunt; and by
 this time everything would have been settled long ago! but who would
 have anticipated that uncle was, after all, man of worth!"
 
"strange enough," lady feng remarked sneeringly, "when you found that
 you didn't succeed in that quarter, you came again yesterday in search
 of me!"
 
"aunt, you do my filial heart an injustice," chia yün protested; "i
 never had such thought; had i entertained any such idea, wouldn't i,
 aunt, have made my appeal to you yesterday? but as you are now aware of
 everything, i'll really put uncle on one side, and prefer my request to
 you; for circumstances compel to entreat you, aunt, to be so good as
 to show some little consideration!"
 
lady feng laughed sardonically. "you people will choose the long road to
 follow and put also in dilemma! had you told just one word at an
 early hour, what couldn't have been brought about? an affair of state
 indeed to be delayed up to this moment! in the garden, there are to be
 more trees planted and flowers laid down, and i couldn't think of any
 person that i could have recommended, and had you spoken before this,
 wouldn't the whole question have been settled soon enough?"
 
"well, in that case, aunt," ventured chia yün with smile, "you had
 better depute to-morrow, and have done!"
 
"this job," continued lady feng after pause, "is not, my impression
 is, very profitable; and if you were to wait till the first moon of next
 year, when the fireworks, lanterns, and candles will have to be
 purveyed, i'll depute you as soon as those extensive commissions turn
 up."
 
"my dear aunt," pleaded chia yün, "first appoint to this one, and if
 i do really manage this satisfactorily, you can then commission with
 that other!"
 
"you know in truth how to draw long thread," lady feng observed
 laughing. "but hadn't it been that your uncle had spoken to on your
 account, i wouldn't have concerned myself about you. but as i shall
 cross over here soon after the repast, you had better come at eleven
 a.m., and fetch the money, for you to enter into the garden the day
 after to-morrow, and have the flowers planted!"
 
as she said this, she gave orders to drive the "scented" carriage, and
 went on her way by the quickest cut; while chia yün, who was
 irrepressibly delighted, betook himself into the i hsia study, and
 inquired after pao-yü. but, who would have thought it, pao-yü had, at an
 early hour, gone to the mansion of the prince of pei ching, so that chia
 yün had to sit in listless mood till noon; and when found out that
 lady feng had returned, speedily wrote an acknowledgment and came to
 receive the warrant. on his arrival outside the court, commissioned a
 servant to announce him, and ts'ai ming thereupon walked out, and merely
 asking for the receipt, went in, and, after filling in the amount, the
 year and moon, handed it over to chia yün together with the warrant.
 chia yün received them from him, and as the entry consisted of two
 hundred taels, his heart was full of exultant joy; and turning round, he
 hurried to the treasury, where after had taken over the amount in
 silver, returned home and laid the case before his mother, and
 needless to say, that both the parent and her were in high spirits.
 the next day, at the fifth watch, chia yun first came in search of ni
 erh, to whom repaid the money, and then taking fifty taels along with
 him, sped outside the western gate to the house of fang ch'un, a
 gardener, to purchase trees, where we will leave him without saying
 anything more about him.
 
we will now resume our story with pao-yü. the day on which he
 encountered chia yün, asked him to come in on the morrow and have a
 chat with him, but this invitation was practically the mere formal talk
 of rich and well-to-do young man, and was not likely to be so much as
 borne in mind; and so it was that it readily slipped from his memory. on
 the evening of the day, however, on which returned home from the
 mansion of the prince pei ching, came, after paying his salutations
 to dowager lady chia, madame wang, and the other inmates, back into the
 garden; but upon divesting himself of all his fineries, was just
 about to have his bath, when, as hsi jen had, at the invitation of hsüeh
 pao-ch'ai, crossed over to tie few knotted buttons, as ch'in wen and
 pi hen had both gone to hurry the servants to bring the water, as t'an
 yun had likewise been taken home, on account of her mother's illness,
 and she yueh, on the other hand, was at present ailing in her quarters,
 while the several waiting-maids, who were in there besides to attend to
 the dirty work, and answer the calls, had, surmising that would not
 requisition their services, one and all gone out in search of their
 friends and in quest of their companions, it occurred, contrary to their
 calculations, that pao-yü remained this whole length of time quite alone
 in his apartments; and as it so happened that pao-yü wanted tea to
 drink, had to call two or three times before at last saw three old
 matrons walk in. but at the sight of them, pao-yü hastily waved his hand
 and exclaimed: "no matter, matter; i don't want you," whereupon the
 matrons had help but to withdraw out of the rooms; and as pao-yü
 perceived that there were waiting-maids at hand, had to come down
 and take cup and go up to the teapot to pour the tea; when heard
 some one from behind him observe: "master secundus, beware, you'll
 scorch your hand; wait until i come to pour it!" and as she spoke, she
 walked up to him, and took the cup from his grasp, to the intense
 surprise, in fact, of pao-yü, who inquired: "where were you that you
 have suddenly come to give start?"
 
the waiting-maid smiled as she handed him the tea. "i was in the back
 court," she replied, "and just came in from the back door of the inner
 rooms; and is it likely that you didn't, sir, hear the sound of my
 footsteps?"
 
pao-yü drank his tea, and as simultaneously passed the servant-girl
 under minute inspection, found that though she wore several
 articles of clothing the worse for wear, she was, nevertheless, with
 that head of beautiful hair, as black as the plumage of raven, done up
 in curls, her face so oblong, her figure so slim and elegant, indeed,
 supremely beautiful, sweet, and spruce, and pao-yü eagerly inquired:
 "are you also girl attached to this room of mine?"
 
"i am," rejoined that waiting-maid.
 
"but since you belong to this room, how is it i don't know you?" pao-yü
 added.
 
when the maid heard these words, she forced laugh. "there are even
 many," she explained, "that are strangers to you; and is it only myself?
 i've never, before this, served tea, or handed water, or brought in
 anything; nor have i attended to single duty in your presence, so how
 could you know me?"
 
"but why don't you attend to any of those duties that would bring you to
 my notice?" pao-yü questioned.
 
"i too," answered the maid, "find it as difficult to answer such a
 question. there's however one thing that i must report to you, master
 secundus. yesterday, some mr. yün erh or other came to see you; but as i
 thought you, sir, had leisure, i speedily bade pei ming tell him to
 come early to-day. but you unexpectedly went over again to the mansion
 of the prince of pei ching."
 
when she had spoken as far as this, she caught sight of ch'iu wen and pi
 hen enter the court, giggling and laughing; the two of them carrying
 between them bucket of water; and while raising their skirts with one
 hand, they hobbled along, as the water spurted and plashed. the
 waiting-maid hastily come out to meet them so as to relieve them of
 their burden, but ch'iu wen and pi hen were in the act of standing face
 to face and finding fault with each other; one saying, "you've wetted my
 clothes," the other adding, "you've trod on my shoes," and upon, all of
 sudden, espying some one walk out to receive the water, and
 discovering, when they came to see, that it was actually one else
 than hsiao hung, they were at once both so taken aback that, putting
 down the bucket, they hurried into the room; and when they looked about
 and saw that there was other person inside besides pao-yü they were
 at once displeased. but as they were meanwhile compelled to get ready
 the articles necessary for his bath, they waited until pao-yü was about
 to divest himself of his clothes, when the couple of them speedily
 pulled the door to behind them, as they went out, and walked as far as
 the room on the opposite side, in search of hsiao hung; of whom they
 inquired: "what were you doing in his room short while back?"
 
"when was i ever in the room?" hsiao hung replied; "simply because i
 lost sight of my handkerchief, i went to the back to try and find it,
 when unexpectedly mr. secundus, who wanted tea, called for you sisters;
 and as there wasn't one even of you there, i walked in and poured cup
 for him, and just at that very moment you sisters came back."
 
"you barefaced, low-bred thing!" cried ch'iu wen, turning towards her
 and spurting in her face. "it was our bounden duty to tell you to go and
 hurry them for the water, but you simply maintained that you were busy
 and made us go instead, in order to afford you an opportunity of
 performing these wily tricks! and isn't this raising yourself up li by
 li? but don't we forsooth, even so much as come up to you? and you just
 take that looking-glass and see for yourself, whether you be fit to
 serve tea and to hand water or not?"
 
"to-morrow," continued pi hea, "i'll tell them that whenever there's
 anything to do connected with his wanting tea, or asking for water, or
 with fetching things for him, not one of us should budge, and that
 _she_ alone should be allowed to go, and have done!"
 
"if this be your suggestion," remarked ch'iu wen, "wouldn't it be still
 better that we should all disperse, and let her reign supreme in this
 room!"
 
but while the two of them were up to this trouble, one saying one thing,
 and another, another, they caught sight of two old nurses walk in to
 deliver message from lady feng; who explained: "to-morrow, someone
 will bring in gardeners to plant trees, and she bids you keep under more
 rigorous restraint, and not sun your clothes and petticoats anywhere and
 everywhere; nor air them about heedlessly; that the artificial hill
 will, all along, be entirely shut in by screening curtains, and that you
 mustn't running about at random."
 
"i wonder," interposed ch'iu wen with alacrity, "who it is that will
 bring the workmen to-morrow, and supervise the works?"
 
"some one or other called mr. yün, living at the back portico," the old
 woman observed.
 
but ch'iu wen and pi hen were neither of them acquainted with him, and
 they went on promiscuously asking further questions on his account, but
 hsiao hung knew distinctly in her mind who it was, and was well aware
 that it was the person whom she had seen, the previous day, in the outer
 library.
 
the surname of this hsiao hung had, in fact, been originally lin, while
 her infant name had been hung yü; but as the word yü improperly
 corresponded with the names of pao-yü and tai-yü, she was, in due
 course, simply called hsiao hung. she was indeed an hereditary servant
 of the mansion; and her father had latterly taken over the charge of all
 matters connected with the farms and farmhouses in every locality. this
 hung-yü came, at the age of sixteen, into the mansion, to enter into
 service, and was attached to the hung yuan, where in point of fact she
 found both quiet and pleasant home; and when contrary to all
 expectation, the young ladies as well as pao-yü, were subsequently
 permitted to move their quarters into the garden of broad vista, it so
 happened that this place was, moreover, fixed upon by pao-yü. this hsiao
 hung was, it is true, girl without any experience, but as she could,
 to certain degree, boast of pretty face, and as, in her own heart,
 she recklessly fostered the idea of exalting herself to higher
 standard, she was ever ready to thrust herself in pao-yü's way, with a
 view to showing herself off. but attached to pao-yü's personal service
 were lot of servants, all of whom were glib and specious, so that how
 could she ever find an opportunity of thrusting herself forward? but
 contrary to her anticipations, there turned up, eventually on this day,
 some faint glimmer of hope, but as she again came in for spell of
 spiteful abuse from ch'iu wen and her companion, her expectations were
 soon considerably frustrated, and she was just plunged in melancholy
 mood, when suddenly she heard the old nurse begin the conversation about
 chia yün, which unconsciously so affected her heart that she hastily
 returned, quite disconsolate, into her room, and lay herself down on her
 bed, giving herself quietly to reflection. but while she was racking and
 torturing her brain and at moment when she was at loss what decision
 to grasp, her ear unexpectedly caught, emanating from outside the
 window, faint voice say: "hsiao hung, i've picked up your pocket
 handkerchief in here!" and as soon as hsiao hung heard these words, she
 walked out with hurried step and found that it was one else than chia
 yün in person; and as hsiao hung unwillingly felt her powdered face
 suffused with brushes: "where did you pick it up, mr. secundus?" she
 asked.
 
"come over," chia yün smiled, "and i'll tell you!" and as uttered
 these words, came up and drew her to him; but hsiao hung twisted
 herself round and ran away; but was however tripped over by the step of
 the door.
 
now, reader, do you want to know the sequel? if so the next chapter will
 explain.
 



end of book i
 





errata [as noted in the original book].
 

preface rhythm not rhymes
 
chap. i page 7 line 30 on _not_ in
 " " " 13 " 11 _dele_ he
 " ii " 22 " 18 yü-ts'un _not_ y-tüs'un
 " " " 22 " 25 dele _one_ the
 " " " 30 " 14 imbued with _not_ by
 " iii " 50 " 33 rhythm _not_ rythm
 " iv " 64 " 27 _dele_ as _and read:_ and his
 widowed mother etc.
 " " " 65 " 3 _dele_ in _and read_: while the
 rest of his
 " v " 80 " 23 monitory _not_ monotony
 " " " 87 " 21 fervour _not_ favour
 " vi " 92 " 20 bonzes _not_ bonze
 " " " 93 " 1 _read_: ai-ya, exclaimed old goody;
 it may very well be said that the
 marquis' door etc.
 " " " 99 " 4 _read_: à chao chün
 " vii " 114 " 13 chia jung _not_ ch'ia jung
 " " " 119 " 10 steward _not_ setward
 " ix " 140 " 10 whiff _not_ wiff
 " " " 141 " 26 roll _not_ rollster
 " x " 157 " 16 action _not_ actions
 " xiii " 196 " 23 in the fear _not_ in fear
 " xiv " 199 " 39 roll _not_ rollster
 " xv " 215 " 23 preparations _not_ preparation
 " xvi " 231 " 22 but these words _not_ but that these
 words etc.
 " " " 238 " 33 roll _not_ rollester
 " xviii " 270 " 11 _delete_ he
 " " " 270 " 40 otter _not_ other
 " " " 280 " 20 roll _not_ rollster
 " xix " 290 " 15 _supply_ 'the' _before_ milk
 " xx " 304 " 39 _read_: lying down, and she felt etc.
 " xxi " 321 " 35 though was _not_ were
 " " " 324 " 12 _supply_ 'with' _after_ fumbling
 " xxiii " 331 " 32 _read_: fancy to _not_ for
 " " " 338 " 13 _supply_ 'himself' _after_
 laying
 " xxiii " 349 " 38 him _not_ her
 " " " 353 " 39 devotes his energies to _not_ upon
 " " " 361 " 1 felt _not_ fell
 " " " 371 " 21 lips _not_ slips
 


errata [additional ones caught during project gutenberg proofreading.]
 
chap. i page 3 line 23: mustn't _not_ must'nt
 ii " 29 " 33: tranquility _not_ tranquilty
 iii " 44 " 2: library _not_ litrary
 iii " 50 " 18: neck _not_ neek
 iii " 50 " 19: ornaments _not_ ormaments
 v " 70 " 26: consistency _not_ consisteney
 v " 73 " 13: "daughter, shou ch'ang" _not_
 "daughter. shou ch'ang"
 v " 86 " 15: haven't _not_ have'nt
 vi " 95 " 20: you've _not_ youv'e
 vi " 95 " 34: it's _not_ its
 vi " 96 " 2: come _not_ came
 vii " 114 " 14: isn't _not_ is'nt
 viii " 121 " 17: subsequently _not_ subequently
 ix " 145 " 1: consternation _not_ conternation
 x " 155 " 37: night's _not_ night't
 xi " 167 " 28: isn't _not_ is'nt
 xii " 179 " 1: insistence _not_ insistance
 xii " 182 " 33: affectionate _not_ affectunate
 xiii " 198 " 37: roll _not_ rollster
 xiv " 203 " 22: ts'ai's _not_ t'sai's
 xiv " 206 " 1: exclaimed _not_ exclained
 xv " 218 " 21: each _not_ eaeh
 xvi " 226 " 34: pupil _not_ purpil
 xvii " 249 " 35: intertwine _not_ interwine
 xvii " 252 " 29: isn't _not_ is'nt
 xvii " 255 " 15: and _not_ aud
 xvii " 260 " 35: unexpectedly _not_ unexpectly
 xviii " 280 " 20: roll _not_ rollster
 xx " 315 " 12: three)." _not_ three."
 xxi " 329 " 31: isn't _not_ is'nt
 xxii " 341 " 11: hasn't _not_ has'nt
 xxii " 344 " 16: enjoy _not_ injoy
 xxii " 346 " 6: meetest _not_ metest
 xxii " 346 " 20: isn't _not_ is'nt
 xxiii " 349 " 10: difficulties _not_ diffiulties
 xxiii " 356 " 1: autumnal _not_ autummal
 xxiii " 356 " 41: manuscripts _not_ manscripts
 xxiv " 364 " 38: back," _not_ back,
 xxiv " 368 " 19: neighbours _not_ neighours
 xxiv " 377 " 17: opportunity _not_ apportunity
 

[notes on project gutenberg edition. the original chinese novel was
 written by cao xueqin. another author later added half again as much. h.
 bencraft joly translated only the work of the first author, essentially
 two-thirds of the whole; the work ends abruptly at the end of volume ii
 as if intended to go on, but the third volume was never published.
 the work was not well proofread originally. there are other better and
 more complete english translations, but this is the only one we could
 find that is in the public domain in the usa.
 
both lists of errata have been corrected in the text. the error noted
 in the original errata list as being on page 140 was actually on page
 145. there were far too many punctuation errata that were corrected,
 to list them all here.
 
there is such word as 'teapoy'; it is not 'teapot' and it means a
 three-legged table. 'dullness' was consistently spelled 'dulness' and is
 left thus. 'decrepit' was consistently spelled 'decrepid' and is left
 thus. 'dote, dotes,' etc. was consistently spelled 'doat, doats,' etc.
 and is left thus. 'license' is spelled once thus and once 'licence.' the
 word 'speciality' appears only once, and that is the proper british
 spelling.
 
whenever proper name normally contained an umlaut we attempted to
 supply it in the instances where it was missing; this was most common
 with the name pao-yü. there were also variations of use of apostrophes
 in proper names, and many were corrected. neither of these is
 listed in the errata above.]
 











*** end of the project gutenberg ebook hung lou meng, or, the dream of the red chamber, chinese novel, book i ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 
