the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
 
author: mary wollstonecraft shelley
 
release date: october 1, 1993 [ebook #84]
 most recently updated: december 2, 2022
 
language: english
 
credits: judith boss, christy phillips, lynn hanninen and david meltzer. html version by haines.
 further corrections by menno leeuw.
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***
 



frankenstein;
 
or, the modern prometheus
 
by mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley
 

contents
 
letter 1
 letter 2
 letter 3
 letter 4
 chapter 1
 chapter 2
 chapter 3
 chapter 4
 chapter 5
 chapter 6
 chapter 7
 chapter 8
 chapter 9
 chapter 10
 chapter 11
 chapter 12
 chapter 13
 chapter 14
 chapter 15
 chapter 16
 chapter 17
 chapter 18
 chapter 19
 chapter 20
 chapter 21
 chapter 22
 chapter 23
 chapter 24
 



letter 1
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 

st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17—.
 

you will rejoice to hear that disaster has accompanied the
 commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
 forebodings. i arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure
 my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success
 of my undertaking.
 
i am already far north of london, and as i walk in the streets of
 petersburgh, i feel cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
 braces my nerves and fills with delight. do you understand this
 feeling? this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards
 which i am advancing, gives foretaste of those icy climes.
 inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent
 and vivid. i try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of
 frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the
 region of beauty and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever
 visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a
 perpetual splendour. there—for with your leave, my sister, i will put
 some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished;
 and, sailing over calm sea, we may be wafted to land surpassing in
 wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable
 globe. its productions and features may be without example, as the
 phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
 solitudes. what may not be expected in country of eternal light? i
 may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may
 regulate thousand celestial observations that require only this
 voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. i
 shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of part of the world
 never before visited, and may tread land never before imprinted by
 the foot of man. these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to
 conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce to commence this
 laborious voyage with the joy child feels when embarks in little
 boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his
 native river. but supposing all these conjectures to be false, you
 cannot contest the inestimable benefit which i shall confer on all
 mankind, to the last generation, by discovering passage near the pole
 to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
 requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
 all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.
 
these reflections have dispelled the agitation with which i began my
 letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me
 to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as
 steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual
 eye. this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. i
 have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have
 been made in the prospect of arriving at the north pacific ocean
 through the seas which surround the pole. you may remember that a
 history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the
 whole of our good uncle thomas’ library. my education was neglected,
 yet i was passionately fond of reading. these volumes were my study
 day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which
 i had felt, as child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction
 had forbidden my uncle to allow to embark in seafaring life.
 
these visions faded when i perused, for the first time, those poets
 whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. i also
 became poet and for one year lived in paradise of my own creation;
 i imagined that i also might obtain niche in the temple where the
 names of homer and shakespeare are consecrated. you are well
 acquainted with my failure and how heavily i bore the disappointment.
 but just at that time i inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
 thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
 
six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking. i
 can, even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this
 great enterprise. i commenced by inuring my body to hardship. i
 accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the north sea;
 i voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often
 worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my
 nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those
 branches of physical science from which naval adventurer might derive
 the greatest practical advantage. twice i actually hired myself as an
 under-mate in greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. i
 must own i felt little proud when my captain offered the second
 dignity in the vessel and entreated to remain with the greatest
 earnestness, so valuable did consider my services.
 
and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
 my life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but i preferred glory to
 every enticement that wealth placed in my path. oh, that some encouraging
 voice would answer in the affirmative! my courage and my resolution is
 firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. i am
 about to proceed on long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which
 will demand all my fortitude: i am required not only to raise the spirits
 of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.
 
this is the most favourable period for travelling in russia. they fly
 quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
 my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stagecoach. the
 cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which i have
 already adopted, for there is great difference between walking the
 deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when exercise
 prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. i have no
 ambition to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and
 archangel.
 
i shall depart for the latter town in fortnight or three weeks; and my
 intention is to hire ship there, which can easily be done by paying the
 insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as i think necessary
 among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. i do not intend to
 sail until the month of june; and when shall i return? ah, dear sister, how
 can i answer this question? if i succeed, many, many months, perhaps years,
 will pass before you and i may meet. if i fail, you will see again soon,
 or never.
 
farewell, my dear, excellent margaret. heaven shower down blessings on you,
 and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for all your
 love and kindness.
 
your affectionate brother,
 
r. walton
 



letter 2
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 
archangel, 28th march, 17—.
 

how slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow!
 yet second step is taken towards my enterprise. i have hired a
 vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom i have
 already engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend and are certainly
 possessed of dauntless courage.
 
but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy, and the
 absence of the object of which i now feel as most severe evil, i have no
 friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there
 will be none to participate my joy; if i am assailed by disappointment, no
 one will endeavour to sustain in dejection. i shall commit my thoughts
 to paper, it is true; but that is poor medium for the communication of
 feeling. i desire the company of man who could sympathise with me, whose
 eyes would reply to mine. you may deem romantic, my dear sister, but i
 bitterly feel the want of friend. i have one near me, gentle yet
 courageous, possessed of cultivated as well as of capacious mind, whose
 tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. how would such a
 friend repair the faults of your poor brother! i am too ardent in execution
 and too impatient of difficulties. but it is still greater evil to me
 that i am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild
 on common and read nothing but our uncle thomas’ books of voyages.
 at that age i became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
 country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its
 most important benefits from such conviction that i perceived the
 necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
 country. now i am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
 schoolboys of fifteen. it is true that i have thought more and that my
 daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters
 call it) _keeping;_ and i greatly need friend who would have sense
 enough not to despise as romantic, and affection enough for to
 endeavour to regulate my mind.
 
well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find friend on the
 wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchants and seamen. yet
 some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these
 rugged bosoms. my lieutenant, for instance, is man of wonderful courage
 and enterprise; is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
 more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. is an
 englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
 unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
 humanity. i first became acquainted with him on board whale vessel;
 finding that was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to assist
 in my enterprise.
 
the master is person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the
 ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. this
 circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made
 very desirous to engage him. youth passed in solitude, my best years
 spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the
 groundwork of my character that i cannot overcome an intense distaste to
 the usual brutality exercised on board ship: i have never believed it to be
 necessary, and when i heard of mariner equally noted for his kindliness
 of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, i felt
 myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. i heard
 of him first in rather romantic manner, from lady who owes to him the
 happiness of her life. this, briefly, is his story. some years ago loved
 young russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed considerable
 sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. saw
 his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in
 tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her,
 confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that was poor,
 and that her father would never consent to the union. my generous friend
 reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover,
 instantly abandoned his pursuit. had already bought farm with his
 money, on which had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he
 bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his
 prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young
 woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. but the old
 man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who,
 when found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned
 until heard that his former mistress was married according to her
 inclinations. “what noble fellow!” you will exclaim. is
 so; but then is wholly uneducated: is as silent as turk, and kind
 of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
 the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
 otherwise would command.
 
yet do not suppose, because i complain little or because i can
 conceive consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am
 wavering in my resolutions. those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage
 is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the
 winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it
 is considered as remarkably early season, so that perhaps i may sail
 sooner than i expected. i shall do nothing rashly: you know me
 sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
 safety of others is committed to my care.
 
i cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
 undertaking. it is impossible to communicate to you conception of
 the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which
 i am preparing to depart. i am going to unexplored regions, to “the
 land of mist and snow,” but i shall kill albatross; therefore do not
 be alarmed for my safety or if i should come back to you as worn and
 woeful as the “ancient mariner.” you will smile at my allusion, but i
 will disclose secret. i have often attributed my attachment to, my
 passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that
 production of the most imaginative of modern poets. there is something
 at work in my soul which i do not understand. i am practically
 industrious—painstaking, workman to execute with perseverance and
 labour—but besides this there is love for the marvellous, belief
 in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries out
 of the common pathways of men, even to the wild and unvisited
 regions i am about to explore.
 
but to return to dearer considerations. shall i meet you again, after
 having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of
 africa or america? i dare not expect such success, yet i cannot bear to
 look on the reverse of the picture. continue for the present to write to
 by every opportunity: i may receive your letters on some occasions when
 i need them most to support my spirits. i love you very tenderly. 
remember with affection, should you never hear from again.
 
your affectionate brother,
 robert walton
 



letter 3
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 
july 7th, 17—.
 

my dear sister,
 
i write few lines in haste to say that i am safe—and well advanced
 on my voyage. this letter will reach england by merchantman now on
 its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not
 see my native land, perhaps, for many years. i am, however, in good
 spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the
 floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
 of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. we
 have already reached very high latitude; but it is the height of
 summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales,
 which blow us speedily towards those shores which i so ardently desire
 to attain, breathe degree of renovating warmth which i had not
 expected.
 
incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make figure in a
 letter. one or two stiff gales and the springing of leak are
 accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and
 i shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.
 
adieu, my dear margaret. be assured that for my own sake, as well as
 yours, i will not rashly encounter danger. i will be cool,
 persevering, and prudent.
 
but success _shall_ crown my endeavours. wherefore not? thus far i
 have gone, tracing secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars
 themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. why not
 still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? what can stop the
 determined heart and resolved will of man?
 
my swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. but i must
 finish. heaven bless my beloved sister!
 
r.w.
 



letter 4
 

_to mrs. saville, england._
 
august 5th, 17—.
 
so strange an accident has happened to us that i cannot forbear
 recording it, although it is very probable that you will see before
 these papers can come into your possession.
 
last monday (july 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
 in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which
 she floated. our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we
 were compassed round by very thick fog. we accordingly lay to,
 hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
 
about two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out
 in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to
 have end. some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to
 grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when strange sight suddenly
 attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own
 situation. we perceived low carriage, fixed on sledge and drawn by
 dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half mile; a
 being which had the shape of man, but apparently of gigantic stature,
 sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. we watched the rapid progress
 of the traveller with our telescopes until was lost among the
 distant inequalities of the ice.
 
this appearance excited our unqualified wonder. we were, as we believed,
 many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that
 it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in, however, by
 ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the
 greatest attention.
 
about two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before
 night the ice broke and freed our ship. we, however, lay to until the
 morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which
 float about after the breaking up of the ice. i profited of this time to
 rest for few hours.
 
in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck and
 found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently
 talking to someone in the sea. it was, in fact, sledge, like that we
 had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on large
 fragment of ice. only one dog remained alive; but there was human
 being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
 was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, savage inhabitant of
 some undiscovered island, but european. when i appeared on deck the
 master said, “here is our captain, and will not allow you to perish
 on the open sea.”
 
on perceiving me, the stranger addressed in english, although with a
 foreign accent. “before i come on board your vessel,” said he,
 “will you have the kindness to inform whither you are bound?”
 
you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such question addressed
 to from man on the brink of destruction and to whom i should have
 supposed that my vessel would have been resource which would not
 have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. i
 replied, however, that we were on voyage of discovery towards the
 northern pole.
 
upon hearing this appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
 good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for
 his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. his limbs were
 nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and
 suffering. i never saw man in so wretched condition. we attempted
 to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as had quitted the fresh
 air fainted. we accordingly brought him back to the deck and
 restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to
 swallow small quantity. as soon as showed signs of life we
 wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the
 kitchen stove. by slow degrees recovered and ate little soup,
 which restored him wonderfully.
 
two days passed in this manner before was able to speak, and i often
 feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. when he
 had in some measure recovered, i removed him to my own cabin and
 attended on him as much as my duty would permit. i never saw more
 interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of
 wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone
 performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most
 trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with
 beam of benevolence and sweetness that i never saw equalled. but he
 is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes gnashes his
 teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.
 
when my guest was little recovered i had great trouble to keep off
 the men, who wished to ask him thousand questions; but i would not
 allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in state of body
 and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
 once, however, the lieutenant asked why had come so far upon the ice
 in so strange vehicle.
 
his countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and
 replied, “to seek one who fled from me.”
 
“and did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then i fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we
 saw some dogs drawing sledge, with man in it, across the ice.”
 
this aroused the stranger’s attention, and asked multitude of
 questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as called him, had
 pursued. soon after, when was alone with me, said, “i have,
 doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good
 people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.”
 
“certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in to
 trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”
 
“and yet you rescued from strange and perilous situation; you have
 benevolently restored to life.”
 
soon after this inquired if i thought that the breaking up of the
 ice had destroyed the other sledge. i replied that i could not answer
 with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near
 midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at place of safety
 before that time; but of this i could not judge.
 
from this time new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the
 stranger. manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for
 the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuaded him to remain in
 the cabin, for is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
 i have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant
 notice if any new object should appear in sight.
 
such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the
 present day. the stranger has gradually improved in health but is very
 silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
 yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all
 interested in him, although they have had very little communication
 with him. for my own part, i begin to love him as brother, and his
 constant and deep grief fills with sympathy and compassion. must
 have been noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck
 so attractive and amiable.
 
i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find friend
 on the wide ocean; yet i have found man who, before his spirit had been
 broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as the brother
 of my heart.
 
i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals,
 should i have any fresh incidents to record.
 



august 13th, 17—.
 

my affection for my guest increases every day. excites at once my
 admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. how can i see so
 noble creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant
 grief? is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and
 when speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art,
 yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
 
is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck,
 apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. yet, although
 unhappy, is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he
 interests himself deeply in the projects of others. has frequently
 conversed with on mine, which i have communicated to him without
 disguise. entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my
 eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures i had taken
 to secure it. i was easily led by the sympathy which evinced to use the
 language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul
 and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly i would
 sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my
 enterprise. one man’s life or death were but small price to pay for
 the acquirement of the knowledge which i sought, for the dominion i should
 acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. as i spoke, a
 dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. at first i
 perceived that tried to suppress his emotion; placed his hands before
 his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed as i beheld tears trickle
 fast from between his fingers; groan burst from his heaving breast. i
 paused; at length spoke, in broken accents: “unhappy man! do you
 share my madness? have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? hear me;
 let reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”
 
such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the
 paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened
 powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were
 necessary to restore his composure.
 
having conquered the violence of his feelings, appeared to despise
 himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of
 despair, led again to converse concerning myself personally. asked
 the history of my earlier years. the tale was quickly told, but it
 awakened various trains of reflection. i spoke of my desire of finding a
 friend, of my thirst for more intimate sympathy with fellow mind than
 had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that man could
 boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
 
“i agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are
 unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
 ourselves—such friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
 perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. i once had friend, the most
 noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting
 friendship. you have hope, and the world before you, and have cause for
 despair. but i—i have lost everything and cannot begin life
 anew.”
 
as said this his countenance became expressive of calm, settled
 grief that touched to the heart. but was silent and presently
 retired to his cabin.
 
even broken in spirit as is, one can feel more deeply than he
 does the beauties of nature. the starry sky, the sea, and every sight
 afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of
 elevating his soul from earth. such man has double existence: he
 may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he
 has retired into himself, will be like celestial spirit that has a
 halo around him, within whose circle grief or folly ventures.
 
will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine
 wanderer? you would not if you saw him. you have been tutored and
 refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore
 somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to
 appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. sometimes i
 have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which possesses that
 elevates him so immeasurably above any other person i ever knew. i
 believe it to be an intuitive discernment, quick but never-failing
 power of judgment, penetration into the causes of things, unequalled
 for clearness and precision; add to this facility of expression and a
 voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.
 



august 19th, 17—.
 

yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easily perceive, captain
 walton, that i have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. i had
 determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with
 me, but you have won to alter my determination. you seek for
 knowledge and wisdom, as i once did; and i ardently hope that the
 gratification of your wishes may not be serpent to sting you, as mine
 has been. i do not know that the relation of my disasters will be
 useful to you; yet, when i reflect that you are pursuing the same
 course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me
 what i am, i imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one
 that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you
 in case of failure. prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually
 deemed marvellous. were we among the tamer scenes of nature i might
 fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things
 will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would
 provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers
 of nature; nor can i doubt but that my tale conveys in its series
 internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”
 
you may easily imagine that i was much gratified by the offered
 communication, yet i could not endure that should renew his grief by
 recital of his misfortunes. i felt the greatest eagerness to hear
 the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from strong
 desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. i expressed
 these feelings in my answer.
 
“i thank you,” replied, “for your sympathy, but it is
 useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. i wait but for one event, and then i
 shall repose in peace. i understand your feeling,” continued he,
 perceiving that i wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my
 friend, if thus you will allow to name you; nothing can alter my
 destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is
 determined.”
 
then told that would commence his narrative the next day when i
 should be at leisure. this promise drew from the warmest thanks. i have
 resolved every night, when i am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to
 record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what has related during
 the day. if i should be engaged, i will at least make notes. this
 manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who
 know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and
 sympathy shall i read it in some future day! even now, as i commence my
 task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me
 with all their melancholy sweetness; i see his thin hand raised in
 animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul
 within. strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which
 embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!
 



chapter 1
 

i am by birth genevese, and my family is one of the most
 distinguished of that republic. my ancestors had been for many years
 counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public
 situations with honour and reputation. was respected by all who
 knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public
 business. passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the
 affairs of his country; variety of circumstances had prevented his
 marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that became a
 husband and the father of family.
 
as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot
 refrain from relating them. one of his most intimate friends was a
 merchant who, from flourishing state, fell, through numerous
 mischances, into poverty. this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a
 proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty
 and oblivion in the same country where had formerly been
 distinguished for his rank and magnificence. having paid his debts,
 therefore, in the most honourable manner, retreated with his
 daughter to the town of lucerne, where lived unknown and in
 wretchedness. my father loved beaufort with the truest friendship and
 was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
 bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to conduct
 so little worthy of the affection that united them. lost time in
 endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin
 the world again through his credit and assistance.
 
beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten
 months before my father discovered his abode. overjoyed at this discovery,
 hastened to the house, which was situated in mean street near the
 reuss. but when entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. beaufort
 had saved but very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but
 it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in
 the meantime hoped to procure some respectable employment in a
 merchant’s house. the interval was, consequently, spent in inaction;
 his grief only became more deep and rankling when had leisure for
 reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end
 of three months lay on bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
 
his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw
 with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that
 there was other prospect of support. but caroline beaufort
 possessed mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support
 her in her adversity. she procured plain work; she plaited straw and
 by various means contrived to earn pittance scarcely sufficient to
 support life.
 
several months passed in this manner. her father grew worse; her time
 was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
 decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
 her an orphan and beggar. this last blow overcame her, and she knelt
 by beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
 chamber. came like protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
 committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he
 conducted her to geneva and placed her under the protection of a
 relation. two years after this event caroline became his wife.
 
there was considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but
 this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted
 affection. there was sense of justice in my father’s upright mind
 which rendered it necessary that should approve highly to love
 strongly. perhaps during former years had suffered from the
 late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set
 greater value on tried worth. there was show of gratitude and
 worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the
 doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her
 virtues and desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing
 her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace
 to his behaviour to her. everything was made to yield to her wishes
 and her convenience. strove to shelter her, as fair exotic is
 sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her
 with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and
 benevolent mind. her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto
 constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. during
 the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had
 gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after
 their union they sought the pleasant climate of italy, and the change
 of scene and interest attendant on tour through that land of wonders,
 as restorative for her weakened frame.
 
from italy they visited germany and france. i, their eldest child, was born
 at naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. i remained
 for several years their only child. much as they were attached to each
 other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from very
 mine of love to bestow them upon me. my mother’s tender caresses and
 my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding are my
 first recollections. i was their plaything and their idol, and something
 better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on
 them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in
 their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled
 their duties towards me. with this deep consciousness of what they owed
 towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit
 of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during
 every hour of my infant life i received lesson of patience, of charity,
 and of self-control, i was so guided by silken cord that all seemed but
 one train of enjoyment to me.
 
for long time i was their only care. my mother had much desired to have a
 daughter, but i continued their single offspring. when i was about five
 years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of italy, they
 passed week on the shores of the lake of como. their benevolent
 disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. this, to my
 mother, was more than duty; it was necessity, a
 passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been
 relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the
 afflicted. during one of their walks poor cot in the foldings of vale
 attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number
 of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst
 shape. one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother,
 accompanied by me, visited this abode. she found peasant and his wife,
 hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing scanty meal to
 five hungry babes. among these there was one which attracted my mother far
 above all the rest. she appeared of different stock. the four others were
 dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. her
 hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her
 clothing, seemed to set crown of distinction on her head. her brow was
 clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of
 her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold
 her without looking on her as of distinct species, being heaven-sent,
 and bearing celestial stamp in all her features.
 
the peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and
 admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. she was
 not her child, but the daughter of milanese nobleman. her mother was a
 german and had died on giving her birth. the infant had been placed with
 these good people to nurse: they were better off then. they had not been
 long married, and their eldest child was but just born. the father of their
 charge was one of those italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory
 of italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted
 himself to obtain the liberty of his country. became the victim of its
 weakness. whether had died or still lingered in the dungeons of austria
 was not known. his property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and
 beggar. she continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude
 abode, fairer than garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.
 
when my father returned from milan, found playing with in the hall of
 our villa child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed
 to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter
 than the chamois of the hills. the apparition was soon explained. with his
 permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their
 charge to her. they were fond of the sweet orphan. her presence had seemed
 blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty
 and want when providence afforded her such powerful protection. they
 consulted their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza
 became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than
 sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and
 my pleasures.
 
everyone loved elizabeth. the passionate and almost reverential
 attachment with which all regarded her became, while i shared it, my
 pride and my delight. on the evening previous to her being brought to
 my home, my mother had said playfully, “i have pretty present for my
 victor—tomorrow shall have it.” and when, on the morrow, she
 presented elizabeth to as her promised gift, i, with childish
 seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon elizabeth
 as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. all praises bestowed on
 her i received as made to possession of my own. we called each other
 familiarly by the name of cousin. word, expression could body
 forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than
 sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
 



chapter 2
 

we were brought up together; there was not quite year difference in
 our ages. i need not say that we were strangers to any species of
 disunion or dispute. harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
 the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
 nearer together. elizabeth was of calmer and more concentrated
 disposition; but, with all my ardour, i was capable of more intense
 application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
 she busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
 and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our swiss
 home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
 tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of
 our alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
 while my companion contemplated with serious and satisfied spirit the
 magnificent appearances of things, i delighted in investigating their
 causes. the world was to secret which i desired to divine.
 curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature,
 gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the
 earliest sensations i can remember.
 
on the birth of second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave
 up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native
 country. we possessed house in geneva, and _campagne_ on belrive,
 the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a
 league from the city. we resided principally in the latter, and the
 lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. it was my
 temper to avoid crowd and to attach myself fervently to few. i was
 indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but i united
 myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. henry
 clerval was the of merchant of geneva. was boy of singular
 talent and fancy. loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for
 its own sake. was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. he
 composed heroic songs and began to write many tale of enchantment and
 knightly adventure. tried to make us act plays and to enter into
 masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
 roncesvalles, of the round table of king arthur, and the chivalrous
 train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands
 of the infidels.
 
human being could have passed happier childhood than myself. my
 parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
 we felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to
 their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights
 which we enjoyed. when i mingled with other families i distinctly
 discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted
 the development of filial love.
 
my temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some
 law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits
 but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
 indiscriminately. i confess that neither the structure of languages,
 nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states
 possessed attractions for me. it was the secrets of heaven and earth
 that i desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
 things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
 that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical,
 or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
 
meanwhile clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
 relations of things. the busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
 and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
 to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the
 gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. the saintly soul
 of elizabeth shone like shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
 her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
 her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. she was
 the living spirit of love to soften and attract; i might have become
 sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that
 she was there to subdue to semblance of her own gentleness. and
 clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval? yet
 might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his
 generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for
 adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of
 beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring
 ambition.
 
i feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood,
 before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of
 extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. besides,
 in drawing the picture of my early days, i also record those events which
 led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when i would
 account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my
 destiny i find it arise, like mountain river, from ignoble and almost
 forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent
 which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
 
natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; i desire,
 therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
 predilection for that science. when i was thirteen years of age we all went
 on party of pleasure to the baths near thonon; the inclemency of the
 weather obliged us to remain day confined to the inn. in this house i
 chanced to find volume of the works of cornelius agrippa. i opened it
 with apathy; the theory which attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful
 facts which relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. new
 light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, i communicated my
 discovery to my father. my father looked carelessly at the title page of my
 book and said, “ah! cornelius agrippa! my dear victor, do not waste
 your time upon this; it is sad trash.”
 
if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me
 that the principles of agrippa had been entirely exploded and that modern
 system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers
 than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
 those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances i
 should certainly have thrown agrippa aside and have contented my
 imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my
 former studies. it is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
 have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. but the cursory glance
 my father had taken of my volume by means assured that was
 acquainted with its contents, and i continued to read with the greatest
 avidity.
 
when i returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this
 author, and afterwards of paracelsus and albertus magnus. i read and
 studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me
 treasures known to few besides myself. i have described myself as always
 having been imbued with fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of
 nature. in spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern
 philosophers, i always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
 sir isaac newton is said to have avowed that felt like child picking
 up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. those of his
 successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom i was acquainted
 appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same
 pursuit.
 
the untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted
 with their practical uses. the most learned philosopher knew little
 more. had partially unveiled the face of nature, but her immortal
 lineaments were still wonder and mystery. might dissect,
 anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of final cause, causes
 in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. i
 had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep
 human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and
 ignorantly i had repined.
 
but here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew
 more. i took their word for all that they averred, and i became their
 disciple. it may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth
 century; but while i followed the routine of education in the schools of
 geneva, i was, to great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite
 studies. my father was not scientific, and i was left to struggle with a
 child’s blindness, added to student’s thirst for knowledge.
 under the guidance of my new preceptors i entered with the greatest
 diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir
 of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. wealth was an
 inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if i could
 banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but
 violent death!
 
nor were these my only visions. the raising of ghosts or devils was a
 promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
 i most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, i
 attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
 want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. and thus for time i was
 occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, thousand
 contradictory theories and floundering desperately in very slough of
 multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish
 reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
 
when i was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near
 belrive, when we witnessed most violent and terrible thunderstorm. it
 advanced from behind the mountains of jura, and the thunder burst at once
 with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. i remained,
 while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
 as i stood at the door, on sudden i beheld stream of fire issue from an
 old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
 soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing
 remained but blasted stump. when we visited it the next morning, we found
 the tree shattered in singular manner. it was not splintered by the
 shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. i never beheld
 anything so utterly destroyed.
 
before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
 electricity. on this occasion man of great research in natural
 philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, entered on
 the explanation of theory which had formed on the subject of
 electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
 all that said threw greatly into the shade cornelius agrippa,
 albertus magnus, and paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
 some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined to pursue my
 accustomed studies. it seemed to as if nothing would or could ever
 be known. all that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
 despicable. by one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps
 most subject to in early youth, i at once gave up my former
 occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as deformed
 and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a
 would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of
 real knowledge. in this mood of mind i betook myself to the
 mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as
 being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
 
thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments
 are we bound to prosperity or ruin. when i look back, it seems to me
 as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the
 immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort
 made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even
 then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. her victory was
 announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which
 followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting
 studies. it was thus that i was to be taught to associate evil with
 their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
 
it was strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
 destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and
 terrible destruction.
 



chapter 3
 

when i had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that i
 should become student at the university of ingolstadt. i had
 hitherto attended the schools of geneva, but my father thought it
 necessary for the completion of my education that i should be made
 acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. my
 departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day
 resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
 occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
 
elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was
 in the greatest danger. during her illness many arguments had been urged to
 persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. she had at first
 yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her
 favourite was menaced, she could longer control her anxiety. she
 attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity
 of the distemper—elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this
 imprudence were fatal to her preserver. on the third day my mother
 sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the
 looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. on her
 deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert
 her. she joined the hands of elizabeth and myself. “my
 children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were
 placed on the prospect of your union. this expectation will now be the
 consolation of your father. elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to
 my younger children. alas! i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy
 and beloved as i have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are
 not thoughts befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to
 death and will indulge hope of meeting you in another world.”
 
she died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
 i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent
 by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the
 soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. it is so
 long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day
 and whose very existence appeared part of our own can have departed
 for ever—that the brightness of beloved eye can have been
 extinguished and the sound of voice so familiar and dear to the ear
 can be hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflections of
 the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the
 evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. yet from whom has
 not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? and why should i
 describe sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at
 length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than necessity; and
 the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a
 sacrilege, is not banished. my mother was dead, but we had still
 duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the
 rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the
 spoiler has not seized.
 
my departure for ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events,
 was now again determined upon. i obtained from my father respite of
 some weeks. it appeared to sacrilege so soon to leave the repose,
 akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of
 life. i was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. i was
 unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above
 all, i desired to see my sweet elizabeth in some degree consoled.
 
she indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
 she looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and
 zeal. she devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call
 her uncle and cousins. never was she so enchanting as at this time,
 when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
 she forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
 
the day of my departure at length arrived. clerval spent the last
 evening with us. had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit
 him to accompany and to become my fellow student, but in vain. his
 father was narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the
 aspirations and ambition of his son. henry deeply felt the misfortune
 of being debarred from liberal education. said little, but when
 spoke i read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a
 restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details
 of commerce.
 
we sat late. we could not tear ourselves away from each other nor
 persuade ourselves to say the word “farewell!” it was said, and we
 retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the
 other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn i descended to the
 carriage which was to convey away, they were all there—my father
 again to bless me, clerval to press my hand once more, my elizabeth to
 renew her entreaties that i would write often and to bestow the last
 feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.
 
i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey away and indulged in
 the most melancholy reflections. i, who had ever been surrounded by
 amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual
 pleasure—i was now alone. in the university whither i was going i
 must form my own friends and be my own protector. my life had hitherto
 been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given invincible
 repugnance to new countenances. i loved my brothers, elizabeth, and
 clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but i believed myself
 totally unfitted for the company of strangers. such were my reflections as
 i commenced my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. i
 ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. i had often, when at home,
 thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had
 longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to
 repent.
 
i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
 journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. at length the
 high white steeple of the town met my eyes. i alighted and was
 conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased.
 
the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction and paid visit to
 some of the principal professors. chance—or rather the evil
 influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me
 from the moment i turned my reluctant steps from my father’s
 door—led first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy. he
 was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. he
 asked several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
 of science appertaining to natural philosophy. i replied carelessly, and
 partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal
 authors i had studied. the professor stared. “have you,” he
 said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?”
 
i replied in the affirmative. “every minute,” continued m. krempe with
 warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
 and entirely lost. you have burdened your memory with exploded systems
 and useless names. good god! in what desert land have you lived,
 where one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you
 have so greedily imbibed are thousand years old and as musty as they
 are ancient? i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
 age, to find disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus. my dear
 sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”
 
so saying, stepped aside and wrote down list of several books
 treating of natural philosophy which desired to procure, and
 dismissed after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
 week intended to commence course of lectures upon natural
 philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, fellow
 professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
 omitted.
 
i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long
 considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i
 returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
 shape. m. krempe was little squat man with gruff voice and a
 repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess in
 favour of his pursuits. in rather too philosophical and connected a
 strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusions i had come
 to concerning them in my early years. as child i had not been
 content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural
 science. with confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my
 extreme youth and my want of guide on such matters, i had retrod the
 steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the
 discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
 besides, i had contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
 it was very different when the masters of the science sought
 immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now
 the scene was changed. the ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit
 itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in
 science was chiefly founded. i was required to exchange chimeras of
 boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
 
such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my
 residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
 acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new
 abode. but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information
 which m. krempe had given concerning the lectures. and although i
 could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
 sentences out of pulpit, i recollected what had said of m.
 waldman, whom i had never seen, as had hitherto been out of town.
 
partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the lecturing
 room, which m. waldman entered shortly after. this professor was very
 unlike his colleague. appeared about fifty years of age, but with an
 aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; few grey hairs covered his
 temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. his person
 was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest i had ever heard.
 began his lecture by recapitulation of the history of chemistry and
 the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
 with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. then took
 cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of
 its elementary terms. after having made few preparatory experiments, he
 concluded with panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i
 shall never forget:
 
“the ancient teachers of this science,” said he,
 “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. the modern masters
 promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that
 the elixir of life is chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem
 only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or
 crucible, have indeed performed miracles. they penetrate into the recesses
 of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. they ascend into the
 heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of
 the air we breathe. they have acquired new and almost unlimited powers;
 they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even
 mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”
 
such were the professor’s words—rather let say such the words of
 the fate—enounced to destroy me. as went on i felt as if my soul
 were grappling with palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were
 touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was
 sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception,
 one purpose. so much has been done, exclaimed the soul of
 frankenstein—more, far more, will i achieve; treading in the steps
 already marked, i will pioneer new way, explore unknown powers, and
 unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
 
i closed not my eyes that night. my internal being was in state of
 insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i
 had power to produce it. by degrees, after the morning’s dawn,
 sleep came. i awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as dream.
 there only remained resolution to return to my ancient studies and to
 devote myself to science for which i believed myself to possess a
 natural talent. on the same day i paid m. waldman visit. his
 manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
 for there was certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
 his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. i
 gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had
 given to his fellow professor. heard with attention the little
 narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius
 agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had
 exhibited. said that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal
 modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
 knowledge. they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
 and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a
 great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. the
 labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever
 fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” i
 listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption
 or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my
 prejudices against modern chemists; i expressed myself in measured
 terms, with the modesty and deference due from youth to his
 instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
 made ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
 labours. i requested his advice concerning the books i ought to
 procure.
 
“i am happy,” said m. waldman, “to have gained a
 disciple; and if your application equals your ability, i have doubt of
 your success. chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the
 greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that
 i have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not
 neglected the other branches of science. man would make but very sorry
 chemist if attended to that department of human knowledge alone. if your
 wish is to become really man of science and not merely petty
 experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of natural
 philosophy, including mathematics.”
 
then took into his laboratory and explained to the uses of his
 various machines, instructing as to what i ought to procure and
 promising the use of his own when i should have advanced far enough in
 the science not to derange their mechanism. also gave the list of
 books which i had requested, and i took my leave.
 
thus ended day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
 



chapter 4
 

from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
 most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
 i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
 which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. i attended the
 lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
 university, and i found even in m. krempe great deal of sound sense
 and real information, combined, it is true, with repulsive
 physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. in
 m. waldman i found true friend. his gentleness was never tinged by
 dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
 good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. in thousand ways
 smoothed for the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
 inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. my application was at
 first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as i proceeded and
 soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
 light of morning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory.
 
as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress
 was rapid. my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and
 my proficiency that of the masters. professor krempe often asked me,
 with sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman
 expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. two years
 passed in this manner, during which i paid visit to geneva, but was
 engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which i
 hoped to make. none but those who have experienced them can conceive
 of the enticements of science. in other studies you go as far as
 others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in
 scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
 mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must
 infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and i, who
 continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was
 solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two
 years i made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical
 instruments, which procured great esteem and admiration at the
 university. when i had arrived at this point and had become as well
 acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as
 depended on the lessons of any of the professors at ingolstadt, my
 residence there being longer conducive to my improvements, i thought
 of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident
 happened that protracted my stay.
 
one of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was
 the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with
 life. whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
 it was bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a
 mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
 acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our
 inquiries. i revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined
 thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of
 natural philosophy which relate to physiology. unless i had been
 animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this
 study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. to examine the
 causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. i became
 acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; i
 must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
 in my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my
 mind should be impressed with supernatural horrors. i do not ever
 remember to have trembled at tale of superstition or to have feared
 the apparition of spirit. darkness had effect upon my fancy, and
 churchyard was to merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of
 life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become
 food for the worm. now i was led to examine the cause and progress of
 this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and
 charnel-houses. my attention was fixed upon every object the most
 insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. i saw how the
 fine form of man was degraded and wasted; i beheld the corruption of
 death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i saw how the worm
 inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. i paused, examining and
 analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change
 from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
 darkness sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and
 wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the immensity
 of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprised that among so
 many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same
 science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a
 secret.
 
remember, i am not recording the vision of madman. the sun does not
 more certainly shine in the heavens than that which i now affirm is
 true. some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
 discovery were distinct and probable. after days and nights of
 incredible labour and fatigue, i succeeded in discovering the cause of
 generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestowing
 animation upon lifeless matter.
 
the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery
 soon gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in
 painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the
 most gratifying consummation of my toils. but this discovery was so
 great and overwhelming that all the steps by which i had been
 progressively led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result.
 what had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation
 of the world was now within my grasp. not that, like magic scene, it
 all opened upon at once: the information i had obtained was of a
 nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as i should point them
 towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
 accomplished. i was like the arabian who had been buried with the dead
 and found passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly
 ineffectual light.
 
i see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes
 express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
 which i am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end
 of my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that
 subject. i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was,
 to your destruction and infallible misery. learn from me, if not by my
 precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
 knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
 to be the world, than who aspires to become greater than his nature
 will allow.
 
when i found so astonishing power placed within my hands, i hesitated
 long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it.
 although i possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to
 prepare frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of
 fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained work of inconceivable
 difficulty and labour. i doubted at first whether i should attempt the
 creation of being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my
 imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit to
 doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful
 as man. the materials at present within my command hardly appeared
 adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but i doubted not that i should
 ultimately succeed. i prepared myself for multitude of reverses; my
 operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be
 imperfect, yet when i considered the improvement which every day takes
 place in science and mechanics, i was encouraged to hope my present
 attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. nor
 could i consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any
 argument of its impracticability. it was with these feelings that i
 began the creation of human being. as the minuteness of the parts
 formed great hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first
 intention, to make the being of gigantic stature, that is to say,
 about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. after having
 formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully
 collecting and arranging my materials, i began.
 
one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore onwards, like
 hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death
 appeared to ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and
 pour torrent of light into our dark world. new species would bless
 as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would
 owe their being to me. father could claim the gratitude of his
 child so completely as i should deserve theirs. pursuing these
 reflections, i thought that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless
 matter, i might in process of time (although i now found it impossible)
 renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
 
these thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking
 with unremitting ardour. my cheek had grown pale with study, and my
 person had become emaciated with confinement. sometimes, on the very
 brink of certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the
 next day or the next hour might realise. one secret which i alone
 possessed was the hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon
 gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless
 eagerness, i pursued nature to her hiding-places. who shall conceive
 the horrors of my secret toil as i dabbled among the unhallowed damps
 of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless
 clay? my limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but
 then resistless and almost frantic impulse urged forward; i seemed
 to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. it was
 indeed but passing trance, that only made feel with renewed
 acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, i had
 returned to my old habits. i collected bones from charnel-houses and
 disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human
 frame. in solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
 and separated from all the other apartments by gallery and staircase,
 i kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from
 their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. the
 dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials;
 and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation,
 whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, i
 brought my work near to conclusion.
 
the summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
 one pursuit. it was most beautiful season; never did the fields
 bestow more plentiful harvest or the vines yield more luxuriant
 vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. and the
 same feelings which made neglect the scenes around caused also
 to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom i had
 not seen for so long time. i knew my silence disquieted them, and i
 well remembered the words of my father: “i know that while you are
 pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall
 hear regularly from you. you must pardon if i regard any
 interruption in your correspondence as proof that your other duties
 are equally neglected.”
 
i knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but i could
 not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
 had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. i wished, as it
 were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection
 until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature,
 should be completed.
 
i then thought that my father would be unjust if ascribed my neglect
 to vice or faultiness on my part, but i am now convinced that was
 justified in conceiving that i should not be altogether free from
 blame. human being in perfection ought always to preserve calm and
 peaceful mind and never to allow passion or transitory desire to
 disturb his tranquillity. i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge
 is an exception to this rule. if the study to which you apply yourself
 has tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for
 those simple pleasures in which alloy can possibly mix, then that
 study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human
 mind. if this rule were always observed; if man allowed any pursuit
 whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
 affections, greece had not been enslaved, cæsar would have spared his
 country, america would have been discovered more gradually, and the
 empires of mexico and peru had not been destroyed.
 
but i forget that i am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
 tale, and your looks remind to proceed.
 
my father made reproach in his letters and only took notice of my
 silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
 winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but i did not
 watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always
 yielded supreme delight—so deeply was i engrossed in my
 occupation. the leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near
 to close, and now every day showed more plainly how well i had
 succeeded. but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appeared
 rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
 unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
 every night i was oppressed by slow fever, and i became nervous to most
 painful degree; the fall of leaf startled me, and i shunned my fellow
 creatures as if i had been guilty of crime. sometimes i grew alarmed at
 the wreck i perceived that i had become; the energy of my purpose alone
 sustained me: my labours would soon end, and i believed that exercise and
 amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and i promised myself
 both of these when my creation should be complete.
 



chapter 5
 

it was on dreary night of november that i beheld the accomplishment
 of my toils. with an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, i
 collected the instruments of life around me, that i might infuse a
 spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. it was
 already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the
 panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the
 half-extinguished light, i saw the dull yellow eye of the creature
 open; it breathed hard, and convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
 
how can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate
 the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavoured to
 form? his limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as
 beautiful. beautiful! great god! his yellow skin scarcely covered
 the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of lustrous
 black, and flowing; his teeth of pearly whiteness; but these
 luxuriances only formed more horrid contrast with his watery eyes,
 that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which
 they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.
 
the different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings
 of human nature. i had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
 purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. for this i had
 deprived myself of rest and health. i had desired it with an ardour
 that far exceeded moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty
 of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my
 heart. unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i
 rushed out of the room and continued long time traversing my
 bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. at length lassitude
 succeeded to the tumult i had before endured, and i threw myself on the
 bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek few moments of forgetfulness.
 but it was in vain; i slept, indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest
 dreams. i thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in
 the streets of ingolstadt. delighted and surprised, i embraced her,
 but as i imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with
 the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i
 held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; shroud enveloped her
 form, and i saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
 i started from my sleep with horror; cold dew covered my forehead, my
 teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and
 yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window
 shutters, i beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom i had
 created. held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
 may be called, were fixed on me. his jaws opened, and muttered some
 inarticulate sounds, while grin wrinkled his cheeks. might have
 spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to
 detain me, but i escaped and rushed downstairs. i took refuge in the
 courtyard belonging to the house which i inhabited, where i remained
 during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest
 agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if
 it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which i
 had so miserably given life.
 
oh! mortal could support the horror of that countenance. mummy
 again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. i
 had gazed on him while unfinished; was ugly then, but when those
 muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became thing
 such as even dante could not have conceived.
 
i passed the night wretchedly. sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
 hardly that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly
 sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. mingled with
 this horror, i felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had
 been my food and pleasant rest for so long space were now become a
 hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!
 
morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my
 sleepless and aching eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple
 and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. the porter opened the gates
 of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issued into
 the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the
 wretch whom i feared every turning of the street would present to my
 view. i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but
 felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured
 from black and comfortless sky.
 
i continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by
 bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. i
 traversed the streets without any clear conception of where i was or
 what i was doing. my heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and i
 hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
 
like one who, on lonely road,
 doth walk in fear and dread,
 and, having once turned round, walks on,
 and turns more his head;
 because knows frightful fiend
 doth close behind him tread.
 
[coleridge’s “ancient mariner.”]
 


continuing thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the various
 diligences and carriages usually stopped. here i paused, i knew not why;
 but i remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on coach that was coming
 towards from the other end of the street. as it drew nearer i observed
 that it was the swiss diligence; it stopped just where i was standing, and
 on the door being opened, i perceived henry clerval, who, on seeing me,
 instantly sprung out. “my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed he,
 “how glad i am to see you! how fortunate that you should be here at
 the very moment of my alighting!”
 
nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought back
 to my thoughts my father, elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear
 to my recollection. i grasped his hand, and in moment forgot my horror
 and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months,
 calm and serene joy. i welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial
 manner, and we walked towards my college. clerval continued talking for
 some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being
 permitted to come to ingolstadt. “you may easily believe,” said
 he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all
 necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping;
 and, indeed, i believe i left him incredulous to the last, for his constant
 answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the dutch
 schoolmaster in the vicar of wakefield: ‘i have ten thousand florins
 year without greek, i eat heartily without greek.’ but his
 affection for at length overcame his dislike of learning, and has
 permitted to undertake voyage of discovery to the land of
 knowledge.”
 
“it gives the greatest delight to see you; but tell how you left
 my father, brothers, and elizabeth.”
 
“very well, and very happy, only little uneasy that they hear from
 you so seldom. by the by, i mean to lecture you little upon their
 account myself. but, my dear frankenstein,” continued he, stopping
 short and gazing full in my face, “i did not before remark how very ill
 you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
 several nights.”
 
“you have guessed right; i have lately been so deeply engaged in one
 occupation that i have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see;
 but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
 end and that i am at length free.”
 
i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to
 allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. i walked with a
 quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. i then reflected, and
 the thought made shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my
 apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. i dreaded to
 behold this monster, but i feared still more that henry should see him.
 entreating him, therefore, to remain few minutes at the bottom of the
 stairs, i darted up towards my own room. my hand was already on the
 lock of the door before i recollected myself. i then paused, and a
 cold shivering came over me. i threw the door forcibly open, as
 children are accustomed to do when they expect spectre to stand in
 waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. i stepped
 fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed
 from its hideous guest. i could hardly believe that so great good
 fortune could have befallen me, but when i became assured that my enemy
 had indeed fled, i clapped my hands for joy and ran down to clerval.
 
we ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
 but i was unable to contain myself. it was not joy only that possessed
 me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
 beat rapidly. i was unable to remain for single instant in the same
 place; i jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
 clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival,
 but when observed more attentively, saw wildness in my eyes
 for which could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
 laughter frightened and astonished him.
 
“my dear victor,” cried he, “what, for god’s sake,
 is the matter? do not laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the
 cause of all this?”
 
“do not ask me,” cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i
 thought i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can
 tell. oh, save me! save me!” i imagined that the monster seized me;
 i struggled furiously and fell down in fit.
 
poor clerval! what must have been his feelings? meeting, which he
 anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. but i
 was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not
 recover my senses for long, long time.
 
this was the commencement of nervous fever which confined for
 several months. during all that time henry was my only nurse. i
 afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness
 for so long journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
 elizabeth, spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
 disorder. knew that i could not have more kind and attentive
 nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope felt of my recovery, he
 did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, performed the kindest
 action that could towards them.
 
but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and
 unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored to life.
 the form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was for ever
 before my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him. doubtless my
 words surprised henry; at first believed them to be the wanderings
 of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which i
 continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder
 indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
 
by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and
 grieved my friend, i recovered. i remember the first time i became
 capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, i
 perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young
 buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. it was
 divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my
 convalescence. i felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in
 my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in short time i became as
 cheerful as before i was attacked by the fatal passion.
 
“dearest clerval,” exclaimed i, “how kind, how very good
 you are to me. this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you
 promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. how shall i ever
 repay you? i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i
 have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.”
 
“you will repay entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get
 well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i
 may speak to you on one subject, may i not?”
 
i trembled. one subject! what could it be? could allude to an object on
 whom i dared not even think?
 
“compose yourself,” said clerval, who observed my change of
 colour, “i will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father
 and cousin would be very happy if they received letter from you in your
 own handwriting. they hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at
 your long silence.”
 
“is that all, my dear henry? how could you suppose that my first
 thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love and
 who are so deserving of my love?”
 
“if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad
 to see letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from
 your cousin, i believe.”
 



chapter 6
 

clerval then put the following letter into my hands. it was from my
 own elizabeth:
 
“my dearest cousin,
 
“you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear
 kind henry are not sufficient to reassure on your account. you are
 forbidden to write—to hold pen; yet one word from you, dear victor,
 is necessary to calm our apprehensions. for long time i have thought
 that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have
 restrained my uncle from undertaking journey to ingolstadt. i have
 prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so
 long journey, yet how often have i regretted not being able to
 perform it myself! i figure to myself that the task of attending on
 your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never
 guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of
 your poor cousin. yet that is over now: clerval writes that indeed
 you are getting better. i eagerly hope that you will confirm this
 intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
 
“get well—and return to us. you will find happy, cheerful home and
 friends who love you dearly. your father’s health is vigorous, and he
 asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a
 care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. how pleased you would
 be to remark the improvement of our ernest! is now sixteen and full
 of activity and spirit. is desirous to be true swiss and to enter
 into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his
 elder brother returns to us. my uncle is not pleased with the idea of
 military career in distant country, but ernest never had your
 powers of application. looks upon study as an odious fetter; his
 time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the
 lake. i fear that will become an idler unless we yield the point
 and permit him to enter on the profession which has selected.
 
“little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken
 place since you left us. the blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they
 never change; and i think our placid home and our contented hearts are
 regulated by the same immutable laws. my trifling occupations take up
 my time and amuse me, and i am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
 none but happy, kind faces around me. since you left us, but one
 change has taken place in our little household. do you remember on
 what occasion justine moritz entered our family? probably you do not;
 i will relate her history, therefore in few words. madame moritz,
 her mother, was widow with four children, of whom justine was the
 third. this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but
 through strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and
 after the death of m. moritz, treated her very ill. my aunt observed
 this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother
 to allow her to live at our house. the republican institutions of our
 country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which
 prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. hence there is less
 distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the
 lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are
 more refined and moral. servant in geneva does not mean the same
 thing as servant in france and england. justine, thus received in
 our family, learned the duties of servant, condition which, in our
 fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a
 sacrifice of the dignity of human being.
 
“justine, you may remember, was great favourite of yours; and i
 recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one
 glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that
 ariosto gives concerning the beauty of angelica—she looked so
 frank-hearted and happy. my aunt conceived great attachment for her,
 by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that
 which she had at first intended. this benefit was fully repaid;
 justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: i do not
 mean that she made any professions i never heard one pass her lips, but
 you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
 although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate,
 yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. she
 thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her
 phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds of her.
 
“when my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own
 grief to notice poor justine, who had attended her during her illness
 with the most anxious affection. poor justine was very ill; but other
 trials were reserved for her.
 
“one by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
 exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. the
 conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the
 deaths of her favourites was judgement from heaven to chastise her
 partiality. she was roman catholic; and i believe her confessor
 confirmed the idea which she had conceived. accordingly, few months
 after your departure for ingolstadt, justine was called home by her
 repentant mother. poor girl! she wept when she quitted our house; she
 was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness
 and winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable
 for vivacity. nor was her residence at her mother’s house of nature
 to restore her gaiety. the poor woman was very vacillating in her
 repentance. she sometimes begged justine to forgive her unkindness,
 but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her
 brothers and sister. perpetual fretting at length threw madame moritz
 into decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is
 now at peace for ever. she died on the first approach of cold weather,
 at the beginning of this last winter. justine has just returned to us;
 and i assure you i love her tenderly. she is very clever and gentle,
 and extremely pretty; as i mentioned before, her mien and her
 expression continually remind of my dear aunt.
 
“i must say also few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
 william. i wish you could see him; is very tall of his age, with
 sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. when he
 smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
 health. has already had one or two little _wives,_ but louisa biron
 is his favourite, pretty little girl of five years of age.
 
“now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulged in little
 gossip concerning the good people of geneva. the pretty miss mansfield
 has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching
 marriage with young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugly
 sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your
 favourite schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffered several misfortunes
 since the departure of clerval from geneva. but has already
 recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a
 lively pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier. she is widow, and much
 older than manoir; but she is very much admired, and favourite with
 everybody.
 
“i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety
 returns upon as i conclude. write, dearest victor,—one line—one
 word will be blessing to us. ten thousand thanks to henry for his
 kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely
 grateful. adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, i entreat
 you, write!
 
“elizabeth lavenza.
 

“geneva, march 18th, 17—.”
 


“dear, dear elizabeth!” i exclaimed, when i had read her
 letter: “i will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety
 they must feel.” i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but
 my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. in another
 fortnight i was able to leave my chamber.
 
one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the
 several professors of the university. in doing this, i underwent a
 kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had
 sustained. ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the
 beginning of my misfortunes, i had conceived violent antipathy even
 to the name of natural philosophy. when i was otherwise quite restored
 to health, the sight of chemical instrument would renew all the agony
 of my nervous symptoms. henry saw this, and had removed all my
 apparatus from my view. had also changed my apartment; for he
 perceived that i had acquired dislike for the room which had
 previously been my laboratory. but these cares of clerval were made of
 avail when i visited the professors. m. waldman inflicted torture
 when praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress i
 had made in the sciences. soon perceived that i disliked the
 subject; but not guessing the real cause, attributed my feelings to
 modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science
 itself, with desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing out. what
 could i do? meant to please, and tormented me. i felt as if he
 had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which
 were to be afterwards used in putting to slow and cruel death. i
 writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
 clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
 sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
 total ignorance; and the conversation took more general turn. i
 thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak. i saw plainly
 that was surprised, but never attempted to draw my secret from
 me; and although i loved him with mixture of affection and reverence
 that knew bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in
 him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
 i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
 
m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
 almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave even
 more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman. “d—n
 the fellow!” cried he; “why, m. clerval, i assure you has
 outstript us all. ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. a
 youngster who, but few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as firmly
 as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if
 is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—ay,
 ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering,
 “m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in young man.
 young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval: i was
 myself when young; but that wears out in very short time.”
 
m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
 the conversation from subject that was so annoying to me.
 
clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his
 literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me. he
 came to the university with the design of making himself complete
 master of the oriental languages, and thus should open field for
 the plan of life had marked out for himself. resolved to pursue no
 inglorious career, turned his eyes toward the east, as affording
 scope for his spirit of enterprise. the persian, arabic, and sanskrit
 languages engaged his attention, and i was easily induced to enter on
 the same studies. idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that i
 wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, i felt
 great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not
 only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. i
 did not, like him, attempt critical knowledge of their dialects, for
 i did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary
 amusement. i read merely to understand their meaning, and they well
 repaid my labours. their melancholy is soothing, and their joy
 elevating, to degree i never experienced in studying the authors of
 any other country. when you read their writings, life appears to
 consist in warm sun and garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns
 of fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. how
 different from the manly and heroical poetry of greece and rome!
 
summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was
 fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
 accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
 and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. i felt this
 delay very bitterly; for i longed to see my native town and my beloved
 friends. my return had only been delayed so long, from an
 unwillingness to leave clerval in strange place, before had become
 acquainted with any of its inhabitants. the winter, however, was spent
 cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came
 its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.
 
the month of may had already commenced, and i expected the letter daily
 which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry proposed a
 pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt, that i might bid a
 personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited. i acceded
 with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval
 had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature
 that i had taken among the scenes of my native country.
 
we passed fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits
 had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
 salubrious air i breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
 the conversation of my friend. study had before secluded from the
 intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered unsocial; but
 clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; again taught
 to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
 excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to
 elevate my mind until it was on level with your own. selfish
 pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and
 affection warmed and opened my senses; i became the same happy creature
 who, few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had sorrow or care.
 when happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on the most
 delightful sensations. serene sky and verdant fields filled with
 ecstasy. the present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring
 bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. i
 was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed
 upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an
 invincible burden.
 
henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he
 exerted himself to amuse me, while expressed the sensations that filled
 his soul. the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
 astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in
 imitation of the persian and arabic writers, invented tales of wonderful
 fancy and passion. at other times repeated my favourite poems, or drew
 out into arguments, which supported with great ingenuity.
 
we returned to our college on sunday afternoon: the peasants were
 dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. my own spirits were
 high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
 



chapter 7
 

on my return, i found the following letter from my father:—
 
“my dear victor,
 
“you have probably waited impatiently for letter to fix the date of
 your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only few
 lines, merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you. but
 that would be cruel kindness, and i dare not do it. what would be
 your surprise, my son, when you expected happy and glad welcome, to
 behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness? and how, victor, can
 i relate our misfortune? absence cannot have rendered you callous to
 our joys and griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on my long absent
 son? i wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is
 impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words
 which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.
 
“william is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
 my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! victor, is murdered!
 
“i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
 circumstances of the transaction.
 
“last thursday (may 7th), i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
 walk in plainpalais. the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
 our walk farther than usual. it was already dusk before we thought of
 returning; and then we discovered that william and ernest, who had gone
 on before, were not to be found. we accordingly rested on seat until
 they should return. presently ernest came, and enquired if we had seen
 his brother; said, that had been playing with him, that william
 had run away to hide himself, and that vainly sought for him, and
 afterwards waited for long time, but that did not return.
 
“this account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
 until night fell, when elizabeth conjectured that might have
 returned to the house. was not there. we returned again, with
 torches; for i could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had
 lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night;
 elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. about five in the morning i
 discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before i had seen blooming and
 active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the
 print of the murder’s finger was on his neck.
 
“he was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
 countenance betrayed the secret to elizabeth. she was very earnest to
 see the corpse. at first i attempted to prevent her but she persisted,
 and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
 victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘o god! i have murdered my
 darling child!’
 
“she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. when she again
 lived, it was only to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same
 evening william had teased her to let him wear very valuable
 miniature that she possessed of your mother. this picture is gone, and
 was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. we
 have trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him
 are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved william!
 
“come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth. she weeps
 continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death;
 her words pierce my heart. we are all unhappy; but will not that be an
 additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
 your dear mother! alas, victor! i now say, thank god she did not live
 to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
 
“come, victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
 but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
 festering, the wounds of our minds. enter the house of mourning, my
 friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
 with hatred for your enemies.
 
“your affectionate and afflicted father,
 
“alphonse frankenstein.
 


“geneva, may 12th, 17—.”
 


clerval, who had watched my countenance as i read this letter, was
 surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy i at first
 expressed on receiving new from my friends. i threw the letter on the
 table, and covered my face with my hands.
 
“my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed henry, when perceived me
 weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? my dear friend,
 what has happened?”
 
i motioned him to take up the letter, while i walked up and down the
 room in the extremest agitation. tears also gushed from the eyes of
 clerval, as read the account of my misfortune.
 
“i can offer you consolation, my friend,” said he;
 “your disaster is irreparable. what do you intend to do?”
 
“to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.”
 
during our walk, clerval endeavoured to say few words of consolation;
 could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “poor william!” said he,
 “dear lovely child, now sleeps with his angel mother! who that had
 seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
 untimely loss! to die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! how
 much more murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! poor little
 fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
 is at rest. the pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
 sod covers his gentle form, and knows pain. can longer
 be subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable
 survivors.”
 
clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
 impressed themselves on my mind and i remembered them afterwards in
 solitude. but now, as soon as the horses arrived, i hurried into a
 cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.
 
my journey was very melancholy. at first i wished to hurry on, for i longed
 to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when i
 drew near my native town, i slackened my progress. i could hardly sustain
 the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. i passed through
 scenes familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for nearly six years.
 how altered every thing might be during that time! one sudden and
 desolating change had taken place; but thousand little circumstances
 might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were
 done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. fear overcame me; i
 dared advance, dreading thousand nameless evils that made tremble,
 although i was unable to define them.
 
i remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind. i
 contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the
 snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. by
 degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and i continued my journey
 towards geneva.
 
the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as i
 approached my native town. i discovered more distinctly the black
 sides of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc. i wept like a
 child. “dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
 wanderer? your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
 placid. is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?”
 
i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
 these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
 happiness, and i think of them with pleasure. my country, my beloved
 country! who but native can tell the delight i took in again
 beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely
 lake!
 
yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. night also
 closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt still
 more gloomily. the picture appeared vast and dim scene of evil, and i
 foresaw obscurely that i was destined to become the most wretched of human
 beings. alas! i prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
 circumstance, that in all the misery i imagined and dreaded, i did not
 conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure.
 
it was completely dark when i arrived in the environs of geneva; the gates
 of the town were already shut; and i was obliged to pass the night at
 secheron, village at the distance of half league from the city. the sky
 was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolved to visit the spot
 where my poor william had been murdered. as i could not pass through the
 town, i was obliged to cross the lake in boat to arrive at plainpalais.
 during this short voyage i saw the lightning playing on the summit of mont
 blanc in the most beautiful figures. the storm appeared to approach
 rapidly, and, on landing, i ascended low hill, that i might observe its
 progress. it advanced; the heavens were clouded, and i soon felt the rain
 coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.
 
i quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
 increased every minute, and the thunder burst with terrific crash
 over my head. it was echoed from salêve, the juras, and the alps of
 savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
 lake, making it appear like vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
 every thing seemed of pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
 from the preceding flash. the storm, as is often the case in
 switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. the
 most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the
 lake which lies between the promontory of belrive and the village of
 copêt. another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another
 darkened and sometimes disclosed the môle, peaked mountain to the
 east of the lake.
 
while i watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, i wandered on with
 hasty step. this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasped my
 hands, and exclaimed aloud, “william, dear angel! this is thy
 funeral, this thy dirge!” as i said these words, i perceived in the
 gloom figure which stole from behind clump of trees near me; i stood
 fixed, gazing intently: i could not be mistaken. flash of lightning
 illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
 gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs
 to humanity, instantly informed that it was the wretch, the filthy
 dæmon, to whom i had given life. what did there? could be (i
 shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? sooner did that
 idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my teeth
 chattered, and i was forced to lean against tree for support. the figure
 passed quickly, and i lost it in the gloom. nothing in human shape could
 have destroyed the fair child. _he_ was the murderer! i could not
 doubt it. the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the
 fact. i thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
 another flash discovered him to hanging among the rocks of the nearly
 perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, hill that bounds plainpalais on the
 south. soon reached the summit, and disappeared.
 
i remained motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still
 continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. i
 revolved in my mind the events which i had until now sought to forget:
 the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of
 the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. two years had
 now nearly elapsed since the night on which first received life; and
 was this his first crime? alas! i had turned loose into the world a
 depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had not
 murdered my brother?
 
one can conceive the anguish i suffered during the remainder of the
 night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but i did not
 feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
 scenes of evil and despair. i considered the being whom i had cast
 among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes
 of horror, such as the deed which had now done, nearly in the light
 of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
 to destroy all that was dear to me.
 
day dawned; and i directed my steps towards the town. the gates were
 open, and i hastened to my father’s house. my first thought was to
 discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
 made. but i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell. a
 being whom i myself had formed, and endued with life, had met at
 midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. i
 remembered also the nervous fever with which i had been seized just at
 the time that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of
 delirium to tale otherwise so utterly improbable. i well knew that
 if any other had communicated such relation to me, i should have
 looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. besides, the strange nature
 of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credited
 as to persuade my relatives to commence it. and then of what use would
 be pursuit? who could arrest creature capable of scaling the
 overhanging sides of mont salêve? these reflections determined me, and
 i resolved to remain silent.
 
it was about five in the morning when i entered my father’s house. i
 told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
 to attend their usual hour of rising.
 
six years had elapsed, passed in dream but for one indelible trace, and i
 stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father before my
 departure for ingolstadt. beloved and venerable parent! still remained
 to me. i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the
 mantel-piece. it was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
 desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
 by the coffin of her dead father. her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale;
 but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the
 sentiment of pity. below this picture was miniature of william; and my
 tears flowed when i looked upon it. while i was thus engaged, ernest
 entered: had heard arrive, and hastened to welcome me:
 “welcome, my dearest victor,” said he. “ah! i wish you
 had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and
 delighted. you come to us now to share misery which nothing can
 alleviate; yet your presence will, i hope, revive our father, who seems
 sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor
 elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—poor
 william! was our darling and our pride!”
 
tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; sense of mortal
 agony crept over my frame. before, i had only imagined the
 wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on as new, and
 not less terrible, disaster. i tried to calm ernest; i enquired more
 minutely concerning my father, and here i named my cousin.
 
“she most of all,” said ernest, “requires consolation; she accused
 herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her
 very wretched. but since the murderer has been discovered—”
 
“the murderer discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt
 to pursue him? it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
 winds, or confine mountain-stream with straw. i saw him too; he
 was free last night!”
 
“i do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of
 wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. no
 one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be
 convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. indeed, who would credit
 that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
 could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling crime?”
 
“justine moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is
 wrongfully; every one knows that; one believes it, surely, ernest?”
 
“no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
 almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
 confused, as to add to the evidence of facts weight that, i fear,
 leaves hope for doubt. but she will be tried today, and you will
 then hear all.”
 
then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william
 had been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
 bed for several days. during this interval, one of the servants,
 happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
 murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
 had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. the servant
 instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying word to
 any of the family, went to magistrate; and, upon their deposition,
 justine was apprehended. on being charged with the fact, the poor girl
 confirmed the suspicion in great measure by her extreme confusion of
 manner.
 
this was strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i replied
 earnestly, “you are all mistaken; i know the murderer. justine, poor,
 good justine, is innocent.”
 
at that instant my father entered. i saw unhappiness deeply impressed
 on his countenance, but endeavoured to welcome cheerfully; and,
 after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced
 some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed,
 “good god, papa! victor says that knows who was the murderer of
 poor william.”
 
“we do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed i had
 rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
 depravity and ungratitude in one i valued so highly.”
 
“my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.”
 
“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be
 tried today, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.”
 
this speech calmed me. i was firmly convinced in my own mind that
 justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. i
 had fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
 brought forward strong enough to convict her. my tale was not one to
 announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
 madness by the vulgar. did any one indeed exist, except i, the
 creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
 existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
 which i had let loose upon the world?
 
we were soon joined by elizabeth. time had altered her since i last
 beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of
 her childish years. there was the same candour, the same vivacity, but
 it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
 she welcomed with the greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear
 cousin,” said she, “fills with hope. you perhaps will find some
 means to justify my poor guiltless justine. alas! who is safe, if she
 be convicted of crime? i rely on her innocence as certainly as i do
 upon my own. our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
 lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom i sincerely
 love, is to be torn away by even worse fate. if she is condemned, i
 never shall know joy more. but she will not, i am sure she will not;
 and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
 william.”
 
“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said i, “and that shall
 be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance
 of her acquittal.”
 
“how kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt,
 and that made wretched, for i knew that it was impossible: and to
 see every one else prejudiced in so deadly manner rendered me
 hopeless and despairing.” she wept.
 
“dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. if she
 is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
 activity with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of
 partiality.”
 



chapter 8
 

we passed few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to
 commence. my father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
 as witnesses, i accompanied them to the court. during the whole of
 this wretched mockery of justice i suffered living torture. it was to
 be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
 cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one smiling babe full of
 innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
 aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
 justine also was girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
 to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an
 ignominious grave, and i the cause! thousand times rather would i
 have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to justine, but i
 was absent when it was committed, and such declaration would have
 been considered as the ravings of madman and would not have
 exculpated her who suffered through me.
 
the appearance of justine was calm. she was dressed in mourning, and
 her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
 feelings, exquisitely beautiful. yet she appeared confident in
 innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
 thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
 excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
 imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. she
 was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
 her confusion had before been adduced as proof of her guilt, she
 worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. when she entered the
 court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were
 seated. tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
 recovered herself, and look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest
 her utter guiltlessness.
 
the trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the
 charge, several witnesses were called. several strange facts combined
 against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof
 of her innocence as i had. she had been out the whole of the night on
 which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been
 perceived by market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
 murdered child had been afterwards found. the woman asked her what she
 did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned confused
 and unintelligible answer. she returned to the house about eight
 o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
 replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly
 if anything had been heard concerning him. when shown the body, she
 fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. the
 picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
 and when elizabeth, in faltering voice, proved that it was the same
 which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round
 his neck, murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.
 
justine was called on for her defence. as the trial had proceeded, her
 countenance had altered. surprise, horror, and misery were strongly
 expressed. sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was
 desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible
 although variable voice.
 
“god knows,” she said, “how entirely i am innocent. but i
 do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; i rest my innocence
 on plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
 against me, and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my
 judges to favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
 doubtful or suspicious.”
 
she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had passed
 the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the
 house of an aunt at chêne, village situated at about league from
 geneva. on her return, at about nine o’clock, she met man who asked
 her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. she was
 alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him,
 when the gates of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain
 several hours of the night in barn belonging to cottage, being
 unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. most
 of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that
 she slept for few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
 it was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour
 to find my brother. if she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
 it was without her knowledge. that she had been bewildered when
 questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed
 sleepless night and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain.
 concerning the picture she could give account.
 
“i know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and
 fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but i have power of
 explaining it; and when i have expressed my utter ignorance, i am only left
 to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
 placed in my pocket. but here also i am checked. i believe that i have no
 enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me
 wantonly. did the murderer place it there? i know of opportunity
 afforded him for so doing; or, if i had, why should have stolen the
 jewel, to part with it again so soon?
 
“i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see room for
 hope. i beg permission to have few witnesses examined concerning my
 character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed
 guilt, i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my
 innocence.”
 
several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and
 they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
 supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come
 forward. elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
 dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
 when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
 the court.
 
“i am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who
 was murdered, or rather his sister, for i was educated by and have lived
 with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. it may
 therefore be judged indecent in to come forward on this occasion, but
 when i see fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her
 pretended friends, i wish to be allowed to speak, that i may say what i
 know of her character. i am well acquainted with the accused. i have lived
 in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly
 two years. during all that period she appeared to the most amiable and
 benevolent of human creatures. she nursed madame frankenstein, my aunt, in
 her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards
 attended her own mother during tedious illness, in manner that excited
 the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my
 uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. she was
 warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a
 most affectionate mother. for my own part, i do not hesitate to say that,
 notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, i believe and rely
 on her perfect innocence. she had temptation for such an action; as to
 the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it,
 i should have willingly given it to her, so much do i esteem and value
 her.”
 
murmur of approbation followed elizabeth’s simple and powerful
 appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
 favour of poor justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
 renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. she
 herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. my own
 agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. i believed
 in her innocence; i knew it. could the dæmon who had (i did not for a
 minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
 betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? i could not sustain the
 horror of my situation, and when i perceived that the popular voice and
 the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
 i rushed out of the court in agony. the tortures of the accused did
 not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
 remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.
 
i passed night of unmingled wretchedness. in the morning i went to
 the court; my lips and throat were parched. i dared not ask the fatal
 question, but i was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
 visit. the ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and justine
 was condemned.
 
i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt. i had before
 experienced sensations of horror, and i have endeavoured to bestow upon
 them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
 heart-sickening despair that i then endured. the person to whom i
 addressed myself added that justine had already confessed her guilt.
 “that evidence,” observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a
 case, but i am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
 condemn criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
 decisive.”
 
this was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? had
 my eyes deceived me? and was i really as mad as the whole world would
 believe to be if i disclosed the object of my suspicions? i
 hastened to return home, and elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
 
“my cousin,” replied i, “it is decided as you may have expected; all
 judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
 should escape. but she has confessed.”
 
this was dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon
 justine’s innocence. “alas!” said she. “how shall i
 ever again believe in human goodness? justine, whom i loved and esteemed as
 my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
 her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has
 committed murder.”
 
soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed desire to see my
 cousin. my father wished her not to go but said that left it to her own
 judgment and feelings to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth,
 “i will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany
 me; i cannot go alone.” the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet
 i could not refuse.
 
we entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld justine sitting on some
 straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on
 her knees. she rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with
 her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly. my
 cousin wept also.
 
“oh, justine!” said she. “why did you rob of my last consolation?
 i relied on your innocence, and although i was then very wretched, i
 was not so miserable as i am now.”
 
“and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked? do you also
 join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn as murderer?” her
 voice was suffocated with sobs.
 
“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth; “why do you kneel,
 if you are innocent? i am not one of your enemies, i believed you
 guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had
 yourself declared your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be
 assured, dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a
 moment, but your own confession.”
 
“i did confess, but i confessed lie. i confessed, that i might
 obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
 all my other sins. the god of heaven forgive me! ever since i was
 condemned, my confessor has besieged me; threatened and menaced,
 until i almost began to think that i was the monster that said i
 was. threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
 i continued obdurate. dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked
 on as wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. what could i do?
 in an evil hour i subscribed to lie; and now only am i truly
 miserable.”
 
she paused, weeping, and then continued, “i thought with horror, my
 sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed
 aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was creature capable
 of crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
 dear william! dearest blessed child! i soon shall see you again in
 heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as i
 am to suffer ignominy and death.”
 
“oh, justine! forgive for having for one moment distrusted you.
 why did you confess? but do not mourn, dear girl. do not fear. i
 will proclaim, i will prove your innocence. i will melt the stony
 hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. you shall not die!
 you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
 no! no! i never could survive so horrible misfortune.”
 
justine shook her head mournfully. “i do not fear to die,” she said;
 “that pang is past. god raises my weakness and gives courage to
 endure the worst. i leave sad and bitter world; and if you remember
 and think of as of one unjustly condemned, i am resigned to the
 fate awaiting me. learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
 the will of heaven!”
 
during this conversation i had retired to corner of the prison room,
 where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. despair!
 who dared talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
 the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as i did, such
 deep and bitter agony. i gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
 uttering groan that came from my inmost soul. justine started. when
 she saw who it was, she approached and said, “dear sir, you are very
 kind to visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty?”
 
i could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more
 convinced of your innocence than i was, for even when heard that you
 had confessed, did not credit it.”
 
“i truly thank him. in these last moments i feel the sincerest
 gratitude towards those who think of with kindness. how sweet is
 the affection of others to such wretch as i am! it removes more than
 half my misfortune, and i feel as if i could die in peace now that my
 innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”
 
thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. she indeed
 gained the resignation she desired. but i, the true murderer, felt the
 never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of hope or
 consolation. elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
 the misery of innocence, which, like cloud that passes over the fair
 moon, for while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. anguish and
 despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; i bore hell within
 which nothing could extinguish. we stayed several hours with
 justine, and it was with great difficulty that elizabeth could tear
 herself away. “i wish,” cried she, “that i were to die with you; i
 cannot live in this world of misery.”
 
justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
 repressed her bitter tears. she embraced elizabeth and said in voice
 of half-suppressed emotion, “farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth,
 my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
 preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
 suffer! live, and be happy, and make others so.”
 
and on the morrow justine died. elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence
 failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
 criminality of the saintly sufferer. my passionate and indignant
 appeals were lost upon them. and when i received their cold answers
 and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
 avowal died away on my lips. thus i might proclaim myself madman,
 but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. she
 perished on the scaffold as murderess!
 
from the tortures of my own heart, i turned to contemplate the deep and
 voiceless grief of my elizabeth. this also was my doing! and my
 father’s woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
 the work of my thrice-accursed hands! ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
 are not your last tears! again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
 the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
 frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
 who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
 thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
 countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
 in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
 his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
 pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!
 
thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
 i beheld those i loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of william and
 justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.
 



chapter 9
 

nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
 been worked up by quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
 inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
 and fear. justine died, she rested, and i was alive. the blood flowed
 freely in my veins, but weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
 heart which nothing could remove. sleep fled from my eyes; i wandered
 like an evil spirit, for i had committed deeds of mischief beyond
 description horrible, and more, much more (i persuaded myself) was yet
 behind. yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
 i had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
 when i should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
 beings. now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
 which allowed to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
 from thence to gather promise of new hopes, i was seized by remorse and
 the sense of guilt, which hurried away to hell of intense tortures
 such as language can describe.
 
this state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
 entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. i shunned
 the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
 solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude.
 
my father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition
 and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
 serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire with fortitude and
 awaken in the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
 “do you think, victor,” said he, “that i do not suffer
 also? one could love child more than i loved your
 brother”—tears came into his eyes as spoke—“but
 is it not duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting
 their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? it is also duty
 owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment,
 or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which man is fit for
 society.”
 
this advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; i
 should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
 remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
 other sensations. now i could only answer my father with look of
 despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.
 
about this time we retired to our house at belrive. this change was
 particularly agreeable to me. the shutting of the gates regularly at
 ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
 hour had rendered our residence within the walls of geneva very irksome
 to me. i was now free. often, after the rest of the family had
 retired for the night, i took the boat and passed many hours upon the
 water. sometimes, with my sails set, i was carried by the wind; and
 sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, i left the boat to
 pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. i
 was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and i the only
 unquiet thing that wandered restless in scene so beautiful and
 heavenly—if i except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
 interrupted croaking was heard only when i approached the shore—often,
 i say, i was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
 might close over and my calamities for ever. but i was restrained,
 when i thought of the heroic and suffering elizabeth, whom i tenderly
 loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. i thought also of my
 father and surviving brother; should i by my base desertion leave them
 exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose
 among them?
 
at these moments i wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
 mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness. but that
 could not be. remorse extinguished every hope. i had been the author of
 unalterable evils, and i lived in daily fear lest the monster whom i had
 created should perpetrate some new wickedness. i had an obscure feeling
 that all was not over and that would still commit some signal crime,
 which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
 there was always scope for fear so long as anything i loved remained
 behind. my abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. when i thought of
 him i gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and i ardently wished to
 extinguish that life which i had so thoughtlessly bestowed. when i
 reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds
 of moderation. i would have made pilgrimage to the highest peak of the
 andes, could i, when there, have precipitated him to their base. i wished
 to see him again, that i might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
 head and avenge the deaths of william and justine.
 
our house was the house of mourning. my father’s health was deeply
 shaken by the horror of the recent events. elizabeth was sad and
 desponding; she longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
 pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
 then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
 and destroyed. she was longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
 wandered with on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our
 future prospects. the first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from
 the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
 smiles.
 
“when i reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of
 justine moritz, i longer see the world and its works as they before
 appeared to me. before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and
 injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
 days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
 reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
 appear to as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. yet i am
 certainly unjust. everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
 if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
 she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. for the sake
 of few jewels, to have murdered the of her benefactor and friend,
 child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
 it had been her own! i could not consent to the death of any human
 being, but certainly i should have thought such creature unfit to
 remain in the society of men. but she was innocent. i know, i feel
 she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
 alas! victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
 assure themselves of certain happiness? i feel as if i were walking on
 the edge of precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
 endeavouring to plunge into the abyss. william and justine were
 assassinated, and the murderer escapes; walks about the world free,
 and perhaps respected. but even if i were condemned to suffer on the
 scaffold for the same crimes, i would not change places with such a
 wretch.”
 
i listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. i, not in deed,
 but in effect, was the true murderer. elizabeth read my anguish in my
 countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “my dearest friend, you
 must calm yourself. these events have affected me, god knows how
 deeply; but i am not so wretched as you are. there is an expression of
 despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
 tremble. dear victor, banish these dark passions. remember the
 friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. have we lost
 the power of rendering you happy? ah! while we love, while we are
 true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
 country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our
 peace?”
 
and could not such words from her whom i fondly prized before every
 other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
 heart? even as she spoke i drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
 that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob of her.
 
thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
 heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
 ineffectual. i was encompassed by cloud which beneficial
 influence could penetrate. the wounded deer dragging its fainting
 limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
 pierced it, and to die, was but type of me.
 
sometimes i could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
 sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove to seek, by bodily
 exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
 sensations. it was during an access of this kind that i suddenly left
 my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys, sought
 in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
 my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. my wanderings were directed
 towards the valley of chamounix. i had visited it frequently during my
 boyhood. six years had passed since then: _i_ was wreck, but nought
 had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
 
i performed the first part of my journey on horseback. i afterwards
 hired mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
 injury on these rugged roads. the weather was fine; it was about the
 middle of the month of august, nearly two months after the death of
 justine, that miserable epoch from which i dated all my woe. the
 weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as i plunged yet deeper in
 the ravine of arve. the immense mountains and precipices that overhung
 on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
 the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of power mighty as
 omnipotence—and i ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
 almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
 displayed in their most terrific guise. still, as i ascended higher,
 the valley assumed more magnificent and astonishing character.
 ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
 impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
 among the trees formed scene of singular beauty. but it was
 augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty alps, whose white and
 shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
 earth, the habitations of another race of beings.
 
i passed the bridge of pélissier, where the ravine, which the river
 forms, opened before me, and i began to ascend the mountain that
 overhangs it. soon after, i entered the valley of chamounix. this
 valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
 picturesque as that of servox, through which i had just passed. the
 high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but i saw no
 more ruined castles and fertile fields. immense glaciers approached
 the road; i heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
 marked the smoke of its passage. mont blanc, the supreme and
 magnificent mont blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_,
 and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.
 
tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across during this
 journey. some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
 recognised, reminded of days gone by, and were associated with the
 lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. the very winds whispered in soothing
 accents, and maternal nature bade weep more. then again the
 kindly influence ceased to act—i found myself fettered again to grief
 and indulging in all the misery of reflection. then i spurred on my
 animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
 myself—or, in more desperate fashion, i alighted and threw myself on
 the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
 
at length i arrived at the village of chamounix. exhaustion succeeded
 to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which i had endured.
 for short space of time i remained at the window watching the pallid
 lightnings that played above mont blanc and listening to the rushing of
 the arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. the same lulling sounds
 acted as lullaby to my too keen sensations; when i placed my head
 upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; i felt it as it came and blessed
 the giver of oblivion.
 



chapter 10
 

i spent the following day roaming through the valley. i stood beside
 the sources of the arveiron, which take their rise in glacier, that
 with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
 barricade the valley. the abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
 me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; few shattered pines were
 scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
 presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling
 waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
 avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
 accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
 was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but plaything in
 their hands. these sublime and magnificent scenes afforded the
 greatest consolation that i was capable of receiving. they elevated me
 from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
 grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. in some degree, also, they
 diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
 last month. i retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
 waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which i
 had contemplated during the day. they congregated round me; the
 unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
 and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all
 gathered round and bade be at peace.
 
where had they fled when the next morning i awoke? all of
 soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
 thought. the rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
 summits of the mountains, so that i even saw not the faces of those
 mighty friends. still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
 in their cloudy retreats. what were rain and storm to me? my mule was
 brought to the door, and i resolved to ascend to the summit of
 montanvert. i remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
 and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when i first saw it.
 it had then filled with sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
 soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
 the sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
 effect of solemnising my mind and causing to forget the passing
 cares of life. i determined to go without guide, for i was well
 acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
 solitary grandeur of the scene.
 
the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
 windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
 mountain. it is scene terrifically desolate. in thousand spots
 the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
 broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
 leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
 other trees. the path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
 of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
 particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
 in loud voice, produces concussion of air sufficient to draw
 destruction upon the head of the speaker. the pines are not tall or
 luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
 i looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
 which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
 mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
 poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression i
 received from the objects around me. alas! why does man boast of
 sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
 them more necessary beings. if our impulses were confined to hunger,
 thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
 every wind that blows and chance word or scene that that word may
 convey to us.
 
we rest; dream has power to poison sleep.
 we rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
 we feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
 embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
 it is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
 the path of its departure still is free.
 man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
 nought may endure but mutability!
 

it was nearly noon when i arrived at the top of the ascent. for some
 time i sat upon the rock that overlooks the of ice. mist covered
 both that and the surrounding mountains. presently breeze dissipated
 the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier. the surface is very
 uneven, rising like the waves of troubled sea, descending low, and
 interspersed by rifts that sink deep. the field of ice is almost a
 league in width, but i spent nearly two hours in crossing it. the
 opposite mountain is bare perpendicular rock. from the side where i
 now stood montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of league;
 and above it rose mont blanc, in awful majesty. i remained in recess
 of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. the sea,
 or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
 whose aerial summits hung over its recesses. their icy and glittering
 peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. my heart, which was
 before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; i exclaimed,
 “wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
 beds, allow this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
 away from the joys of life.”
 
as i said this i suddenly beheld the figure of man, at some distance,
 advancing towards with superhuman speed. bounded over the
 crevices in the ice, among which i had walked with caution; his
 stature, also, as approached, seemed to exceed that of man. i was
 troubled; mist came over my eyes, and i felt faintness seize me,
 but i was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. i
 perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
 that it was the wretch whom i had created. i trembled with rage and
 horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
 mortal combat. approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
 combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
 rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. but i scarcely
 observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived of utterance,
 and i recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
 detestation and contempt.
 
“devil,” i exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do
 not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
 begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust! and,
 oh! that i could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore
 those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”
 
“i expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “all men hate the
 wretched; how, then, must i be hated, who am miserable beyond all
 living things! yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
 to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
 one of us. you purpose to kill me. how dare you sport thus with life?
 do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of
 mankind. if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and
 you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it
 be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”
 
“abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too
 mild vengeance for thy crimes. wretched devil! you reproach with
 your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i
 so negligently bestowed.”
 
my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impelled by all the
 feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
 
easily eluded and said,
 
“be calm! i entreat you to hear before you give vent to your hatred
 on my devoted head. have i not suffered enough, that you seek to
 increase my misery? life, although it may only be an accumulation of
 anguish, is dear to me, and i will defend it. remember, thou hast made
 more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
 joints more supple. but i will not be tempted to set myself in
 opposition to thee. i am thy creature, and i will be even mild and
 docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
 the which thou owest me. oh, frankenstein, be not equitable to every
 other and trample upon alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
 clemency and affection, is most due. remember that i am thy creature;
 i ought to be thy adam, but i am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
 drivest from joy for misdeed. everywhere i see bliss, from which i
 alone am irrevocably excluded. i was benevolent and good; misery made
 fiend. make happy, and i shall again be virtuous.”
 
“begone! i will not hear you. there can be community between you
 and me; we are enemies. begone, or let us try our strength in fight,
 in which one must fall.”
 
“how can i move thee? will entreaties cause thee to turn a
 favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
 compassion? believe me, frankenstein, i was benevolent; my soul glowed
 with love and humanity; but am i not alone, miserably alone? you, my
 creator, abhor me; what hope can i gather from your fellow creatures,
 who owe nothing? they spurn and hate me. the desert mountains and
 dreary glaciers are my refuge. i have wandered here many days; the
 caves of ice, which i only do not fear, are dwelling to me, and the
 only one which man does not grudge. these bleak skies i hail, for they
 are kinder to than your fellow beings. if the multitude of mankind
 knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
 my destruction. shall i not then hate them who abhor me? i will keep
 terms with my enemies. i am miserable, and they shall share my
 wretchedness. yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
 them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
 not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
 swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. let your compassion be
 moved, and do not disdain me. listen to my tale; when you have heard
 that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that i deserve.
 but hear me. the guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
 are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. listen
 to me, frankenstein. you accuse of murder, and yet you would, with
 satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. oh, praise the
 eternal justice of man! yet i ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
 and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”
 
“why do you call to my remembrance,” i rejoined, “circumstances of
 which i shudder to reflect, that i have been the miserable origin and
 author? cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
 light! cursed (although i curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
 you have made wretched beyond expression. you have left power
 to consider whether i am just to you or not. begone! relieve from
 the sight of your detested form.”
 
“thus i relieve thee, my creator,” said, and placed his hated hands
 before my eyes, which i flung from with violence; “thus i take from
 thee sight which you abhor. still thou canst listen to and grant
 thy compassion. by the virtues that i once possessed, i demand this
 from you. hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
 this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
 the mountain. the sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
 to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
 world, you will have heard my story and can decide. on you it rests,
 whether i quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead harmless
 life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
 your own speedy ruin.”
 
as said this led the way across the ice; i followed. my heart
 was full, and i did not answer him, but as i proceeded, i weighed the
 various arguments that had used and determined at least to listen to
 his tale. i was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
 resolution. i had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
 brother, and i eagerly sought confirmation or denial of this opinion.
 for the first time, also, i felt what the duties of creator towards
 his creature were, and that i ought to render him happy before i
 complained of his wickedness. these motives urged to comply with
 his demand. we crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
 rock. the air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
 entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, i with heavy
 heart and depressed spirits. but i consented to listen, and seating
 myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, thus began
 his tale.
 



chapter 11
 

“it is with considerable difficulty that i remember the original of
 my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
 strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and i saw, felt, heard,
 and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, long time before i
 learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. by
 degrees, i remember, stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that i
 was obliged to shut my eyes. darkness then came over and troubled
 me, but hardly had i felt this when, by opening my eyes, as i now
 suppose, the light poured in upon again. i walked and, i believe,
 descended, but i presently found great alteration in my sensations.
 before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my
 touch or sight; but i now found that i could wander on at liberty, with
 obstacles which i could not either surmount or avoid. the light
 became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying as i
 walked, i sought place where i could receive shade. this was the
 forest near ingolstadt; and here i lay by the side of brook resting
 from my fatigue, until i felt tormented by hunger and thirst. this
 roused from my nearly dormant state, and i ate some berries which i
 found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. i slaked my thirst
 at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
 
“it was dark when i awoke; i felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
 were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. before i had quitted
 your apartment, on sensation of cold, i had covered myself with some
 clothes, but these were insufficient to secure from the dews of
 night. i was poor, helpless, miserable wretch; i knew, and could
 distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade on all sides, i sat
 down and wept.
 
“soon gentle light stole over the heavens and gave sensation of
 pleasure. i started up and beheld radiant form rise from among the
 trees. [the moon] i gazed with kind of wonder. it moved slowly,
 but it enlightened my path, and i again went out in search of berries.
 i was still cold when under one of the trees i found huge cloak, with
 which i covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. distinct
 ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. i felt light, and hunger,
 and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on
 all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that i could
 distinguish was the bright moon, and i fixed my eyes on that with
 pleasure.
 
“several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
 greatly lessened, when i began to distinguish my sensations from each
 other. i gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied with
 drink and the trees that shaded with their foliage. i was delighted
 when i first discovered that pleasant sound, which often saluted my
 ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
 often intercepted the light from my eyes. i began also to observe,
 with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded and to perceive the
 boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. sometimes i
 tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
 sometimes i wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
 uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from frightened into
 silence again.
 
“the moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with lessened
 form, showed itself, while i still remained in the forest. my
 sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every
 day additional ideas. my eyes became accustomed to the light and to
 perceive objects in their right forms; i distinguished the insect from
 the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. i found that the
 sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
 thrush were sweet and enticing.
 
“one day, when i was oppressed by cold, i found fire which had been
 left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
 warmth i experienced from it. in my joy i thrust my hand into the live
 embers, but quickly drew it out again with cry of pain. how strange,
 i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! i
 examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
 composed of wood. i quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
 and would not burn. i was pained at this and sat still watching the
 operation of the fire. the wet wood which i had placed near the heat
 dried and itself became inflamed. i reflected on this, and by touching
 the various branches, i discovered the cause and busied myself in
 collecting great quantity of wood, that i might dry it and have a
 plentiful supply of fire. when night came on and brought sleep with
 it, i was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. i
 covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
 upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, i lay on the ground and sank
 into sleep.
 
“it was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
 i uncovered it, and gentle breeze quickly fanned it into flame. i
 observed this also and contrived fan of branches, which roused the
 embers when they were nearly extinguished. when night came again i
 found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
 the discovery of this element was useful to in my food, for i found
 some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
 tasted much more savoury than the berries i gathered from the trees. i
 tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on
 the live embers. i found that the berries were spoiled by this
 operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
 
“food, however, became scarce, and i often spent the whole day
 searching in vain for few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. when
 i found this, i resolved to quit the place that i had hitherto
 inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants i experienced would be
 more easily satisfied. in this emigration i exceedingly lamented the
 loss of the fire which i had obtained through accident and knew not how
 to reproduce it. i gave several hours to the serious consideration of
 this difficulty, but i was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
 it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, i struck across the wood
 towards the setting sun. i passed three days in these rambles and at
 length discovered the open country. great fall of snow had taken
 place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
 appearance was disconsolate, and i found my feet chilled by the cold
 damp substance that covered the ground.
 
“it was about seven in the morning, and i longed to obtain food and
 shelter; at length i perceived small hut, on rising ground, which
 had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. this
 was new sight to me, and i examined the structure with great
 curiosity. finding the door open, i entered. an old man sat in it,
 near fire, over which was preparing his breakfast. turned on
 hearing noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
 hut, ran across the fields with speed of which his debilitated form
 hardly appeared capable. his appearance, different from any i had ever
 before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. but i was enchanted
 by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
 penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to then as exquisite
 and divine retreat as pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell
 after their sufferings in the lake of fire. i greedily devoured the
 remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese,
 milk, and wine; the latter, however, i did not like. then, overcome by
 fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
 
“it was noon when i awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which
 shone brightly on the white ground, i determined to recommence my
 travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a
 wallet i found, i proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
 at sunset i arrived at village. how miraculous did this appear! the
 huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by
 turns. the vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that i saw
 placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. one
 of the best of these i entered, but i had hardly placed my foot within
 the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
 the whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
 grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, i
 escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in low hovel,
 quite bare, and making wretched appearance after the palaces i had
 beheld in the village. this hovel however, joined cottage of neat
 and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, i
 dared not enter it. my place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
 low that i could with difficulty sit upright in it. wood, however,
 was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
 although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, i found it an
 agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.
 
“here, then, i retreated and lay down happy to have found shelter,
 however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
 from the barbarity of man. as soon as morning dawned i crept from my
 kennel, that i might view the adjacent cottage and discover if i could
 remain in the habitation i had found. it was situated against the back
 of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by pig
 sty and clear pool of water. one part was open, and by that i had
 crept in; but now i covered every crevice by which i might be perceived
 with stones and wood, yet in such manner that i might move them on
 occasion to pass out; all the light i enjoyed came through the sty, and
 that was sufficient for me.
 
“having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, i
 retired, for i saw the figure of man at distance, and i remembered
 too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. i
 had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by loaf
 of coarse bread, which i purloined, and cup with which i could drink
 more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by
 my retreat. the floor was little raised, so that it was kept
 perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was
 tolerably warm.
 
“being thus provided, i resolved to reside in this hovel until
 something should occur which might alter my determination. it was
 indeed paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
 the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. i ate my breakfast with
 pleasure and was about to remove plank to procure myself little
 water when i heard step, and looking through small chink, i beheld
 young creature, with pail on her head, passing before my hovel. the
 girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what i have since found
 cottagers and farmhouse servants to be. yet she was meanly dressed, a
 coarse blue petticoat and linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
 hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. i lost
 sight of her, and in about quarter of an hour she returned bearing
 the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. as she walked along,
 seemingly incommoded by the burden, young man met her, whose
 countenance expressed deeper despondence. uttering few sounds with
 an air of melancholy, took the pail from her head and bore it to the
 cottage himself. she followed, and they disappeared. presently i saw
 the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
 behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the
 house and sometimes in the yard.
 
“on examining my dwelling, i found that one of the windows of the
 cottage had formerly occupied part of it, but the panes had been
 filled up with wood. in one of these was small and almost
 imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
 through this crevice small room was visible, whitewashed and clean
 but very bare of furniture. in one corner, near small fire, sat an
 old man, leaning his head on his hands in disconsolate attitude. the
 young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she
 took something out of drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat
 down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play
 and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
 nightingale. it was lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
 never beheld aught beautiful before. the silver hair and benevolent
 countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle
 manners of the girl enticed my love. played sweet mournful air
 which i perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of
 which the old man took notice, until she sobbed audibly; then
 pronounced few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
 at his feet. raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection
 that i felt sensations of peculiar and overpowering nature; they were
 mixture of pain and pleasure, such as i had never before experienced,
 either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and i withdrew from the
 window, unable to bear these emotions.
 
“soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a
 load of wood. the girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of
 his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on
 the fire; then she and the youth went apart into nook of the cottage,
 and showed her large loaf and piece of cheese. she seemed
 pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
 placed in water, and then upon the fire. she afterwards continued her
 work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
 employed in digging and pulling up roots. after had been employed
 thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
 cottage together.
 
“the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance
 of his companions assumed more cheerful air, and they sat down to
 eat. the meal was quickly dispatched. the young woman was again
 occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the
 cottage in the sun for few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
 nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent
 creatures. one was old, with silver hairs and countenance beaming
 with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his
 figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his
 eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. the
 old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different
 from those had used in the morning, directed his steps across the
 fields.
 
“night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, i found that the
 cottagers had means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was
 delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
 pleasure i experienced in watching my human neighbours. in the evening
 the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
 which i did not understand; and the old man again took up the
 instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted in
 the morning. so soon as had finished, the youth began, not to play,
 but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
 harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; i since
 found that read aloud, but at that time i knew nothing of the
 science of words or letters.
 
“the family, after having been thus occupied for short time,
 extinguished their lights and retired, as i conjectured, to rest.”
 



chapter 12
 

“i lay on my straw, but i could not sleep. i thought of the
 occurrences of the day. what chiefly struck was the gentle manners
 of these people, and i longed to join them, but dared not. i
 remembered too well the treatment i had suffered the night before from
 the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct i
 might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present i would
 remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the
 motives which influenced their actions.
 
“the cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. the young woman
 arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed
 after the first meal.
 
“this day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
 the young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in
 various laborious occupations within. the old man, whom i soon
 perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
 in contemplation. nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
 younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. they
 performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
 gentleness, and rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
 
“they were not entirely happy. the young man and his companion often
 went apart and appeared to weep. i saw cause for their unhappiness,
 but i was deeply affected by it. if such lovely creatures were
 miserable, it was less strange that i, an imperfect and solitary being,
 should be wretched. yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? they
 possessed delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
 luxury; they had fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands
 when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
 they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
 looks of affection and kindness. what did their tears imply? did they
 really express pain? i was at first unable to solve these questions,
 but perpetual attention and time explained to many appearances which
 were at first enigmatic.
 
“a considerable period elapsed before i discovered one of the causes of
 the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they
 suffered that evil in very distressing degree. their nourishment
 consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of
 one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters
 could scarcely procure food to support it. they often, i believe,
 suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two
 younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old
 man when they reserved none for themselves.
 
“this trait of kindness moved sensibly. i had been accustomed,
 during the night, to steal part of their store for my own
 consumption, but when i found that in doing this i inflicted pain on
 the cottagers, i abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and
 roots which i gathered from neighbouring wood.
 
“i discovered also another means through which i was enabled to assist
 their labours. i found that the youth spent great part of each day
 in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night i often
 took his tools, the use of which i quickly discovered, and brought home
 firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.
 
“i remember, the first time that i did this, the young woman, when she
 opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing great
 pile of wood on the outside. she uttered some words in loud voice, and the
 youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. i observed, with pleasure,
 that did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the
 cottage and cultivating the garden.
 
“by degrees i made discovery of still greater moment. i found that
 these people possessed method of communicating their experience and
 feelings to one another by articulate sounds. i perceived that the words
 they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the
 minds and countenances of the hearers. this was indeed godlike science,
 and i ardently desired to become acquainted with it. but i was baffled in
 every attempt i made for this purpose. their pronunciation was quick, and
 the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible
 objects, i was unable to discover any clue by which i could unravel the
 mystery of their reference. by great application, however, and after having
 remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, i
 discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of
 discourse; i learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and
 _wood._ i learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. the youth
 and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only
 one, which was _father._ the girl was called _sister_ or
 _agatha,_ and the youth _felix, brother,_ or _son_. i cannot
 describe the delight i felt when i learned the ideas appropriated to each of
 these sounds and was able to pronounce them. i distinguished several other
 words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good,
 dearest, unhappy._
 
“i spent the winter in this manner. the gentle manners and beauty of
 the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, i
 felt depressed; when they rejoiced, i sympathised in their joys. i saw
 few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the
 cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to the
 superior accomplishments of my friends. the old man, i could perceive,
 often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes i found that
 called them, to cast off their melancholy. would talk in a
 cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
 even upon me. agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
 with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but i
 generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after
 having listened to the exhortations of her father. it was not thus
 with felix. was always the saddest of the group, and even to my
 unpractised senses, appeared to have suffered more deeply than his
 friends. but if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more
 cheerful than that of his sister, especially when addressed the old
 man.
 
“i could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked
 the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. in the midst of poverty
 and want, felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little
 white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. early in
 the morning, before she had risen, cleared away the snow that
 obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and
 brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual
 astonishment, found his store always replenished by an invisible
 hand. in the day, i believe, worked sometimes for neighbouring
 farmer, because often went forth and did not return until dinner,
 yet brought wood with him. at other times worked in the garden,
 but as there was little to do in the frosty season, read to the old
 man and agatha.
 
“this reading had puzzled extremely at first, but by degrees i
 discovered that uttered many of the same sounds when read as when
 talked. i conjectured, therefore, that found on the paper signs
 for speech which understood, and i ardently longed to comprehend
 these also; but how was that possible when i did not even understand
 the sounds for which they stood as signs? i improved, however,
 sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of
 conversation, although i applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for i
 easily perceived that, although i eagerly longed to discover myself to
 the cottagers, i ought not to make the attempt until i had first become
 master of their language, which knowledge might enable to make them
 overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast
 perpetually presented to my eyes had made acquainted.
 
“i had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty,
 and delicate complexions; but how was i terrified when i viewed myself
 in transparent pool! at first i started back, unable to believe that
 it was indeed i who was reflected in the mirror; and when i became
 fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was
 filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
 alas! i did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
 deformity.
 
“as the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
 vanished, and i beheld the bare trees and the black earth. from this
 time felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of
 impending famine disappeared. their food, as i afterwards found, was
 coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured sufficiency of it.
 several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
 dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season
 advanced.
 
“the old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
 not rain, as i found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
 waters. this frequently took place, but high wind quickly dried the
 earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.
 
“my mode of life in my hovel was uniform. during the morning i
 attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in
 various occupations, i slept; the remainder of the day was spent in
 observing my friends. when they had retired to rest, if there was any
 moon or the night was star-light, i went into the woods and collected
 my own food and fuel for the cottage. when i returned, as often as it
 was necessary, i cleared their path from the snow and performed those
 offices that i had seen done by felix. i afterwards found that these
 labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and
 once or twice i heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good
 spirit, wonderful_; but i did not then understand the signification
 of these terms.
 
“my thoughts now became more active, and i longed to discover the
 motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; i was inquisitive to
 know why felix appeared so miserable and agatha so sad. i thought
 (foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to
 these deserving people. when i slept or was absent, the forms of the
 venerable blind father, the gentle agatha, and the excellent felix
 flitted before me. i looked upon them as superior beings who would be
 the arbiters of my future destiny. i formed in my imagination a
 thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of
 me. i imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle
 demeanour and conciliating words, i should first win their favour and
 afterwards their love.
 
“these thoughts exhilarated and led to apply with fresh ardour to
 the acquiring the art of language. my organs were indeed harsh, but
 supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their
 tones, yet i pronounced such words as i understood with tolerable ease.
 it was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose
 intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved
 better treatment than blows and execration.
 
“the pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
 aspect of the earth. men who before this change seemed to have been
 hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of
 cultivation. the birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves
 began to bud forth on the trees. happy, happy earth! fit habitation
 for gods, which, so short time before, was bleak, damp, and
 unwholesome. my spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of
 nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
 and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.”
 



chapter 13
 

“i now hasten to the more moving part of my story. i shall relate
 events that impressed with feelings which, from what i had been,
 have made what i am.
 
“spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies
 cloudless. it surprised that what before was desert and gloomy
 should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. my
 senses were gratified and refreshed by thousand scents of delight and
 thousand sights of beauty.
 
“it was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested
 from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children
 listened to him—that i observed the countenance of felix was
 melancholy beyond expression; sighed frequently, and once his father
 paused in his music, and i conjectured by his manner that inquired
 the cause of his son’s sorrow. felix replied in cheerful accent, and
 the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.
 
“it was lady on horseback, accompanied by country-man as guide.
 the lady was dressed in dark suit and covered with thick black
 veil. agatha asked question, to which the stranger only replied by
 pronouncing, in sweet accent, the name of felix. her voice was
 musical but unlike that of either of my friends. on hearing this word,
 felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her
 veil, and i beheld countenance of angelic beauty and expression. her
 hair of shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were
 dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of regular
 proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with
 lovely pink.
 
“felix seemed ravished with delight when saw her, every trait of
 sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed degree of
 ecstatic joy, of which i could hardly have believed it capable; his
 eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment i
 thought him as beautiful as the stranger. she appeared affected by
 different feelings; wiping few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
 out her hand to felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as
 well as i could distinguish, his sweet arabian. she did not appear to
 understand him, but smiled. assisted her to dismount, and
 dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. some
 conversation took place between him and his father, and the young
 stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand,
 but raised her and embraced her affectionately.
 
“i soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds
 and appeared to have language of her own, she was neither understood
 by nor herself understood the cottagers. they made many signs which i
 did not comprehend, but i saw that her presence diffused gladness
 through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
 morning mists. felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of
 delight welcomed his arabian. agatha, the ever-gentle agatha, kissed
 the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made
 signs which appeared to to mean that had been sorrowful until she
 came. some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances,
 expressed joy, the cause of which i did not comprehend. presently i
 found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger
 repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language;
 and the idea instantly occurred to that i should make use of the
 same instructions to the same end. the stranger learned about twenty
 words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which i had
 before understood, but i profited by the others.
 
“as night came on, agatha and the arabian retired early. when they
 separated felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘good night
 sweet safie.’ sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and
 by the frequent repetition of her name i conjectured that their lovely
 guest was the subject of their conversation. i ardently desired to
 understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found
 it utterly impossible.
 
“the next morning felix went out to his work, and after the usual
 occupations of agatha were finished, the arabian sat at the feet of the
 old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly
 beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my
 eyes. she sang, and her voice flowed in rich cadence, swelling or
 dying away like nightingale of the woods.
 
“when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first
 declined it. she played simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
 sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. the old
 man appeared enraptured and said some words which agatha endeavoured to
 explain to safie, and by which appeared to wish to express that she
 bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.
 
“the days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration
 that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
 safie was always gay and happy; she and i improved rapidly in the
 knowledge of language, so that in two months i began to comprehend most
 of the words uttered by my protectors.
 
“in the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and
 the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
 scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
 the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal
 rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably
 shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for i never
 ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same
 treatment i had formerly endured in the first village which i entered.
 
“my days were spent in close attention, that i might more speedily
 master the language; and i may boast that i improved more rapidly than
 the arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken
 accents, whilst i comprehended and could imitate almost every word that
 was spoken.
 
“while i improved in speech, i also learned the science of letters as
 it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before wide field
 for wonder and delight.
 
“the book from which felix instructed safie was volney’s _ruins
 of empires_. i should not have understood the purport of this book had not
 felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. had chosen this
 work, said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the
 eastern authors. through this work i obtained cursory knowledge of history
 and view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave
 an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different
 nations of the earth. i heard of the slothful asiatics, of the stupendous
 genius and mental activity of the grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue
 of the early romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the
 decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings. i heard
 of the discovery of the american hemisphere and wept with safie over the
 hapless fate of its original inhabitants.
 
“these wonderful narrations inspired with strange feelings. was
 man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so
 vicious and base? appeared at one time mere scion of the evil
 principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and
 godlike. to be great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour
 that can befall sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
 record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, condition more
 abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. for long time i
 could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or
 even why there were laws and governments; but when i heard details of
 vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and i turned away with disgust and
 loathing.
 
“every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
 while i listened to the instructions which felix bestowed upon the
 arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. i
 heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid
 poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.
 
“the words induced to turn towards myself. i learned that the
 possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and
 unsullied descent united with riches. man might be respected with
 only one of these advantages, but without either was considered,
 except in very rare instances, as vagabond and slave, doomed to
 waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! and what was i? of
 my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i
 possessed money, friends, kind of property. i was, besides,
 endued with figure hideously deformed and loathsome; i was not even
 of the same nature as man. i was more agile than they and could
 subsist upon coarser diet; i bore the extremes of heat and cold with
 less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. when i looked
 around i saw and heard of none like me. was i, then, monster, blot
 upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
 
“i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
 upon me; i tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
 knowledge. oh, that i had for ever remained in my native wood, nor
 known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!
 
“of what strange nature is knowledge! it clings to the mind when it
 has once seized on it like lichen on the rock. i wished sometimes to
 shake off all thought and feeling, but i learned that there was but one
 means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state
 which i feared yet did not understand. i admired virtue and good
 feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
 cottagers, but i was shut out from intercourse with them, except
 through means which i obtained by stealth, when i was unseen and
 unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire i had of
 becoming one among my fellows. the gentle words of agatha and the
 animated smiles of the charming arabian were not for me. the mild
 exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved
 felix were not for me. miserable, unhappy wretch!
 
“other lessons were impressed upon even more deeply. i heard of the
 difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the
 father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the
 older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up
 in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained
 knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which
 bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.
 
“but where were my friends and relations? father had watched my
 infant days, mother had blessed with smiles and caresses; or if
 they had, all my past life was now blot, blind vacancy in which i
 distinguished nothing. from my earliest remembrance i had been as i
 then was in height and proportion. i had never yet seen being
 resembling or who claimed any intercourse with me. what was i? the
 question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.
 
“i will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow now to
 return to the cottagers, whose story excited in such various
 feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated
 in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so i loved, in
 an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).”
 



chapter 14
 

“some time elapsed before i learned the history of my friends. it was
 one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
 as it did number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to
 one so utterly inexperienced as i was.
 
“the name of the old man was lacey. was descended from good
 family in france, where had lived for many years in affluence,
 respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. his was bred
 in the service of his country, and agatha had ranked with ladies of the
 highest distinction. few months before my arrival they had lived in
 large and luxurious city called paris, surrounded by friends and
 possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
 taste, accompanied by moderate fortune, could afford.
 
“the father of safie had been the cause of their ruin. was a
 turkish merchant and had inhabited paris for many years, when, for some
 reason which i could not learn, became obnoxious to the government.
 was seized and cast into prison the very day that safie arrived from
 constantinople to join him. was tried and condemned to death. the
 injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all paris was indignant;
 and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime
 alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.
 
“felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and
 indignation were uncontrollable when heard the decision of the
 court. made, at that moment, solemn vow to deliver him and then
 looked around for the means. after many fruitless attempts to gain
 admittance to the prison, found strongly grated window in an
 unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the
 unfortunate muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the
 execution of the barbarous sentence. felix visited the grate at night
 and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. the turk,
 amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer
 by promises of reward and wealth. felix rejected his offers with
 contempt, yet when saw the lovely safie, who was allowed to visit
 her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the
 youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed
 treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
 
“the turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made
 on the heart of felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in
 his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he
 should be conveyed to place of safety. felix was too delicate to
 accept this offer, yet looked forward to the probability of the
 event as to the consummation of his happiness.
 
“during the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for
 the escape of the merchant, the zeal of felix was warmed by several
 letters that received from this lovely girl, who found means to
 express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old
 man, servant of her father who understood french. she thanked him in
 the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and
 at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
 
“i have copies of these letters, for i found means, during my residence
 in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters
 were often in the hands of felix or agatha. before i depart i will
 give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present,
 as the sun is already far declined, i shall only have time to repeat
 the substance of them to you.
 
“safie related that her mother was christian arab, seized and made a
 slave by the turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of
 the father of safie, who married her. the young girl spoke in high and
 enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the
 bondage to which she was now reduced. she instructed her daughter in
 the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of
 intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female
 followers of muhammad. this lady died, but her lessons were indelibly
 impressed on the mind of safie, who sickened at the prospect of again
 returning to asia and being immured within the walls of harem,
 allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to
 the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and noble
 emulation for virtue. the prospect of marrying christian and
 remaining in country where women were allowed to take rank in
 society was enchanting to her.
 
“the day for the execution of the turk was fixed, but on the night
 previous to it quitted his prison and before morning was distant
 many leagues from paris. felix had procured passports in the name of
 his father, sister, and himself. had previously communicated his
 plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under
 the pretence of journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in
 an obscure part of paris.
 
“felix conducted the fugitives through france to lyons and across mont
 cenis to leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait favourable
 opportunity of passing into some part of the turkish dominions.
 
“safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his
 departure, before which time the turk renewed his promise that she
 should be united to his deliverer; and felix remained with them in
 expectation of that event; and in the meantime enjoyed the society
 of the arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest
 affection. they conversed with one another through the means of an
 interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and safie
 sang to him the divine airs of her native country.
 
“the turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes
 of the youthful lovers, while in his heart had formed far other
 plans. loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
 christian, but feared the resentment of felix if should appear
 lukewarm, for knew that was still in the power of his deliverer
 if should choose to betray him to the italian state which they
 inhabited. revolved thousand plans by which should be enabled
 to prolong the deceit until it might be longer necessary, and
 secretly to take his daughter with him when departed. his plans
 were facilitated by the news which arrived from paris.
 
“the government of france were greatly enraged at the escape of their
 victim and spared pains to detect and punish his deliverer. the
 plot of felix was quickly discovered, and lacey and agatha were
 thrown into prison. the news reached felix and roused him from his
 dream of pleasure. his blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay
 in noisome dungeon while enjoyed the free air and the society of
 her whom loved. this idea was torture to him. quickly arranged
 with the turk that if the latter should find favourable opportunity
 for escape before felix could return to italy, safie should remain as a
 boarder at convent at leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely arabian,
 hastened to paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the
 law, hoping to free lacey and agatha by this proceeding.
 
“he did not succeed. they remained confined for five months before the
 trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune
 and condemned them to perpetual exile from their native country.
 
“they found miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i
 discovered them. felix soon learned that the treacherous turk, for
 whom and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
 discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
 became traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted italy with
 his daughter, insultingly sending felix pittance of money to aid him,
 as said, in some plan of future maintenance.
 
“such were the events that preyed on the heart of felix and rendered
 him, when i first saw him, the most miserable of his family. could
 have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his
 virtue, gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the turk and the loss
 of his beloved safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. the
 arrival of the arabian now infused new life into his soul.
 
“when the news reached leghorn that felix was deprived of his wealth
 and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think more of her
 lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. the generous
 nature of safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
 expostulate with her father, but left her angrily, reiterating his
 tyrannical mandate.
 
“a few days after, the turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told
 her hastily that had reason to believe that his residence at leghorn
 had been divulged and that should speedily be delivered up to the
 french government; had consequently hired vessel to convey him to
 constantinople, for which city should sail in few hours. he
 intended to leave his daughter under the care of confidential
 servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his
 property, which had not yet arrived at leghorn.
 
“when alone, safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
 would become her to pursue in this emergency. residence in turkey
 was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse
 to it. by some papers of her father which fell into her hands she
 heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
 then resided. she hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
 determination. taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a
 sum of money, she quitted italy with an attendant, native of leghorn,
 but who understood the common language of turkey, and departed for
 germany.
 
“she arrived in safety at town about twenty leagues from the cottage
 of lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. safie nursed her
 with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the
 arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country
 and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. she fell, however,
 into good hands. the italian had mentioned the name of the spot for
 which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in
 which they had lived took care that safie should arrive in safety at
 the cottage of her lover.”
 



chapter 15
 

“such was the history of my beloved cottagers. it impressed deeply.
 i learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
 their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.
 
“as yet i looked upon crime as distant evil, benevolence and
 generosity were ever present before me, inciting within desire to
 become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
 were called forth and displayed. but in giving an account of the
 progress of my intellect, i must not omit circumstance which occurred
 in the beginning of the month of august of the same year.
 
“one night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where i
 collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, i found on
 the ground leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and
 some books. i eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel. 
fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which i
 had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of _paradise lost_, volume
 of _plutarch’s lives_, and the _sorrows of werter_. the
 possession of these treasures gave extreme delight; i now continually
 studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were
 employed in their ordinary occupations.
 
“i can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. they produced
 in an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
 to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk into the lowest dejection. in
 the _sorrows of werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
 story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
 what had hitherto been to obscure subjects that i found in it a
 never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. the gentle and
 domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
 feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
 well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
 were for ever alive in my own bosom. but i thought werter himself a
 more divine being than i had ever beheld or imagined; his character
 contained pretension, but it sank deep. the disquisitions upon
 death and suicide were calculated to fill with wonder. i did not
 pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet i inclined towards
 the opinions of the hero, whose extinction i wept, without precisely
 understanding it.
 
“as i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and
 condition. i found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
 unlike to the beings concerning whom i read and to whose conversation i
 was listener. i sympathised with and partly understood them, but i
 was unformed in mind; i was dependent on none and related to none.
 ‘the path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my
 annihilation. my person was hideous and my stature gigantic. what did
 this mean? who was i? what was i? whence did i come? what was my
 destination? these questions continually recurred, but i was unable to
 solve them.
 
“the volume of _plutarch’s lives_ which i possessed contained the
 histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. this book
 had far different effect upon from the _sorrows of werter_. i
 learned from werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but plutarch
 taught high thoughts; elevated above the wretched sphere of my
 own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. many
 things i read surpassed my understanding and experience. i had very
 confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
 and boundless seas. but i was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
 large assemblages of men. the cottage of my protectors had been the
 only school in which i had studied human nature, but this book
 developed new and mightier scenes of action. i read of men concerned
 in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. i felt the
 greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
 far as i understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
 were, as i applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. induced by these
 feelings, i was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, numa,
 solon, and lycurgus, in preference to romulus and theseus. the
 patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
 firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
 been made by young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, i should
 have been imbued with different sensations.
 
“but _paradise lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. i read
 it, as i had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
 true history. it moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
 picture of an omnipotent god warring with his creatures was capable of
 exciting. i often referred the several situations, as their similarity
 struck me, to my own. like adam, i was apparently united by link to
 any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
 in every other respect. had come forth from the hands of god a
 perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
 his creator; was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
 beings of superior nature, but i was wretched, helpless, and alone.
 many times i considered satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
 often, like him, when i viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
 gall of envy rose within me.
 
“another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. soon
 after my arrival in the hovel i discovered some papers in the pocket of
 the dress which i had taken from your laboratory. at first i had
 neglected them, but now that i was able to decipher the characters in
 which they were written, i began to study them with diligence. it was
 your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. you
 minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
 of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
 occurrences. you doubtless recollect these papers. here they are.
 everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
 origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
 which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
 and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
 horrors and rendered mine indelible. i sickened as i read. ‘hateful
 day when i received life!’ i exclaimed in agony. ‘accursed creator!
 why did you form monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from in
 disgust? god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
 image; but my form is filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
 very resemblance. satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
 and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.’
 
“these were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
 but when i contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
 benevolent dispositions, i persuaded myself that when they should
 become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would
 compassionate and overlook my personal deformity. could they turn
 from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
 and friendship? i resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
 to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. i
 postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
 attached to its success inspired with dread lest i should fail.
 besides, i found that my understanding improved so much with every
 day’s experience that i was unwilling to commence this undertaking
 until few more months should have added to my sagacity.
 
“several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. the
 presence of safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and i also
 found that greater degree of plenty reigned there. felix and agatha
 spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
 their labours by servants. they did not appear rich, but they were
 contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
 mine became every day more tumultuous. increase of knowledge only
 discovered to more clearly what wretched outcast i was. i
 cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when i beheld my person
 reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
 image and that inconstant shade.
 
“i endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
 which in few months i resolved to undergo; and sometimes i allowed my
 thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of paradise, and
 dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my
 feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
 smiles of consolation. but it was all dream; eve soothed my
 sorrows nor shared my thoughts; i was alone. i remembered adam’s
 supplication to his creator. but where was mine? had abandoned me,
 and in the bitterness of my heart i cursed him.
 
“autumn passed thus. i saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
 and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
 had worn when i first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. yet i did
 not heed the bleakness of the weather; i was better fitted by my
 conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. but my chief
 delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
 apparel of summer; when those deserted me, i turned with more attention
 towards the cottagers. their happiness was not decreased by the
 absence of summer. they loved and sympathised with one another; and
 their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
 casualties that took place around them. the more i saw of them, the
 greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
 heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
 their sweet looks directed towards with affection was the utmost
 limit of my ambition. i dared not think that they would turn them from
 with disdain and horror. the poor that stopped at their door were
 never driven away. i asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
 little food or rest: i required kindness and sympathy; but i did not
 believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
 
“the winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
 place since i awoke into life. my attention at this time was solely
 directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
 protectors. i revolved many projects, but that on which i finally
 fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
 i had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
 person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
 beheld me. my voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; i
 thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children i could gain
 the good will and mediation of the old lacey, i might by his means
 be tolerated by my younger protectors.
 
“one day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
 and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, safie, agatha,
 and felix departed on long country walk, and the old man, at his own
 desire, was left alone in the cottage. when his children had departed,
 took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
 sweet and mournful than i had ever heard him play before. at first his
 countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as continued,
 thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
 instrument, sat absorbed in reflection.
 
“my heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
 would decide my hopes or realise my fears. the servants were gone to a
 neighbouring fair. all was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
 excellent opportunity; yet, when i proceeded to execute my plan, my
 limbs failed and i sank to the ground. again i rose, and exerting
 all the firmness of which i was master, removed the planks which i had
 placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. the fresh air revived
 me, and with renewed determination i approached the door of their
 cottage.
 
“i knocked. ‘who is there?’ said the old man. ‘come in.’
 
“i entered. ‘pardon this intrusion,’ said i; ‘i am
 traveller in want of little rest; you would greatly oblige if you
 would allow to remain few minutes before the fire.’
 
“‘enter,’ said lacey, ‘and i will try in what
 manner i can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are
 from home, and as i am blind, i am afraid i shall find it difficult to
 procure food for you.’
 
“‘do not trouble yourself, my kind host; i have food; it is
 warmth and rest only that i need.’
 
“i sat down, and silence ensued. i knew that every minute was
 precious to me, yet i remained irresolute in what manner to commence
 the interview, when the old man addressed me.
 
‘by your language, stranger, i suppose you are my countryman; are you
 french?’
 
“‘no; but i was educated by french family and understand that
 language only. i am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
 whom i sincerely love, and of whose favour i have some hopes.’
 
“‘are they germans?’
 
“‘no, they are french. but let us change the subject. i am an
 unfortunate and deserted creature, i look around and i have relation
 or friend upon earth. these amiable people to whom i go have never
 seen and know little of me. i am full of fears, for if i fail
 there, i am an outcast in the world for ever.’
 
“‘do not despair. to be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
 the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
 full of brotherly love and charity. rely, therefore, on your hopes;
 and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’
 
“‘they are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
 but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. i have good
 dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
 beneficial; but fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
 ought to see feeling and kind friend, they behold only detestable
 monster.’
 
“‘that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
 you undeceive them?’
 
“‘i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i
 feel so many overwhelming terrors. i tenderly love these friends; i
 have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
 kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and
 it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.’
 
“‘where do these friends reside?’
 
“‘near this spot.’
 
“the old man paused and then continued, ‘if you will unreservedly
 confide to the particulars of your tale, i perhaps may be of use in
 undeceiving them. i am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
 there is something in your words which persuades that you are
 sincere. i am poor and an exile, but it will afford true pleasure
 to be in any way serviceable to human creature.’
 
“‘excellent man! i thank you and accept your generous offer. you
 raise from the dust by this kindness; and i trust that, by your aid,
 i shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
 creatures.’
 
“‘heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal, for that can only
 drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. i also am
 unfortunate; i and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
 judge, therefore, if i do not feel for your misfortunes.’
 
“‘how can i thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lips
 first have i heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; i shall
 be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures of success
 with those friends whom i am on the point of meeting.’
 
“‘may i know the names and residence of those friends?’
 
“i paused. this, i thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
 rob of or bestow happiness on for ever. i struggled vainly for
 firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
 remaining strength; i sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. at that
 moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors. i had not moment
 to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, i cried, ‘now is the
 time! save and protect me! you and your family are the friends whom i
 seek. do not you desert in the hour of trial!’
 
“‘great god!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘who are you?’
 
“at that instant the cottage door was opened, and felix, safie, and
 agatha entered. who can describe their horror and consternation on
 beholding me? agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her
 friend, rushed out of the cottage. felix darted forward, and with
 supernatural force tore from his father, to whose knees i clung, in
 transport of fury, dashed to the ground and struck violently
 with stick. i could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
 the antelope. but my heart sank within as with bitter sickness, and
 i refrained. i saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
 overcome by pain and anguish, i quitted the cottage, and in the general
 tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”
 



chapter 16
 

“cursed, cursed creator! why did i live? why, in that instant, did i
 not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
 bestowed? i know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
 feelings were those of rage and revenge. i could with pleasure have
 destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
 their shrieks and misery.
 
“when night came i quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
 now, longer restrained by the fear of discovery, i gave vent to my
 anguish in fearful howlings. i was like wild beast that had broken
 the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed and ranging
 through the wood with stag-like swiftness. oh! what miserable
 night i passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
 waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of bird
 burst forth amidst the universal stillness. all, save i, were at rest
 or in enjoyment; i, like the arch-fiend, bore hell within me, and
 finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
 havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
 the ruin.
 
“but this was luxury of sensation that could not endure; i became
 fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
 the sick impotence of despair. there was none among the myriads of men
 that existed who would pity or assist me; and should i feel kindness
 towards my enemies? no; from that moment i declared everlasting war
 against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
 and sent forth to this insupportable misery.
 
“the sun rose; i heard the voices of men and knew that it was
 impossible to return to my retreat during that day. accordingly i hid
 myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
 to reflection on my situation.
 
“the pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored to some
 degree of tranquillity; and when i considered what had passed at the
 cottage, i could not help believing that i had been too hasty in my
 conclusions. i had certainly acted imprudently. it was apparent that
 my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and i was a
 fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. i
 ought to have familiarised the old lacey to me, and by degrees to
 have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
 been prepared for my approach. but i did not believe my errors to be
 irretrievable, and after much consideration i resolved to return to the
 cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
 party.
 
“these thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon i sank into profound
 sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow to be visited by
 peaceful dreams. the horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
 acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged felix
 tearing from his father’s feet. i awoke exhausted, and finding that
 it was already night, i crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
 search of food.
 
“when my hunger was appeased, i directed my steps towards the
 well-known path that conducted to the cottage. all there was at peace.
 i crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
 accustomed hour when the family arose. that hour passed, the sun
 mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. i
 trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. the inside
 of the cottage was dark, and i heard motion; i cannot describe the
 agony of this suspense.
 
“presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
 entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but i did not
 understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
 which differed from that of my protectors. soon after, however, felix
 approached with another man; i was surprised, as i knew that had not
 quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
 his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.
 
“‘do you consider,’ said his companion to him,
 ‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
 the produce of your garden? i do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and
 i beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
 determination.’
 
“‘it is utterly useless,’ replied felix; ‘we can
 never again inhabit your cottage. the life of my father is in the greatest
 danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that i have related. my wife and
 my sister will never recover from their horror. i entreat you not to reason
 with any more. take possession of your tenement and let fly from this
 place.’
 
“felix trembled violently as said this. and his companion
 entered the cottage, in which they remained for few minutes, and then
 departed. i never saw any of the family of lacey more.
 
“i continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in state of
 utter and stupid despair. my protectors had departed and had broken
 the only link that held to the world. for the first time the
 feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and i did not strive to
 control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, i
 bent my mind towards injury and death. when i thought of my friends,
 of the mild voice of lacey, the gentle eyes of agatha, and the
 exquisite beauty of the arabian, these thoughts vanished and gush of
 tears somewhat soothed me. but again when i reflected that they had
 spurned and deserted me, anger returned, rage of anger, and unable to
 injure anything human, i turned my fury towards inanimate objects. as
 night advanced, i placed variety of combustibles around the cottage,
 and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
 i waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
 operations.
 
“as the night advanced, fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
 dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
 along like mighty avalanche and produced kind of insanity in my
 spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. i lighted the
 dry branch of tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
 my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
 nearly touched. part of its orb was at length hid, and i waved my
 brand; it sank, and with loud scream i fired the straw, and heath,
 and bushes, which i had collected. the wind fanned the fire, and the
 cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
 licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
 
“as soon as i was convinced that assistance could save any part of
 the habitation, i quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.
 
“and now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps? i
 resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
 and despised, every country must be equally horrible. at length the
 thought of you crossed my mind. i learned from your papers that you
 were my father, my creator; and to whom could i apply with more fitness
 than to him who had given life? among the lessons that felix had
 bestowed upon safie, geography had not been omitted; i had learned from
 these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
 you had mentioned geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
 this place i resolved to proceed.
 
“but how was i to direct myself? i knew that i must travel in a
 southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
 only guide. i did not know the names of the towns that i was to pass
 through, nor could i ask information from single human being; but i
 did not despair. from you only could i hope for succour, although
 towards you i felt sentiment but that of hatred. unfeeling,
 heartless creator! you had endowed with perceptions and passions
 and then cast abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
 but on you only had i any claim for pity and redress, and from you i
 determined to seek that justice which i vainly attempted to gain from
 any other being that wore the human form.
 
“my travels were long and the sufferings i endured intense. it was
 late in autumn when i quitted the district where i had so long resided.
 i travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
 human being. nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
 rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
 of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and i found shelter. oh,
 earth! how often did i imprecate curses on the cause of my being! the
 mildness of my nature had fled, and all within was turned to gall
 and bitterness. the nearer i approached to your habitation, the more
 deeply did i feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. snow
 fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rested not. few incidents
 now and then directed me, and i possessed map of the country; but i
 often wandered wide from my path. the agony of my feelings allowed me
 respite; incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
 not extract its food; but circumstance that happened when i arrived
 on the confines of switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
 and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
 manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.
 
“i generally rested during the day and travelled only when i was
 secured by night from the view of man. one morning, however, finding
 that my path lay through deep wood, i ventured to continue my journey
 after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
 cheered even by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
 the air. i felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
 appeared dead, revive within me. half surprised by the novelty of
 these sensations, i allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
 forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. soft tears
 again bedewed my cheeks, and i even raised my humid eyes with
 thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.
 
“i continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until i came to its
 boundary, which was skirted by deep and rapid river, into which many
 of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
 here i paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when i heard
 the sound of voices, that induced to conceal myself under the shade
 of cypress. i was scarcely hid when young girl came running
 towards the spot where i was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
 someone in sport. she continued her course along the precipitous sides
 of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
 rapid stream. i rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
 from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. she
 was senseless, and i endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
 animation, when i was suddenly interrupted by the approach of rustic,
 who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. on
 seeing me, darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
 hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. i followed speedily, i
 hardly knew why; but when the man saw draw near, aimed gun,
 which carried, at my body and fired. i sank to the ground, and my
 injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.
 
“this was then the reward of my benevolence! i had saved human being
 from destruction, and as recompense i now writhed under the miserable
 pain of wound which shattered the flesh and bone. the feelings of
 kindness and gentleness which i had entertained but few moments
 before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. inflamed by
 pain, i vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. but the
 agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and i fainted.
 
“for some weeks i led miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
 cure the wound which i had received. the ball had entered my shoulder,
 and i knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
 rate i had means of extracting it. my sufferings were augmented
 also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
 infliction. my daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge,
 such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish i had
 endured.
 
“after some weeks my wound healed, and i continued my journey. the
 labours i endured were longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
 gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but mockery which insulted my
 desolate state and made feel more painfully that i was not made for
 the enjoyment of pleasure.
 
“but my toils now drew near close, and in two months from this time i
 reached the environs of geneva.
 
“it was evening when i arrived, and i retired to hiding-place among
 the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner i should apply
 to you. i was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
 enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
 behind the stupendous mountains of jura.
 
“at this time slight sleep relieved from the pain of reflection,
 which was disturbed by the approach of beautiful child, who came
 running into the recess i had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
 infancy. suddenly, as i gazed on him, an idea seized that this
 little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short time to have
 imbibed horror of deformity. if, therefore, i could seize him and
 educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in
 this peopled earth.
 
“urged by this impulse, i seized on the boy as passed and drew him
 towards me. as soon as beheld my form, placed his hands before
 his eyes and uttered shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his
 face and said, ‘child, what is the meaning of this? i do not intend to
 hurt you; listen to me.’
 
“he struggled violently. ‘let go,’ cried;
 ‘monster! ugly wretch! you wish to eat and tear to pieces. you
 are an ogre. let go, or i will tell my papa.’
 
“‘boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’
 
“‘hideous monster! let go. my papa is syndic—he is m.
 frankenstein—he will punish you. you dare not keep me.’
 
“‘frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom i have
 sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’
 
“the child still struggled and loaded with epithets which carried
 despair to my heart; i grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
 moment lay dead at my feet.
 
“i gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
 triumph; clapping my hands, i exclaimed, ‘i too can create desolation;
 my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
 thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’
 
“as i fixed my eyes on the child, i saw something glittering on his
 breast. i took it; it was portrait of most lovely woman. in spite
 of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. for few moments i
 gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
 lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; i remembered that i was
 for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
 bestow and that she whose resemblance i contemplated would, in
 regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
 expressive of disgust and affright.
 
“can you wonder that such thoughts transported with rage? i only
 wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
 exclamations and agony, i did not rush among mankind and perish in the
 attempt to destroy them.
 
“while i was overcome by these feelings, i left the spot where i had
 committed the murder, and seeking more secluded hiding-place, i
 entered barn which had appeared to to be empty. woman was
 sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
 whose portrait i held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
 loveliness of youth and health. here, i thought, is one of those whose
 joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. and then i bent over
 her and whispered, ‘awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
 give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
 beloved, awake!’
 
“the sleeper stirred; thrill of terror ran through me. should she
 indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? thus
 would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
 the thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not i, but
 she, shall suffer; the murder i have committed because i am for ever
 robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. the crime had
 its source in her; be hers the punishment! thanks to the lessons of
 felix and the sanguinary laws of man, i had learned now to work
 mischief. i bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
 the folds of her dress. she moved again, and i fled.
 
“for some days i haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
 sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
 its miseries for ever. at length i wandered towards these mountains,
 and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by burning
 passion which you alone can gratify. we may not part until you have
 promised to comply with my requisition. i am alone and miserable; man
 will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
 would not deny herself to me. my companion must be of the same species
 and have the same defects. this being you must create.”
 



chapter 17
 

the being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon in the
 expectation of reply. but i was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
 arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
 proposition. continued,
 
“you must create female for with whom i can live in the
 interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. this you alone
 can do, and i demand it of you as right which you must not refuse to
 concede.”
 
the latter part of his tale had kindled anew in the anger that had
 died away while narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
 as said this i could longer suppress the rage that burned within
 me.
 
“i do refuse it,” i replied; “and torture shall ever extort a
 consent from me. you may render the most miserable of men, but you
 shall never make base in my own eyes. shall i create another like
 yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. begone! i
 have answered you; you may torture me, but i will never consent.”
 
“you are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead
 of threatening, i am content to reason with you. i am malicious because i
 am miserable. am i not shunned and hated by all mankind? you, my creator,
 would tear to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell why i
 should pity man more than pities me? you would not call it murder if you
 could precipitate into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
 work of your own hands. shall i respect man when condemns me? let him
 live with in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury i would
 bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
 but that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
 union. yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. i will
 revenge my injuries; if i cannot inspire love, i will cause fear, and
 chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do i swear
 inextinguishable hatred. have care; i will work at your destruction, nor
 finish until i desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
 your birth.”
 
fiendish rage animated him as said this; his face was wrinkled
 into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
 calmed himself and proceeded—
 
“i intended to reason. this passion is detrimental to me, for you do
 not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. if any being felt
 emotions of benevolence towards me, i should return them hundred and a
 hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake i would make peace with the
 whole kind! but i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
 what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand creature of
 another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
 is all that i can receive, and it shall content me. it is true, we shall be
 monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
 attached to one another. our lives will not be happy, but they will be
 harmless and free from the misery i now feel. oh! my creator, make me
 happy; let feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! let see that i
 excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny my
 request!”
 
i was moved. i shuddered when i thought of the possible consequences
 of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his argument.
 his tale and the feelings now expressed proved him to be creature
 of fine sensations, and did i not as his maker owe him all the portion
 of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? saw my change of
 feeling and continued,
 
“if you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
 us again; i will go to the vast wilds of south america. my food is not
 that of man; i do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
 acorns and berries afford sufficient nourishment. my companion will
 be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
 we shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
 man and will ripen our food. the picture i present to you is peaceful
 and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
 wantonness of power and cruelty. pitiless as you have been towards me,
 i now see compassion in your eyes; let seize the favourable moment
 and persuade you to promise what i so ardently desire.”
 
“you propose,” replied i, “to fly from the habitations of
 man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
 only companions. how can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
 persevere in this exile? you will return and again seek their kindness, and
 you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
 and you will then have companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
 this may not be; cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.”
 
“how inconstant are your feelings! but moment ago you were moved by
 my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
 i swear to you, by the earth which i inhabit, and by you that made me, that
 with the companion you bestow, i will quit the neighbourhood of man and
 dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. my evil passions
 will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy! my life will flow quietly
 away, and in my dying moments i shall not curse my maker.”
 
his words had strange effect upon me. i compassionated him and
 sometimes felt wish to console him, but when i looked upon him, when
 i saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
 feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. i tried to stifle
 these sensations; i thought that as i could not sympathise with him, i
 had right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
 was yet in my power to bestow.
 
“you swear,” i said, “to be harmless; but have you not
 already shown degree of malice that should reasonably make distrust
 you? may not even this be feint that will increase your triumph by
 affording wider scope for your revenge?”
 
“how is this? i must not be trifled with, and i demand an answer. if
 i have ties and affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
 the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and i shall
 become thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. my vices
 are the children of forced solitude that i abhor, and my virtues will
 necessarily arise when i live in communion with an equal. i shall feel
 the affections of sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
 existence and events from which i am now excluded.”
 
i paused some time to reflect on all had related and the various
 arguments which had employed. i thought of the promise of virtues which
 had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
 of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
 manifested towards him. his power and threats were not omitted in my
 calculations; creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
 and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
 was being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. after a
 long pause of reflection i concluded that the justice due both to him and
 my fellow creatures demanded of that i should comply with his request.
 turning to him, therefore, i said,
 
“i consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europe for ever,
 and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as i shall
 deliver into your hands female who will accompany you in your exile.”
 
“i swear,” cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
 heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
 prayer, while they exist you shall never behold again. depart to your
 home and commence your labours; i shall watch their progress with
 unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready i shall
 appear.”
 
saying this, suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
 my sentiments. i saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
 the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
 of ice.
 
his tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
 the horizon when departed. i knew that i ought to hasten my descent
 towards the valley, as i should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
 heart was heavy, and my steps slow. the labour of winding among the
 little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as i advanced
 perplexed me, occupied as i was by the emotions which the occurrences
 of the day had produced. night was far advanced when i came to the
 halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. the stars
 shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
 rose before me, and every here and there broken tree lay on the
 ground; it was scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
 thoughts within me. i wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, i
 exclaimed, “oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
 me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let become as
 nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave in darkness.”
 
these were wild and miserable thoughts, but i cannot describe to you
 how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon and how i
 listened to every blast of wind as if it were dull ugly siroc on its
 way to consume me.
 
morning dawned before i arrived at the village of chamounix; i took no
 rest, but returned immediately to geneva. even in my own heart i could
 give expression to my sensations—they weighed on with a
 mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
 thus i returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
 family. my haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but i
 answered question, scarcely did i speak. i felt as if i were placed
 under ban—as if i had right to claim their sympathies—as if
 never more might i enjoy companionship with them. yet even thus i
 loved them to adoration; and to save them, i resolved to dedicate
 myself to my most abhorred task. the prospect of such an occupation
 made every other circumstance of existence pass before like dream,
 and that thought only had to the reality of life.
 



chapter 18
 

day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to geneva; and
 i could not collect the courage to recommence my work. i feared the
 vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet i was unable to overcome my
 repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. i found that i could not
 compose female without again devoting several months to profound
 study and laborious disquisition. i had heard of some discoveries
 having been made by an english philosopher, the knowledge of which was
 material to my success, and i sometimes thought of obtaining my
 father’s consent to visit england for this purpose; but i clung to
 every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
 undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
 me. change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
 hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
 unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. my
 father saw this change with pleasure, and turned his thoughts
 towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
 which every now and then would return by fits, and with devouring
 blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. at these moments i took
 refuge in the most perfect solitude. i passed whole days on the lake
 alone in little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
 rippling of the waves, silent and listless. but the fresh air and
 bright sun seldom failed to restore to some degree of composure, and
 on my return i met the salutations of my friends with readier smile
 and more cheerful heart.
 
it was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
 calling aside, thus addressed me,
 
“i am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
 pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. and yet you are still
 unhappy and still avoid our society. for some time i was lost in
 conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
 and if it is well founded, i conjure you to avow it. reserve on such a
 point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.”
 
i trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued—
 
“i confess, my son, that i have always looked forward to your
 marriage with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the
 stay of my declining years. you were attached to each other from your
 earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and
 tastes, entirely suited to one another. but so blind is the experience of
 man that what i conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
 entirely destroyed it. you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any
 wish that she might become your wife. nay, you may have met with another
 whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to
 elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear
 to feel.”
 
“my dear father, reassure yourself. i love my cousin tenderly and
 sincerely. i never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my
 warmest admiration and affection. my future hopes and prospects are
 entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.”
 
“the expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear victor,
 gives more pleasure than i have for some time experienced. if you
 feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
 gloom over us. but it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
 strong hold of your mind that i wish to dissipate. tell me,
 therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the
 marriage. we have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
 from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. you
 are younger; yet i do not suppose, possessed as you are of competent
 fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
 plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. do not suppose,
 however, that i wish to dictate happiness to you or that delay on
 your part would cause any serious uneasiness. interpret my words
 with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and
 sincerity.”
 
i listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
 of offering any reply. i revolved rapidly in my mind multitude of
 thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. alas! to me
 the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and
 dismay. i was bound by solemn promise which i had not yet fulfilled
 and dared not break, or if i did, what manifold miseries might not
 impend over and my devoted family! could i enter into festival
 with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing to the
 ground? i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
 his mate before i allowed myself to enjoy the delight of union from
 which i expected peace.
 
i remembered also the necessity imposed upon of either journeying to
 england or entering into long correspondence with those philosophers
 of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
 use to in my present undertaking. the latter method of obtaining
 the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i
 had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
 loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar
 intercourse with those i loved. i knew that thousand fearful
 accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose tale to
 thrill all connected with with horror. i was aware also that i
 should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
 harrowing sensations that would possess during the progress of my
 unearthly occupation. i must absent myself from all i loved while thus
 employed. once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and i might be
 restored to my family in peace and happiness. my promise fulfilled,
 the monster would depart for ever. or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
 accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
 slavery for ever.
 
these feelings dictated my answer to my father. i expressed wish to
 visit england, but concealing the true reasons of this request, i
 clothed my desires under guise which excited suspicion, while i
 urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
 comply. after so long period of an absorbing melancholy that
 resembled madness in its intensity and effects, was glad to find
 that i was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such journey,
 and hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
 return, have restored entirely to myself.
 
the duration of my absence was left to my own choice; few months, or
 at most year, was the period contemplated. one paternal kind
 precaution had taken to ensure my having companion. without
 previously communicating with me, had, in concert with elizabeth,
 arranged that clerval should join at strasburgh. this interfered
 with the solitude i coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
 commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in way be
 an impediment, and truly i rejoiced that thus i should be saved many
 hours of lonely, maddening reflection. nay, henry might stand between
 and the intrusion of my foe. if i were alone, would not at times
 force his abhorred presence on to remind of my task or to
 contemplate its progress?
 
to england, therefore, i was bound, and it was understood that my union
 with elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. my father’s
 age rendered him extremely averse to delay. for myself, there was one
 reward i promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my
 unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
 enfranchised from my miserable slavery, i might claim elizabeth and
 forget the past in my union with her.
 
i now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
 which filled with fear and agitation. during my absence i should
 leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
 unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as might be by my
 departure. but had promised to follow wherever i might go, and
 would not accompany to england? this imagination was dreadful in
 itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
 i was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
 this might happen. but through the whole period during which i was the
 slave of my creature i allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
 the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
 would follow and exempt my family from the danger of his
 machinations.
 
it was in the latter end of september that i again quitted my native
 country. my journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth
 therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
 my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. it had
 been her care which provided companion in clerval—and yet man
 is blind to thousand minute circumstances which call forth woman’s
 sedulous attention. she longed to bid hasten my return; thousand
 conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade tearful, silent
 farewell.
 
i threw myself into the carriage that was to convey away, hardly
 knowing whither i was going, and careless of what was passing around.
 i remembered only, and it was with bitter anguish that i reflected on
 it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
 me. filled with dreary imaginations, i passed through many beautiful
 and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. i could
 only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
 whilst they endured.
 
after some days spent in listless indolence, during which i traversed
 many leagues, i arrived at strasburgh, where i waited two days for
 clerval. came. alas, how great was the contrast between us! he
 was alive to every new scene, joyful when saw the beauties of the
 setting sun, and more happy when beheld it rise and recommence new
 day. pointed out to the shifting colours of the landscape and
 the appearances of the sky. “this is what it is to live,” cried;
 “now i enjoy existence! but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are
 you desponding and sorrowful!” in truth, i was occupied by gloomy
 thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
 sunrise reflected in the rhine. and you, my friend, would be far more
 amused with the journal of clerval, who observed the scenery with an
 eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. i, a
 miserable wretch, haunted by curse that shut up every avenue to
 enjoyment.
 
we had agreed to descend the rhine in boat from strasburgh to
 rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for london. during this
 voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
 we stayed day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
 strasburgh, arrived at mainz. the course of the rhine below mainz
 becomes much more picturesque. the river descends rapidly and winds
 between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. we saw
 many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
 black woods, high and inaccessible. this part of the rhine, indeed,
 presents singularly variegated landscape. in one spot you view
 rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
 the dark rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of promontory,
 flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and meandering river
 and populous towns occupy the scene.
 
we travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers
 as we glided down the stream. even i, depressed in mind, and my spirits
 continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even i was pleased. i lay at the
 bottom of the boat, and as i gazed on the cloudless blue sky, i seemed to
 drink in tranquillity to which i had long been stranger. and if these
 were my sensations, who can describe those of henry? felt as if had
 been transported to fairy-land and enjoyed happiness seldom tasted by
 man. “i have seen,” said, “the most beautiful scenes
 of my own country; i have visited the lakes of lucerne and uri, where the
 snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black
 and impenetrable shades, which would cause gloomy and mournful appearance
 were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay
 appearance; i have seen this lake agitated by tempest, when the wind tore
 up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be
 on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
 where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and
 where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
 nightly wind; i have seen the mountains of valais, and the pays vaud;
 but this country, victor, pleases more than all those wonders. the
 mountains of switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a
 charm in the banks of this divine river that i never before saw equalled.
 look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
 island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now
 that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
 half hid in the recess of the mountain. oh, surely the spirit that inhabits
 and guards this place has soul more in harmony with man than those who
 pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of
 our own country.”
 
clerval! beloved friend! even now it delights to record your words and
 to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. was a
 being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” his wild and
 enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. his
 soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that
 devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
 in the imagination. but even human sympathies were not sufficient to
 satisfy his eager mind. the scenery of external nature, which others regard
 only with admiration, loved with ardour:—
 
——the sounding cataract
 haunted him like passion: the tall rock,
 the mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
 their colours and their forms, were then to him
 an appetite; feeling, and love,
 that had need of remoter charm,
 by thought supplied, or any interest
 unborrow’d from the eye.
 
[wordsworth’s “tintern abbey”.]
 
and where does now exist? is this gentle and lovely being lost
 for ever? has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
 and magnificent, which formed world, whose existence depended on the
 life of its creator;—has this mind perished? does it now only exist
 in my memory? no, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
 beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
 consoles your unhappy friend.
 
pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but slight
 tribute to the unexampled worth of henry, but they soothe my heart,
 overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. i will
 proceed with my tale.
 
beyond cologne we descended to the plains of holland; and we resolved to
 post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of
 the river was too gentle to aid us.
 
our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we
 arrived in few days at rotterdam, whence we proceeded by to england.
 it was on clear morning, in the latter days of december, that i first saw
 the white cliffs of britain. the banks of the thames presented new scene;
 they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the
 remembrance of some story. we saw tilbury fort and remembered the spanish
 armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwich—places which i had heard
 of even in my country.
 
at length we saw the numerous steeples of london, st. paul’s towering
 above all, and the tower famed in english history.
 



chapter 19
 

london was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
 months in this wonderful and celebrated city. clerval desired the
 intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
 time, but this was with secondary object; i was principally
 occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
 completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
 introduction that i had brought with me, addressed to the most
 distinguished natural philosophers.
 
if this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
 it would have afforded inexpressible pleasure. but blight had
 come over my existence, and i only visited these people for the sake of
 the information they might give on the subject in which my interest
 was so terribly profound. company was irksome to me; when alone, i
 could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
 henry soothed me, and i could thus cheat myself into transitory
 peace. but busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
 my heart. i saw an insurmountable barrier placed between and my
 fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of william and
 justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
 my soul with anguish.
 
but in clerval i saw the image of my former self; was inquisitive
 and anxious to gain experience and instruction. the difference of
 manners which observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
 instruction and amusement. was also pursuing an object had long
 had in view. his design was to visit india, in the belief that had
 in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views had
 taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
 european colonization and trade. in britain only could further the
 execution of his plan. was for ever busy, and the only check to his
 enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. i tried to conceal this
 as much as possible, that i might not debar him from the pleasures
 natural to one who was entering on new scene of life, undisturbed by
 any care or bitter recollection. i often refused to accompany him,
 alleging another engagement, that i might remain alone. i now also
 began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
 was to like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
 on the head. every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
 anguish, and every word that i spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
 to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.
 
after passing some months in london, we received letter from person in
 scotland who had formerly been our visitor at geneva. mentioned the
 beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient
 allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as perth,
 where resided. clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and i,
 although i abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and
 all the wondrous works with which nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.
 
we had arrived in england at the beginning of october, and it was now
 february. we accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
 north at the expiration of another month. in this expedition we did not
 intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford,
 matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of
 this tour about the end of july. i packed up my chemical instruments and
 the materials i had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
 obscure nook in the northern highlands of scotland.
 
we quitted london on the 27th of march and remained few days at
 windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. this was new scene to us
 mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
 stately deer were all novelties to us.
 
from thence we proceeded to oxford. as we entered this city, our minds
 were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
 there more than century and half before. it was here that charles
 i. had collected his forces. this city had remained faithful to him,
 after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
 parliament and liberty. the memory of that unfortunate king and his
 companions, the amiable falkland, the insolent goring, his queen, and
 son, gave peculiar interest to every part of the city which they
 might be supposed to have inhabited. the spirit of elder days found a
 dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. if these
 feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of
 the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
 the colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
 magnificent; and the lovely isis, which flows beside it through meadows
 of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into placid expanse of waters,
 which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and
 domes, embosomed among aged trees.
 
i enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
 memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. i was formed
 for peaceful happiness. during my youthful days discontent never
 visited my mind, and if i was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what
 is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
 the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate
 elasticity to my spirits. but i am blasted tree; the bolt has
 entered my soul; and i felt then that i should survive to exhibit what
 i shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
 pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
 
we passed considerable period at oxford, rambling among its environs
 and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
 animating epoch of english history. our little voyages of discovery
 were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented
 themselves. we visited the tomb of the illustrious hampden and the
 field on which that patriot fell. for moment my soul was elevated
 from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas
 of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments
 and the remembrancers. for an instant i dared to shake off my chains
 and look around with free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
 into my flesh, and i sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
 miserable self.
 
we left oxford with regret and proceeded to matlock, which was our next
 place of rest. the country in the neighbourhood of this village
 resembled, to greater degree, the scenery of switzerland; but
 everything is on lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
 distant white alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my
 native country. we visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
 of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same
 manner as in the collections at servox and chamounix. the latter name
 made tremble when pronounced by henry, and i hastened to quit
 matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
 
from derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in
 cumberland and westmorland. i could now almost fancy myself among the
 swiss mountains. the little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
 northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the
 rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. here also we
 made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat into
 happiness. the delight of clerval was proportionably greater than
 mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and found
 in his own nature greater capacities and resources than could have
 imagined himself to have possessed while associated with his
 inferiors. “i could pass my life here,” said to me; “and among
 these mountains i should scarcely regret switzerland and the rhine.”
 
but found that traveller’s life is one that includes much pain
 amidst its enjoyments. his feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
 when begins to sink into repose, finds himself obliged to quit
 that on which rests in pleasure for something new, which again
 engages his attention, and which also forsakes for other novelties.
 
we had scarcely visited the various lakes of cumberland and westmorland
 and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period
 of our appointment with our scotch friend approached, and we left them
 to travel on. for my own part i was not sorry. i had now neglected my
 promise for some time, and i feared the effects of the dæmon’s
 disappointment. might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance
 on my relatives. this idea pursued and tormented at every moment
 from which i might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. i waited
 for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed i was
 miserable and overcome by thousand fears; and when they arrived and i
 saw the superscription of elizabeth or my father, i hardly dared to
 read and ascertain my fate. sometimes i thought that the fiend
 followed and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
 when these thoughts possessed me, i would not quit henry for moment,
 but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
 his destroyer. i felt as if i had committed some great crime, the
 consciousness of which haunted me. i was guiltless, but i had indeed
 drawn down horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.
 
i visited edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
 have interested the most unfortunate being. clerval did not like it so well
 as oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
 but the beauty and regularity of the new town of edinburgh, its romantic
 castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, arthur’s
 seat, st. bernard’s well, and the pentland hills, compensated him for
 the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. but i was
 impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
 
we left edinburgh in week, passing through coupar, st. andrew’s, and
 along the banks of the tay, to perth, where our friend expected us.
 but i was in mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
 their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from guest; and
 accordingly i told clerval that i wished to make the tour of scotland
 alone. “do you,” said i, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our
 rendezvous. i may be absent month or two; but do not interfere with
 my motions, i entreat you; leave to peace and solitude for short
 time; and when i return, i hope it will be with lighter heart, more
 congenial to your own temper.”
 
henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing bent on this plan, ceased to
 remonstrate. entreated to write often. “i had rather be with
 you,” said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch
 people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return,
 that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in
 your absence.”
 
having parted from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of
 scotland and finish my work in solitude. i did not doubt but that the
 monster followed and would discover himself to when i should have
 finished, that might receive his companion.
 
with this resolution i traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of
 the remotest of the orkneys as the scene of my labours. it was place
 fitted for such work, being hardly more than rock whose high sides were
 continually beaten upon by the waves. the soil was barren, scarcely
 affording pasture for few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
 inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
 gave tokens of their miserable fare. vegetables and bread, when they
 indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from
 the mainland, which was about five miles distant.
 
on the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
 these was vacant when i arrived. this i hired. it contained but two
 rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
 penury. the thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
 door was off its hinges. i ordered it to be repaired, bought some
 furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
 occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been
 benumbed by want and squalid poverty. as it was, i lived ungazed at
 and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes
 which i gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations
 of men.
 
in this retreat i devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
 when the weather permitted, i walked on the stony beach of the to
 listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. it was a
 monotonous yet ever-changing scene. i thought of switzerland; it was
 far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. its hills
 are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
 plains. its fair lakes reflect blue and gentle sky, and when
 troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of lively
 infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
 
in this manner i distributed my occupations when i first arrived, but
 as i proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
 irksome to me. sometimes i could not prevail on myself to enter my
 laboratory for several days, and at other times i toiled day and night
 in order to complete my work. it was, indeed, filthy process in
 which i was engaged. during my first experiment, kind of
 enthusiastic frenzy had blinded to the horror of my employment; my
 mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes
 were shut to the horror of my proceedings. but now i went to it in
 cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
 
thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in
 solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from
 the actual scene in which i was engaged, my spirits became unequal; i
 grew restless and nervous. every moment i feared to meet my
 persecutor. sometimes i sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
 to raise them lest they should encounter the object which i so much
 dreaded to behold. i feared to wander from the sight of my fellow
 creatures lest when alone should come to claim his companion.
 
in the mean time i worked on, and my labour was already considerably
 advanced. i looked towards its completion with tremulous and eager
 hope, which i dared not trust myself to question but which was
 intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
 in my bosom.
 



chapter 20
 

i sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
 rising from the sea; i had not sufficient light for my employment, and i
 remained idle, in pause of consideration of whether i should leave my
 labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
 to it. as i sat, train of reflection occurred to which led to
 consider the effects of what i was now doing. three years before, i was
 engaged in the same manner and had created fiend whose unparalleled
 barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
 remorse. i was now about to form another being of whose dispositions i was
 alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her
 mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. had
 sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she
 had not; and she, who in all probability was to become thinking and
 reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with compact made before her
 creation. they might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
 loathed his own deformity, and might not conceive greater abhorrence
 for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? she also might turn
 with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him,
 and be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
 deserted by one of his own species.
 
even if they were to leave europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world,
 yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon
 thirsted would be children, and race of devils would be propagated upon
 the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a
 condition precarious and full of terror. had i right, for my own benefit,
 to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? i had before been moved
 by the sophisms of the being i had created; i had been struck senseless by
 his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my
 promise burst upon me; i shuddered to think that future ages might curse me
 as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
 the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.
 
i trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, i saw by
 the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. ghastly grin
 wrinkled his lips as gazed on me, where i sat fulfilling the task
 which had allotted to me. yes, had followed in my travels; he
 had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
 and desert heaths; and now came to mark my progress and claim the
 fulfilment of my promise.
 
as i looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
 malice and treachery. i thought with sensation of madness on my
 promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
 tore to pieces the thing on which i was engaged. the wretch saw me
 destroy the creature on whose future existence depended for
 happiness, and with howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
 
i left the room, and locking the door, made solemn vow in my own
 heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, i
 sought my own apartment. i was alone; none were near to dissipate
 the gloom and relieve from the sickening oppression of the most
 terrible reveries.
 
several hours passed, and i remained near my window gazing on the sea;
 it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
 reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. few fishing vessels alone
 specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
 of voices as the fishermen called to one another. i felt the silence,
 although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
 was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
 person landed close to my house.
 
in few minutes after, i heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
 endeavoured to open it softly. i trembled from head to foot; i felt a
 presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
 dwelt in cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the sensation
 of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain
 endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.
 
presently i heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
 opened, and the wretch whom i dreaded appeared. shutting the door, he
 approached and said in smothered voice,
 
“you have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
 intend? do you dare to break your promise? i have endured toil and misery;
 i left switzerland with you; i crept along the shores of the rhine, among
 its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. i have dwelt many
 months in the heaths of england and among the deserts of scotland. i have
 endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my
 hopes?”
 
“begone! i do break my promise; never will i create another like
 yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.”
 
“slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
 unworthy of my condescension. remember that i have power; you believe
 yourself miserable, but i can make you so wretched that the light of
 day will be hateful to you. you are my creator, but i am your master;
 obey!”
 
“the hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
 arrived. your threats cannot move to do an act of wickedness; but
 they confirm in determination of not creating you companion in
 vice. shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth dæmon whose
 delight is in death and wretchedness? begone! i am firm, and your
 words will only exasperate my rage.”
 
the monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
 impotence of anger. “shall each man,” cried he, “find a
 wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone? i had
 feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
 man! you may hate, but beware! your hours will pass in dread and misery,
 and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for
 ever. are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my
 wretchedness? you can blast my other passions, but revenge
 remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! i may die, but
 first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
 misery. beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful. i will watch with
 the wiliness of snake, that i may sting with its venom. man, you shall
 repent of the injuries you inflict.”
 
“devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
 i have declared my resolution to you, and i am coward to bend
 beneath words. leave me; i am inexorable.”
 
“it is well. i go; but remember, i shall be with you on your
 wedding-night.”
 
i started forward and exclaimed, “villain! before you sign my
 death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.”
 
i would have seized him, but eluded and quitted the house with
 precipitation. in few moments i saw him in his boat, which shot
 across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
 waves.
 
all was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. i burned with rage to
 pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. i
 walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
 conjured up thousand images to torment and sting me. why had i not
 followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? but i had suffered him
 to depart, and had directed his course towards the mainland. i shuddered
 to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
 and then i thought again of his words—“_i will be with you on
 your wedding-night._” that, then, was the period fixed for the
 fulfilment of my destiny. in that hour i should die and at once satisfy and
 extinguish his malice. the prospect did not move to fear; yet when i
 thought of my beloved elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she
 should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first i
 had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and i resolved not to fall
 before my enemy without bitter struggle.
 
the night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became
 calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into
 the depths of despair. i left the house, the horrid scene of the last
 night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which i
 almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between and my fellow
 creatures; nay, wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. i
 desired that i might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true,
 but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. if i returned, it was to
 be sacrificed or to see those whom i most loved die under the grasp of a
 dæmon whom i had myself created.
 
i walked about the isle like restless spectre, separated from all it
 loved and miserable in the separation. when it became noon, and the
 sun rose higher, i lay down on the grass and was overpowered by deep
 sleep. i had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
 were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. the sleep
 into which i now sank refreshed me; and when i awoke, i again felt as
 if i belonged to race of human beings like myself, and i began to
 reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
 words of the fiend rang in my ears like death-knell; they appeared
 like dream, yet distinct and oppressive as reality.
 
the sun had far descended, and i still sat on the shore, satisfying my
 appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when i saw a
 fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought packet;
 it contained letters from geneva, and one from clerval entreating to
 join him. said that was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
 was, that letters from the friends had formed in london desired
 his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
 indian enterprise. could not any longer delay his departure; but as
 his journey to london might be followed, even sooner than now
 conjectured, by his longer voyage, entreated to bestow as much of
 my society on him as i could spare. besought me, therefore, to
 leave my solitary isle and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed
 southwards together. this letter in degree recalled to life, and
 i determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.
 
yet, before i departed, there was task to perform, on which i shuddered
 to reflect; i must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose i
 must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and i must
 handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. the next
 morning, at daybreak, i summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door
 of my laboratory. the remains of the half-finished creature, whom i had
 destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as if i had
 mangled the living flesh of human being. i paused to collect myself and
 then entered the chamber. with trembling hand i conveyed the instruments
 out of the room, but i reflected that i ought not to leave the relics of my
 work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and i accordingly
 put them into basket, with great quantity of stones, and laying them
 up, determined to throw them into the that very night; and in the
 meantime i sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my
 chemical apparatus.
 
nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
 in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. i had
 before regarded my promise with gloomy despair as thing that, with
 whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but i now felt as if film
 had been taken from before my eyes and that i for the first time saw
 clearly. the idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
 to me; the threat i had heard weighed on my thoughts, but i did not
 reflect that voluntary act of mine could avert it. i had resolved in
 my own mind that to create another like the fiend i had first made
 would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and i
 banished from my mind every thought that could lead to different
 conclusion.
 
between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and i then, putting my
 basket aboard little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
 the scene was perfectly solitary; few boats were returning towards land,
 but i sailed away from them. i felt as if i was about the commission of a
 dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my
 fellow creatures. at one time the moon, which had before been clear, was
 suddenly overspread by thick cloud, and i took advantage of the moment of
 darkness and cast my basket into the sea; i listened to the gurgling sound
 as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. the sky became clouded, but
 the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then
 rising. but it refreshed and filled with such agreeable sensations
 that i resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a
 direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. clouds hid the
 moon, everything was obscure, and i heard only the sound of the boat as its
 keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in short time i
 slept soundly.
 
i do not know how long i remained in this situation, but when i awoke i
 found that the sun had already mounted considerably. the wind was high, and
 the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. i found
 that the wind was northeast and must have driven far from the coast from
 which i had embarked. i endeavoured to change my course but quickly found
 that if i again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with
 water. thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. i
 confess that i felt few sensations of terror. i had compass with me
 and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the
 world that the sun was of little benefit to me. i might be driven into the
 wide atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in
 the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. i had already
 been out many hours and felt the torment of burning thirst, prelude to
 my other sufferings. i looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds
 that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; i looked upon the
 sea; it was to be my grave. “fiend,” i exclaimed, “your
 task is already fulfilled!” i thought of elizabeth, of my father, and
 of clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
 sanguinary and merciless passions. this idea plunged into reverie so
 despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
 closing before for ever, i shudder to reflect on it.
 
some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
 horizon, the wind died away into gentle breeze and the became
 free from breakers. but these gave place to heavy swell; i felt sick
 and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly i saw line of high
 land towards the south.
 
almost spent, as i was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense i endured
 for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like flood of
 warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.
 
how mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have
 of life even in the excess of misery! i constructed another sail with a
 part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. it had a
 wild and rocky appearance, but as i approached nearer i easily perceived
 the traces of cultivation. i saw vessels near the shore and found myself
 suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. i
 carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed steeple which i at
 length saw issuing from behind small promontory. as i was in state of
 extreme debility, i resolved to sail directly towards the town, as place
 where i could most easily procure nourishment. fortunately i had money with
 me. as i turned the promontory i perceived small neat town and good
 harbour, which i entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
 escape.
 
as i was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
 people crowded towards the spot. they seemed much surprised at my
 appearance, but instead of offering any assistance, whispered
 together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
 slight sensation of alarm. as it was, i merely remarked that they
 spoke english, and i therefore addressed them in that language. “my
 good friends,” said i, “will you be so kind as to tell the name of
 this town and inform where i am?”
 
“you will know that soon enough,” replied man with hoarse voice.
 “maybe you are come to place that will not prove much to your taste,
 but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, i promise you.”
 
i was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
 stranger, and i was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
 angry countenances of his companions. “why do you answer so
 roughly?” i replied. “surely it is not the custom of englishmen to
 receive strangers so inhospitably.”
 
“i do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the
 english may be, but it is the custom of the irish to hate villains.”
 
while this strange dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly
 increase. their faces expressed mixture of curiosity and anger, which
 annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. i inquired the way to the inn, but
 one replied. i then moved forward, and murmuring sound arose from the
 crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man
 approaching tapped on the shoulder and said, “come, sir, you must
 follow to mr. kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.”
 
“who is mr. kirwin? why am i to give an account of myself? is not
 this free country?”
 
“ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. mr. kirwin is magistrate,
 and you are to give an account of the death of gentleman who was
 found murdered here last night.”
 
this answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself. i was innocent;
 that could easily be proved; accordingly i followed my conductor in silence
 and was led to one of the best houses in the town. i was ready to sink from
 fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by crowd, i thought it politic
 to rouse all my strength, that physical debility might be construed into
 apprehension or conscious guilt. little did i then expect the calamity that
 was in few moments to overwhelm and extinguish in horror and despair
 all fear of ignominy or death.
 
i must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of
 the frightful events which i am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
 recollection.
 



chapter 21
 

i was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
 benevolent man with calm and mild manners. looked upon me, however,
 with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors,
 asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.
 
about half dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the
 magistrate, deposed that had been out fishing the night before with
 his and brother-in-law, daniel nugent, when, about ten o’clock,
 they observed strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
 for port. it was very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
 not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at creek about
 two miles below. walked on first, carrying part of the fishing tackle,
 and his companions followed him at some distance. as was proceeding
 along the sands, struck his foot against something and fell at his
 length on the ground. his companions came up to assist him, and by the
 light of their lantern they found that had fallen on the body of man,
 who was to all appearance dead. their first supposition was that it was the
 corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
 waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even
 that the body was not then cold. they instantly carried it to the cottage
 of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
 to life. it appeared to be handsome young man, about five and twenty
 years of age. had apparently been strangled, for there was sign of
 any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.
 
the first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but
 when the mark of the fingers was mentioned i remembered the murder of
 my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
 mist came over my eyes, which obliged to lean on chair for
 support. the magistrate observed with keen eye and of course drew
 an unfavourable augury from my manner.
 
the confirmed his father’s account, but when daniel nugent was
 called swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he
 saw boat, with single man in it, at short distance from the shore;
 and as far as could judge by the light of few stars, it was the same
 boat in which i had just landed.
 
woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door
 of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour
 before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw boat with
 only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
 was afterwards found.
 
another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
 body into her house; it was not cold. they put it into bed and
 rubbed it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was
 quite gone.
 
several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed
 that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
 was very probable that i had beaten about for many hours and had been
 obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed.
 besides, they observed that it appeared that i had brought the body
 from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know
 the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
 of the town of —— from the place where i had deposited the corpse.
 
mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that i should be taken into
 the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what
 effect the sight of it would produce upon me. this idea was probably
 suggested by the extreme agitation i had exhibited when the mode of the
 murder had been described. i was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate
 and several other persons, to the inn. i could not help being struck by the
 strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but,
 knowing that i had been conversing with several persons in the island i had
 inhabited about the time that the body had been found, i was perfectly
 tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.
 
i entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. how
 can i describe my sensations on beholding it? i feel yet parched with
 horror, nor can i reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and
 agony. the examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
 passed like dream from my memory when i saw the lifeless form of henry
 clerval stretched before me. i gasped for breath, and throwing myself on
 the body, i exclaimed, “have my murderous machinations deprived you
 also, my dearest henry, of life? two i have already destroyed; other
 victims await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my
 benefactor—”
 
the human frame could longer support the agonies that i endured, and
 i was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.
 
fever succeeded to this. i lay for two months on the point of death; my
 ravings, as i afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the
 murderer of william, of justine, and of clerval. sometimes i entreated my
 attendants to assist in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was
 tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already grasping
 my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. fortunately, as i spoke
 my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and
 bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
 
why did i not die? more miserable than man ever was before, why did i not
 sink into forgetfulness and rest? death snatches away many blooming
 children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and
 youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
 next prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! of what materials was i
 made that i could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of
 the wheel, continually renewed the torture?
 
but i was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from
 dream, in prison, stretched on wretched bed, surrounded by
 gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of dungeon.
 it was morning, i remember, when i thus awoke to understanding; i had
 forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some
 great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when i looked around
 and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which i
 was, all flashed across my memory and i groaned bitterly.
 
this sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in chair beside
 me. she was hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
 countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise
 that class. the lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
 persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. her
 tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed in english,
 and the voice struck as one that i had heard during my sufferings.
 
“are you better now, sir?” said she.
 
i replied in the same language, with feeble voice, “i believe i am;
 but if it be all true, if indeed i did not dream, i am sorry that i am
 still alive to feel this misery and horror.”
 
“for that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the
 gentleman you murdered, i believe that it were better for you if you
 were dead, for i fancy it will go hard with you! however, that’s none
 of my business; i am sent to nurse you and get you well; i do my duty
 with safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”
 
i turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
 speech to person just saved, on the very edge of death; but i felt
 languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. the whole series
 of my life appeared to as dream; i sometimes doubted if indeed it
 were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
 of reality.
 
as the images that floated before became more distinct, i grew
 feverish; darkness pressed around me; one was near who soothed
 with the gentle voice of love; dear hand supported me. the
 physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
 them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
 expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
 second. who could be interested in the fate of murderer but the
 hangman who would gain his fee?
 
these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had
 shown extreme kindness. had caused the best room in the prison
 to be prepared for (wretched indeed was the best); and it was who
 had provided physician and nurse. it is true, seldom came to
 see me, for although ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
 every human creature, did not wish to be present at the agonies and
 miserable ravings of murderer. came, therefore, sometimes to see
 that i was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
 intervals.
 
one day, while i was gradually recovering, i was seated in chair, my eyes
 half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. i was overcome by gloom
 and misery and often reflected i had better seek death than desire to
 remain in world which to was replete with wretchedness. at one time i
 considered whether i should not declare myself guilty and suffer the
 penalty of the law, less innocent than poor justine had been. such were my
 thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and mr. kirwin entered.
 his countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; drew chair close to
 mine and addressed in french,
 
“i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do anything to
 make you more comfortable?”
 
“i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
 earth there is comfort which i am capable of receiving.”
 
“i know that the sympathy of stranger can be but of little relief to
 one borne down as you are by so strange misfortune. but you will, i
 hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can
 easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”
 
“that is my least concern; i am, by course of strange events, become
 the most miserable of mortals. persecuted and tortured as i am and
 have been, can death be any evil to me?”
 
“nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
 strange chances that have lately occurred. you were thrown, by some
 surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
 seized immediately, and charged with murder. the first sight that was
 presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
 unaccountable manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
 your path.”
 
as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endured on
 this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at
 the knowledge seemed to possess concerning me. i suppose some
 astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hastened
 to say,
 
“immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on
 your person were brought me, and i examined them that i might discover some
 trace by which i could send to your relations an account of your misfortune
 and illness. i found several letters, and, among others, one which i
 discovered from its commencement to be from your father. i instantly wrote
 to geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
 but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any
 kind.”
 
“this suspense is thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
 tell what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am
 now to lament?”
 
“your family is perfectly well,” said mr. kirwin with
 gentleness; “and someone, friend, is come to visit you.”
 
i know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
 instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
 misery and taunt with the death of clerval, as new incitement for
 to comply with his hellish desires. i put my hand before my eyes,
 and cried out in agony,
 
“oh! take him away! i cannot see him; for god’s sake, do not
 let him enter!”
 
mr. kirwin regarded with troubled countenance. could not help
 regarding my exclamation as presumption of my guilt and said in
 rather severe tone,
 
“i should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
 would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.”
 
“my father!” cried i, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
 from anguish to pleasure. “is my father indeed come? how kind, how
 very kind! but where is he, why does not hasten to me?”
 
my change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
 thought that my former exclamation was momentary return of delirium,
 and now instantly resumed his former benevolence. rose and
 quitted the room with my nurse, and in moment my father entered it.
 
nothing, at this moment, could have given greater pleasure than the
 arrival of my father. i stretched out my hand to him and cried,
 
“are you then safe—and elizabeth—and ernest?”
 
my father calmed with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
 dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
 desponding spirits; but soon felt that prison cannot be the abode of
 cheerfulness. “what place is this that you inhabit, my son!”
 said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
 of the room. “you travelled to seek happiness, but fatality seems
 to pursue you. and poor clerval—”
 
the name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
 great to be endured in my weak state; i shed tears.
 
“alas! yes, my father,” replied i; “some destiny of the
 most horrible kind hangs over me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i
 should have died on the coffin of henry.”
 
we were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
 precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
 could ensure tranquillity. mr. kirwin came in and insisted that my
 strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. but the
 appearance of my father was to like that of my good angel, and i
 gradually recovered my health.
 
as my sickness quitted me, i was absorbed by gloomy and black
 melancholy that nothing could dissipate. the image of clerval was
 for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. more than once the agitation
 into which these reflections threw made my friends dread dangerous
 relapse. alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a
 life? it was surely that i might fulfil my destiny, which is now
 drawing to close. soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
 throbbings and relieve from the mighty weight of anguish that bears
 to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, i shall also
 sink to rest. then the appearance of death was distant, although the
 wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hours
 motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
 might bury and my destroyer in its ruins.
 
the season of the assizes approached. i had already been three months
 in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a
 relapse, i was obliged to travel nearly hundred miles to the country
 town where the court was held. mr. kirwin charged himself with every
 care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. i was spared
 the disgrace of appearing publicly as criminal, as the case was not
 brought before the court that decides on life and death. the grand
 jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that i was on the orkney
 islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and fortnight
 after my removal i was liberated from prison.
 
my father was enraptured on finding freed from the vexations of a
 criminal charge, that i was again allowed to breathe the fresh
 atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. i did not
 participate in these feelings, for to the walls of dungeon or a
 palace were alike hateful. the cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
 although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i
 saw around nothing but dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
 light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. sometimes
 they were the expressive eyes of henry, languishing in death, the dark
 orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
 them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as i
 first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt.
 
my father tried to awaken in the feelings of affection. talked
 of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but
 these words only drew deep groans from me. sometimes, indeed, i felt a
 wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
 cousin or longed, with devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
 the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to in early
 childhood; but my general state of feeling was torpor in which a
 prison was as welcome residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
 these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and
 despair. at these moments i often endeavoured to put an end to the
 existence i loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
 to restrain from committing some dreadful act of violence.
 
yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
 triumphed over my selfish despair. it was necessary that i should
 return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
 i so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
 chance led to the place of his concealment, or if dared again to
 blast by his presence, i might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
 the existence of the monstrous image which i had endued with the
 mockery of soul still more monstrous. my father still desired to
 delay our departure, fearful that i could not sustain the fatigues of a
 journey, for i was shattered wreck—the shadow of human being. my
 strength was gone. i was mere skeleton, and fever night and day
 preyed upon my wasted frame.
 
still, as i urged our leaving ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
 my father thought it best to yield. we took our passage on board vessel
 bound for havre-de-grace and sailed with fair wind from the irish shores.
 it was midnight. i lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to
 the dashing of the waves. i hailed the darkness that shut ireland from my
 sight, and my pulse beat with feverish joy when i reflected that i should
 soon see geneva. the past appeared to in the light of frightful dream;
 yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew from the detested
 shore of ireland, and the which surrounded me, told too forcibly
 that i was deceived by vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest
 companion, had fallen victim to and the monster of my creation. i
 repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
 with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
 ingolstadt. i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried on
 to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i called to mind the night in
 which first lived. i was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
 thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept bitterly.
 
ever since my recovery from the fever, i had been in the custom of taking
 every night small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
 only that i was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
 life. oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, i now
 swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. but sleep did
 not afford respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a
 thousand objects that scared me. towards morning i was possessed by kind
 of nightmare; i felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
 myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. my father, who was
 watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves
 were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: sense of
 security, feeling that truce was established between the present hour
 and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to kind of calm
 forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly
 susceptible.
 



chapter 22
 

the voyage came to an end. we landed, and proceeded to paris. i soon
 found that i had overtaxed my strength and that i must repose before i
 could continue my journey. my father’s care and attentions were
 indefatigable, but did not know the origin of my sufferings and
 sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. wished to
 seek amusement in society. i abhorred the face of man. oh, not
 abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and i felt
 attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an
 angelic nature and celestial mechanism. but i felt that i had right
 to share their intercourse. i had unchained an enemy among them whose
 joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. how they
 would, each and all, abhor and hunt from the world, did they know
 my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!
 
my father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by
 various arguments to banish my despair. sometimes thought that i
 felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer charge of
 murder, and endeavoured to prove to the futility of pride.
 
“alas! my father,” said i, “how little do you know me. 
human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such
 wretch as i felt pride. justine, poor unhappy justine, was as innocent
 as i, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and i am the cause
 of this—i murdered her. william, justine, and henry—they all
 died by my hands.”
 
my father had often, during my imprisonment, heard make the same
 assertion; when i thus accused myself, sometimes seemed to desire an
 explanation, and at others appeared to consider it as the offspring of
 delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
 itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which i preserved in my
 convalescence. i avoided explanation and maintained continual silence
 concerning the wretch i had created. i had persuasion that i should be
 supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. but,
 besides, i could not bring myself to disclose secret which would fill my
 hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of
 his breast. i checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was
 silent when i would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
 yet, still, words like those i have recorded would burst uncontrollably
 from me. i could offer explanation of them, but their truth in part
 relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.
 
upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder,
 “my dearest victor, what infatuation is this? my dear son, i entreat
 you never to make such an assertion again.”
 
“i am not mad,” i cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
 have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. i am the
 assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
 thousand times would i have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
 saved their lives; but i could not, my father, indeed i could not
 sacrifice the whole human race.”
 
the conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
 deranged, and instantly changed the subject of our conversation and
 endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. wished as much as
 possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
 ireland and never alluded to them or suffered to speak of my
 misfortunes.
 
as time passed away i became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my
 heart, but i longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
 crimes; sufficient for was the consciousness of them. by the utmost
 self-violence i curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
 sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners
 were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
 to the of ice.
 
few days before we left paris on our way to switzerland, i received the
 following letter from elizabeth:
 
“my dear friend,
 
“it gave the greatest pleasure to receive letter from my uncle
 dated at paris; you are longer at formidable distance, and i may
 hope to see you in less than fortnight. my poor cousin, how much you
 must have suffered! i expect to see you looking even more ill than
 when you quitted geneva. this winter has been passed most miserably,
 tortured as i have been by anxious suspense; yet i hope to see peace in
 your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
 comfort and tranquillity.
 
“yet i fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
 year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. i would not disturb you at
 this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a
 conversation that i had with my uncle previous to his departure renders
 some explanation necessary before we meet.
 
explanation! you may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain? if
 you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
 but you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet
 be pleased with this explanation; and in probability of this being the
 case, i dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, i
 have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.
 
“you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of
 your parents ever since our infancy. we were told this when young, and
 taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
 place. we were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, i
 believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. but
 as brother and sister often entertain lively affection towards each
 other without desiring more intimate union, may not such also be our
 case? tell me, dearest victor. answer me, i conjure you by our mutual
 happiness, with simple truth—do you not love another?
 
“you have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
 ingolstadt; and i confess to you, my friend, that when i saw you last
 autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every
 creature, i could not help supposing that you might regret our
 connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
 your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
 but this is false reasoning. i confess to you, my friend, that i love
 you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant
 friend and companion. but it is your happiness i desire as well as my
 own when i declare to you that our marriage would render eternally
 miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. even now
 i weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
 misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that
 love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. i, who
 have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries
 tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. ah! victor, be assured
 that your cousin and playmate has too sincere love for you not to be
 made miserable by this supposition. be happy, my friend; and if you
 obey in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
 will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.
 
“do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
 next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. my uncle
 will send news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your
 lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, i
 shall need other happiness.
 
“elizabeth lavenza.
 


“geneva, may 18th, 17—”
 


this letter revived in my memory what i had before forgotten, the threat of
 the fiend—“_i will be with you on your
 wedding-night!_” such was my sentence, and on that night would the
 dæmon employ every art to destroy and tear from the glimpse of
 happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. on that night he
 had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. well, be it so; a
 deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if were
 victorious i should be at peace and his power over be at an end. if he
 were vanquished, i should be free man. alas! what freedom? such as the
 peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
 cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and is turned adrift, homeless,
 penniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberty except that in my
 elizabeth i possessed treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
 remorse and guilt which would pursue until death.
 
sweet and beloved elizabeth! i read and reread her letter, and some
 softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
 dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
 angel’s arm bared to drive from all hope. yet i would die to make
 her happy. if the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
 again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. my
 destruction might indeed arrive few months sooner, but if my torturer
 should suspect that i postponed it, influenced by his menaces, would
 surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. had vowed
 _to be with on my wedding-night_, yet did not consider that
 threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show that
 was not yet satiated with blood, had murdered clerval immediately
 after the enunciation of his threats. i resolved, therefore, that if my
 immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
 father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life
 should not retard it single hour.
 
in this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth. my letter was calm and
 affectionate. “i fear, my beloved girl,” i said, “little happiness
 remains for us on earth; yet all that i may one day enjoy is centred in
 you. chase away your idle fears; to you alone do i consecrate my life
 and my endeavours for contentment. i have one secret, elizabeth, a
 dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
 horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
 wonder that i survive what i have endured. i will confide this tale of
 misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place,
 for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. but
 until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. this i most
 earnestly entreat, and i know you will comply.”
 
in about week after the arrival of elizabeth’s letter we returned
 to geneva. the sweet girl welcomed with warm affection, yet tears were
 in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. i saw a
 change in her also. she was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly
 vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of
 compassion made her more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as i
 was.
 
the tranquillity which i now enjoyed did not endure. memory brought madness
 with it, and when i thought of what had passed, real insanity possessed
 me; sometimes i was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and
 despondent. i neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless,
 bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
 
elizabeth alone had the power to draw from these fits; her gentle voice
 would soothe when transported by passion and inspire with human
 feelings when sunk in torpor. she wept with and for me. when reason
 returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire with
 resignation. ah! it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the
 guilty there is peace. the agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is
 otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.
 
soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
 elizabeth. i remained silent.
 
“have you, then, some other attachment?”
 
“none on earth. i love elizabeth and look forward to our union with
 delight. let the day therefore be fixed; and on it i will consecrate
 myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”
 
“my dear victor, do not speak thus. heavy misfortunes have befallen
 us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love
 for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. our circle will be
 small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
 and when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
 care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly
 deprived.”
 
such were the lessons of my father. but to the remembrance of the
 threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had
 yet been in his deeds of blood, i should almost regard him as
 invincible, and that when had pronounced the words “_i shall be with
 you on your wedding-night_,” i should regard the threatened fate as
 unavoidable. but death was evil to if the loss of elizabeth were
 balanced with it, and i therefore, with contented and even cheerful
 countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
 ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined,
 the seal to my fate.
 
great god! if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish
 intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banished myself
 for ever from my native country and wandered friendless outcast over
 the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. but, as if
 possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded to his real
 intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i
 hastened that of far dearer victim.
 
as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or
 prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me. but i concealed my
 feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the
 countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer
 eye of elizabeth. she looked forward to our union with placid contentment,
 not unmingled with little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed,
 that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate
 into an airy dream and leave trace but deep and everlasting regret.
 
preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
 and all wore smiling appearance. i shut up, as well as i could, in my own
 heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness
 into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
 decorations of my tragedy. through my father’s exertions part of
 the inheritance of elizabeth had been restored to her by the austrian
 government. small possession on the shores of belonged to her. it
 was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to villa
 lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake
 near which it stood.
 
in the meantime i took every precaution to defend my person in case the
 fiend should openly attack me. i carried pistols and dagger
 constantly about and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and
 by these means gained greater degree of tranquillity. indeed, as the
 period approached, the threat appeared more as delusion, not to be
 regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness i hoped for
 in my marriage wore greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed
 for its solemnisation drew nearer and i heard it continually spoken of
 as an occurrence which accident could possibly prevent.
 
elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
 calm her mind. but on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
 destiny, she was melancholy, and presentiment of evil pervaded her;
 and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which i had
 promised to reveal to her on the following day. my father was in the
 meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in
 the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of bride.
 
after the ceremony was performed large party assembled at my
 father’s, but it was agreed that elizabeth and i should commence our
 journey by water, sleeping that night at evian and continuing our
 voyage on the following day. the day was fair, the wind favourable;
 all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.
 
those were the last moments of my life during which i enjoyed the
 feeling of happiness. we passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we
 were sheltered from its rays by kind of canopy while we enjoyed the
 beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
 mont salêve, the pleasant banks of montalègre, and at distance,
 surmounting all, the beautiful mont blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
 mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
 opposite banks, we saw the mighty jura opposing its dark side to the
 ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
 insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.
 
i took the hand of elizabeth. “you are sorrowful, my love. ah! if
 you knew what i have suffered and what i may yet endure, you would
 endeavour to let taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
 one day at least permits to enjoy.”
 
“be happy, my dear victor,” replied elizabeth; “there is, i hope,
 nothing to distress you; and be assured that if lively joy is not
 painted in my face, my heart is contented. something whispers to me
 not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but i
 will not listen to such sinister voice. observe how fast we move
 along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise
 above the dome of mont blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
 interesting. look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in
 the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at
 the bottom. what divine day! how happy and serene all nature
 appears!”
 
thus elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
 reflection upon melancholy subjects. but her temper was fluctuating;
 joy for few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place
 to distraction and reverie.
 
the sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river drance and
 observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
 lower hills. the alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
 the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. the
 spire of evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range
 of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.
 
the wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
 sank at sunset to light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water
 and caused pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the
 shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and
 hay. the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as i touched
 the shore i felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp
 and cling to for ever.
 



chapter 23
 

it was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for short time on the
 shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and
 contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
 in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.
 
the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence
 in the west. the moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was
 beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
 flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the
 scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
 that were beginning to rise. suddenly heavy storm of rain descended.
 
i had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the
 shapes of objects, thousand fears arose in my mind. i was anxious
 and watchful, while my right hand grasped pistol which was hidden in
 my bosom; every sound terrified me, but i resolved that i would sell my
 life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that
 of my adversary was extinguished.
 
elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
 but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and
 trembling, she asked, “what is it that agitates you, my dear victor?
 what is it you fear?”
 
“oh! peace, peace, my love,” replied i; “this night, and
 all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.”
 
i passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly i reflected how
 fearful the combat which i momentarily expected would be to my wife,
 and i earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her
 until i had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
 
she left me, and i continued some time walking up and down the passages
 of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford retreat to
 my adversary. but i discovered trace of him and was beginning to
 conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
 execution of his menaces when suddenly i heard shrill and dreadful
 scream. it came from the room into which elizabeth had retired. as i
 heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
 motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; i could feel the blood
 trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. this
 state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and i rushed
 into the room.
 
great god! why did i not then expire! why am i here to relate the
 destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? she was
 there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
 and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. everywhere i
 turn i see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung
 by the murderer on its bridal bier. could i behold this and live? alas!
 life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. for moment
 only did i lose recollection; i fell senseless on the ground.
 
when i recovered i found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their
 countenances expressed breathless terror, but the horror of others
 appeared only as mockery, shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. i
 escaped from them to the room where lay the body of elizabeth, my love, my
 wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. she had been moved from the
 posture in which i had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
 her arm and handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, i might have
 supposed her asleep. i rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but
 the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told that what i now held
 in my arms had ceased to be the elizabeth whom i had loved and cherished.
 the murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
 breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
 
while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i happened to look up.
 the windows of the room had before been darkened, and i felt kind of
 panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
 the shutters had been thrown back, and with sensation of horror not to be
 described, i saw at the open window figure the most hideous and abhorred.
 grin was on the face of the monster; seemed to jeer, as with his
 fiendish finger pointed towards the corpse of my wife. i rushed towards
 the window, and drawing pistol from my bosom, fired; but eluded me,
 leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning,
 plunged into the lake.
 
the report of the pistol brought crowd into the room. i pointed to
 the spot where had disappeared, and we followed the track with
 boats; nets were cast, but in vain. after passing several hours, we
 returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a
 form conjured up by my fancy. after having landed, they proceeded to
 search the country, parties going in different directions among the
 woods and vines.
 
i attempted to accompany them and proceeded short distance from the
 house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of drunken
 man, i fell at last in state of utter exhaustion; film covered my
 eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. in this state i
 was carried back and placed on bed, hardly conscious of what had
 happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that
 i had lost.
 
after an interval i arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room
 where the corpse of my beloved lay. there were women weeping around; i
 hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
 distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
 various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their
 cause. i was bewildered, in cloud of wonder and horror. the death
 of william, the execution of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastly
 of my wife; even at that moment i knew not that my only remaining
 friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now
 might be writhing under his grasp, and ernest might be dead at his
 feet. this idea made shudder and recalled to action. i started
 up and resolved to return to geneva with all possible speed.
 
there were horses to be procured, and i must return by the lake; but the
 wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. however, it was
 hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night. i hired men
 to row and took an oar myself, for i had always experienced relief from
 mental torment in bodily exercise. but the overflowing misery i now felt,
 and the excess of agitation that i endured rendered incapable of any
 exertion. i threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way
 to every gloomy idea that arose. if i looked up, i saw scenes which were
 familiar to in my happier time and which i had contemplated but the day
 before in the company of her who was now but shadow and recollection.
 tears streamed from my eyes. the rain had ceased for moment, and i saw
 the fish play in the waters as they had done few hours before; they had
 then been observed by elizabeth. nothing is so painful to the human mind as
 great and sudden change. the sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
 but nothing could appear to as it had done the day before. fiend had
 snatched from every hope of future happiness; creature had ever been
 so miserable as i was; so frightful an event is single in the history of
 man.
 
but why should i dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
 overwhelming event? mine has been tale of horrors; i have reached their
 _acme_, and what i must now relate can but be tedious to you. know
 that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; i was left desolate. my
 own strength is exhausted, and i must tell, in few words, what remains of
 my hideous narration.
 
i arrived at geneva. my father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk
 under the tidings that i bore. i see him now, excellent and venerable old
 man! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their
 delight—his elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom doted on with
 all that affection which man feels, who in the decline of life, having
 few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. cursed, cursed
 be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
 in wretchedness! could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
 around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; was unable to
 rise from his bed, and in few days died in my arms.
 
what then became of me? i know not; i lost sensation, and chains and
 darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. sometimes,
 indeed, i dreamt that i wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
 with the friends of my youth, but i awoke and found myself in a
 dungeon. melancholy followed, but by degrees i gained clear
 conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
 prison. for they had called mad, and during many months, as i
 understood, solitary cell had been my habitation.
 
liberty, however, had been useless gift to me, had i not, as i
 awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. as the
 memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their
 cause—the monster whom i had created, the miserable dæmon whom i had
 sent abroad into the world for my destruction. i was possessed by a
 maddening rage when i thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
 that i might have him within my grasp to wreak great and signal
 revenge on his cursed head.
 
nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to
 reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
 month after my release, i repaired to criminal judge in the town
 and told him that i had an accusation to make, that i knew the
 destroyer of my family, and that i required him to exert his whole
 authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
 
the magistrate listened to with attention and kindness. “be
 assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall
 be spared to discover the villain.”
 
“i thank you,” replied i; “listen, therefore, to the
 deposition that i have to make. it is indeed tale so strange that i
 should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth
 which, however wonderful, forces conviction. the story is too connected to
 be mistaken for dream, and i have motive for falsehood.” my
 manner as i thus addressed him was impressive but calm; i had formed in my
 own heart resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose
 quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled to life. i now related
 my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
 accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
 
the magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as i continued
 became more attentive and interested; i saw him sometimes shudder with
 horror; at others lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted
 on his countenance.
 
when i had concluded my narration, i said, “this is the being whom i
 accuse and for whose seizure and punishment i call upon you to exert your
 whole power. it is your duty as magistrate, and i believe and hope that
 your feelings as man will not revolt from the execution of those
 functions on this occasion.”
 
this address caused considerable change in the physiognomy of my own
 auditor. had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given
 to tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when was called upon
 to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity
 returned. he, however, answered mildly, “i would willingly afford you
 every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to
 have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. who can follow an
 animal which can traverse the of ice and inhabit caves and dens where
 man would venture to intrude? besides, some months have elapsed since
 the commission of his crimes, and one can conjecture to what place he
 has wandered or what region may now inhabit.”
 
“i do not doubt that hovers near the spot which i inhabit, and if
 has indeed taken refuge in the alps, may be hunted like the chamois
 and destroyed as beast of prey. but i perceive your thoughts; you do not
 credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
 punishment which is his desert.”
 
as i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
 “you are mistaken,” said he. “i will exert myself, and if
 it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that shall suffer
 punishment proportionate to his crimes. but i fear, from what you have
 yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
 impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should
 make up your mind to disappointment.”
 
“that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail. my
 revenge is of moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be vice, i
 confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. my rage
 is unspeakable when i reflect that the murderer, whom i have turned
 loose upon society, still exists. you refuse my just demand; i have
 but one resource, and i devote myself, either in my life or death, to
 his destruction.”
 
i trembled with excess of agitation as i said this; there was frenzy
 in my manner, and something, i doubt not, of that haughty fierceness
 which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. but to genevan
 magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
 devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
 madness. endeavoured to soothe as nurse does child and
 reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.
 
“man,” i cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of
 wisdom! cease; you know not what it is you say.”
 
i broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on
 some other mode of action.
 



chapter 24
 

my present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
 swallowed up and lost. i was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
 endowed with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and
 allowed to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise
 delirium or death would have been my portion.
 
my first resolution was to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when i
 was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
 hateful. i provided myself with sum of money, together with few jewels
 which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
 
and now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. i have
 traversed vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships
 which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. how i
 have lived i hardly know; many times have i stretched my failing limbs upon
 the sandy plain and prayed for death. but revenge kept alive; i dared
 not die and leave my adversary in being.
 
when i quitted geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which i
 might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. but my plan was unsettled,
 and i wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain
 what path i should pursue. as night approached i found myself at the
 entrance of the cemetery where william, elizabeth, and my father
 reposed. i entered it and approached the tomb which marked their
 graves. everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which
 were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
 scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
 observer. the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
 cast shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
 mourner.
 
the deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
 rage and despair. they were dead, and i lived; their murderer also lived,
 and to destroy him i must drag out my weary existence. i knelt on the grass
 and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “by the
 sacred earth on which i kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
 deep and eternal grief that i feel, i swear; and by thee, night, and the
 spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery,
 until or i shall perish in mortal conflict. for this purpose i will
 preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will i again behold the sun
 and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my
 eyes for ever. and i call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering
 ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct in my work. let the cursed
 and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now
 torments me.”
 
i had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
 that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but
 the furies possessed as i concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
 
i was answered through the stillness of night by loud and fiendish
 laugh. it rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
 it, and i felt as if all hell surrounded with mockery and laughter.
 surely in that moment i should have been possessed by frenzy and have
 destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that i
 was reserved for vengeance. the laughter died away, when well-known
 and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed in an
 audible whisper, “i am satisfied, miserable wretch! you have
 determined to live, and i am satisfied.”
 
i darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil
 eluded my grasp. suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
 full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as fled with more than
 mortal speed.
 
i pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. guided by a
 slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly. the
 blue mediterranean appeared, and by strange chance, i saw the fiend
 enter by night and hide himself in vessel bound for the black sea. i
 took my passage in the same ship, but escaped, i know not how.
 
amidst the wilds of tartary and russia, although still evaded me, i
 have ever followed in his track. sometimes the peasants, scared by
 this horrid apparition, informed of his path; sometimes himself,
 who feared that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die,
 left some mark to guide me. the snows descended on my head, and i saw
 the print of his huge step on the white plain. to you first entering
 on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
 what i have felt and still feel? cold, want, and fatigue were the
 least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by some devil
 and carried about with my eternal hell; yet still spirit of good
 followed and directed my steps and when i most murmured would suddenly
 extricate from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. sometimes,
 when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, repast
 was prepared for in the desert that restored and inspirited me. the
 fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
 i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had
 invoked to aid me. often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
 i was parched by thirst, slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
 few drops that revived me, and vanish.
 
i followed, when i could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon
 generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
 country chiefly collected. in other places human beings were seldom
 seen, and i generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
 path. i had money with and gained the friendship of the villagers
 by distributing it; or i brought with some food that i had killed,
 which, after taking small part, i always presented to those who had
 provided with fire and utensils for cooking.
 
my life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
 sleep alone that i could taste joy. blessed sleep! often, when most
 miserable, i sank to repose, and my dreams lulled even to rapture. the
 spirits that guarded had provided these moments, or rather hours, of
 happiness that i might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. deprived of
 this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships. during the day i was
 sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep i saw my
 friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again i saw the benevolent
 countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my elizabeth’s
 voice, and beheld clerval enjoying health and youth. often, when wearied by
 toilsome march, i persuaded myself that i was dreaming until night should
 come and that i should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest
 friends. what agonising fondness did i feel for them! how did i cling to
 their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and
 persuade myself that they still lived! at such moments vengeance, that
 burned within me, died in my heart, and i pursued my path towards the
 destruction of the dæmon more as task enjoined by heaven, as the
 mechanical impulse of some power of which i was unconscious, than as the
 ardent desire of my soul.
 
what his feelings were whom i pursued i cannot know. sometimes, indeed, he
 left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
 and instigated my fury. “my reign is not yet
 over”—these words were legible in one of these
 inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. follow me; i
 seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
 cold and frost, to which i am impassive. you will find near this place, if
 you follow not too tardily, dead hare; eat and be refreshed. come on, my
 enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable
 hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.”
 
scoffing devil! again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee,
 miserable fiend, to torture and death. never will i give up my search
 until or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my
 elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for the
 reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!
 
as i still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the
 cold increased in degree almost too severe to support. the peasants were
 shut up in their hovels, and only few of the most hardy ventured forth to
 seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to
 seek for prey. the rivers were covered with ice, and fish could be
 procured; and thus i was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
 
the triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. one
 inscription that left was in these words: “prepare! your toils
 only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
 upon journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
 hatred.”
 
my courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; i
 resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support
 me, i continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
 until the ocean appeared at distance and formed the utmost boundary
 of the horizon. oh! how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the
 south! covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by
 its superior wildness and ruggedness. the greeks wept for joy when
 they beheld the mediterranean from the hills of asia, and hailed with
 rapture the boundary of their toils. i did not weep, but i knelt down
 and with full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting in
 safety to the place where i hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe,
 to meet and grapple with him.
 
some weeks before this period i had procured sledge and dogs and thus
 traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. i know not whether the
 fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had
 daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gained on him, so much so that
 when i first saw the ocean was but one day’s journey in advance, and
 i hoped to intercept him before should reach the beach. with new
 courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrived at wretched
 hamlet on the seashore. i inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
 fiend and gained accurate information. gigantic monster, they said,
 had arrived the night before, armed with gun and many pistols,
 putting to flight the inhabitants of solitary cottage through fear of
 his terrific appearance. had carried off their store of winter
 food, and placing it in sledge, to draw which had seized on a
 numerous drove of trained dogs, had harnessed them, and the same
 night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
 journey across the in direction that led to land; and they
 conjectured that must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
 ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.
 
on hearing this information i suffered temporary access of despair.
 had escaped me, and i must commence destructive and almost endless
 journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
 of the inhabitants could long endure and which i, the native of a
 genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. yet at the idea
 that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
 returned, and like mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
 after slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
 round and instigated to toil and revenge, i prepared for my journey.
 
i exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of
 the frozen ocean, and purchasing plentiful stock of provisions, i
 departed from land.
 
i cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but i have endured
 misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of just retribution
 burning within my heart could have enabled to support. immense and
 rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and i often heard
 the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. but
 again the frost came and made the paths of the secure.
 
by the quantity of provision which i had consumed, i should guess that
 i had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction
 of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
 despondency and grief from my eyes. despair had indeed almost secured
 her prey, and i should soon have sunk beneath this misery. once, after
 the poor animals that conveyed had with incredible toil gained the
 summit of sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue,
 died, i viewed the expanse before with anguish, when suddenly my eye
 caught dark speck upon the dusky plain. i strained my sight to
 discover what it could be and uttered wild cry of ecstasy when i
 distinguished sledge and the distorted proportions of well-known
 form within. oh! with what burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
 warm tears filled my eyes, which i hastily wiped away, that they might
 not intercept the view i had of the dæmon; but still my sight was
 dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that
 oppressed me, i wept aloud.
 
but this was not the time for delay; i disencumbered the dogs of their
 dead companion, gave them plentiful portion of food, and after an
 hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
 irksome to me, i continued my route. the sledge was still visible, nor
 did i again lose sight of it except at the moments when for short
 time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. i indeed
 perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, i
 beheld my enemy at more than mile distant, my heart bounded within
 me.
 
but now, when i appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
 suddenly extinguished, and i lost all trace of him more utterly than i had
 ever done before. ground was heard; the thunder of its progress, as
 the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous
 and terrific. i pressed on, but in vain. the wind arose; the roared;
 and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
 tremendous and overwhelming sound. the work was soon finished; in few
 minutes tumultuous rolled between and my enemy, and i was left
 drifting on scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and
 thus preparing for hideous death.
 
in this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and i
 myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when i saw your
 vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to hopes of succour and life.
 i had conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded
 at the sight. i quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and
 by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in
 the direction of your ship. i had determined, if you were going southwards,
 still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my
 purpose. i hoped to induce you to grant boat with which i could pursue
 my enemy. but your direction was northwards. you took on board when my
 vigour was exhausted, and i should soon have sunk under my multiplied
 hardships into death which i still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.
 
oh! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting to the dæmon, allow
 the rest i so much desire; or must i die, and yet live? if i do,
 swear to me, walton, that shall not escape, that you will seek him
 and satisfy my vengeance in his death. and do i dare to ask of you to
 undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that i have undergone?
 no; i am not so selfish. yet, when i am dead, if should appear, if
 the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
 shall not live—swear that shall not triumph over my accumulated
 woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. is eloquent
 and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
 trust him not. his soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
 and fiend-like malice. hear him not; call on the names of william,
 justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched victor, and
 thrust your sword into his heart. i will hover near and direct the
 steel aright.
 
walton, _in continuation._
 

august 26th, 17—.
 

you have read this strange and terrific story, margaret; and do you not
 feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles
 mine? sometimes, seized with sudden agony, could not continue his
 tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with
 difficulty the words so replete with anguish. his fine and lovely eyes
 were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
 and quenched in infinite wretchedness. sometimes commanded his
 countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
 tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
 volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
 of the wildest rage as shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.
 
his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth,
 yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which showed me,
 and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to a
 greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
 however earnest and connected. such monster has, then, really existence!
 i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration. sometimes i
 endeavoured to gain from frankenstein the particulars of his
 creature’s formation, but on this point was impenetrable.
 
“are you mad, my friend?” said he. “or whither does your
 senseless curiosity lead you? would you also create for yourself and the
 world demoniacal enemy? peace, peace! learn my miseries and do not seek
 to increase your own.”
 
frankenstein discovered that i made notes concerning his history; asked
 to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
 but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations held
 with his enemy. “since you have preserved my narration,” said
 he, “i would not that mutilated one should go down to
 posterity.”
 
thus has week passed away, while i have listened to the strangest
 tale that ever imagination formed. my thoughts and every feeling of my
 soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale
 and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. i wish to soothe
 him, yet can i counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of
 every hope of consolation, to live? oh, no! the only joy that can
 now know will be when composes his shattered spirit to peace and
 death. yet enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
 delirium; believes that when in dreams holds converse with his
 friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or
 excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his
 fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a
 remote world. this faith gives solemnity to his reveries that render
 them to almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
 
our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
 misfortunes. on every point of general literature displays
 unbounded knowledge and quick and piercing apprehension. his
 eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can i hear him, when relates
 pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love,
 without tears. what glorious creature must have been in the days
 of his prosperity, when is thus noble and godlike in ruin! seems
 to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.
 
“when younger,” said he, “i believed myself destined for
 some great enterprise. my feelings are profound, but i possessed coolness
 of judgment that fitted for illustrious achievements. this sentiment of
 the worth of my nature supported when others would have been oppressed,
 for i deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that
 might be useful to my fellow creatures. when i reflected on the work i had
 completed, less one than the creation of sensitive and rational
 animal, i could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. but
 this thought, which supported in the commencement of my career, now
 serves only to plunge lower in the dust. all my speculations and hopes
 are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, i am
 chained in an eternal hell. my imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
 analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities i
 conceived the idea and executed the creation of man. even now i cannot
 recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. i trod
 heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea
 of their effects. from my infancy i was imbued with high hopes and lofty
 ambition; but how am i sunk! oh! my friend, if you had known as i once
 was, you would not recognise in this state of degradation. despondency
 rarely visited my heart; high destiny seemed to bear on, until i fell,
 never, never again to rise.”
 
must i then lose this admirable being? i have longed for friend; i have
 sought one who would sympathise with and love me. behold, on these desert
 seas i have found such one, but i fear i have gained him only to know his
 value and lose him. i would reconcile him to life, but repulses the idea.
 
“i thank you, walton,” said, “for your kind intentions towards so
 miserable wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
 affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? can any
 man be to as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth? even
 where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence,
 the companions of our childhood always possess certain power over our
 minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. they know our
 infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified,
 are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more
 certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. sister or a
 brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
 suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
 however strongly may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be
 contemplated with suspicion. but i enjoyed friends, dear not only
 through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
 i am, the soothing voice of my elizabeth and the conversation of
 clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. they are dead, and but one
 feeling in such solitude can persuade to preserve my life. if i
 were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
 utility to my fellow creatures, then could i live to fulfil it. but
 such is not my destiny; i must pursue and destroy the being to whom i
 gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and i may die.”
 
my beloved sister,
 
september 2d.
 

i write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether i am ever
 doomed to see again dear england and the dearer friends that inhabit
 it. i am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of escape and
 threaten every moment to crush my vessel. the brave fellows whom i
 have persuaded to be my companions look towards for aid, but i have
 none to bestow. there is something terribly appalling in our
 situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. yet it is
 terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered
 through me. if we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
 
and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind? you will not hear of my
 destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. years will pass, and
 you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. oh! my
 beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is,
 in prospect, more terrible to than my own death. but you have husband
 and lovely children; you may be happy. heaven bless you and make you so!
 
my unfortunate guest regards with the tenderest compassion. he
 endeavours to fill with hope and talks as if life were possession
 which valued. reminds how often the same accidents have
 happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite
 of myself, fills with cheerful auguries. even the sailors feel
 the power of his eloquence; when speaks, they longer despair; he
 rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these
 vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the
 resolutions of man. these feelings are transitory; each day of
 expectation delayed fills them with fear, and i almost dread mutiny
 caused by this despair.
 
september 5th.
 

scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is
 highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet i cannot
 forbear recording it.
 
we are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger
 of being crushed in their conflict. the cold is excessive, and many of
 my unfortunate comrades have already found grave amidst this scene of
 desolation. frankenstein has daily declined in health; feverish fire
 still glimmers in his eyes, but is exhausted, and when suddenly
 roused to any exertion, speedily sinks again into apparent
 lifelessness.
 
i mentioned in my last letter the fears i entertained of mutiny.
 this morning, as i sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his
 eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—i was roused by half
 dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. they
 entered, and their leader addressed me. told that and his
 companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation
 to to make requisition which, in justice, i could not refuse.
 we were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they
 feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and free
 passage be opened, i should be rash enough to continue my voyage and
 lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
 this. they insisted, therefore, that i should engage with solemn
 promise that if the vessel should be freed i would instantly direct my
 course southwards.
 
this speech troubled me. i had not despaired, nor had i yet conceived
 the idea of returning if set free. yet could i, in justice, or even in
 possibility, refuse this demand? i hesitated before i answered, when
 frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly
 to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
 and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. turning towards the men,
 said,
 
“what do you mean? what do you demand of your captain? are you, then,
 so easily turned from your design? did you not call this glorious
 expedition? “and wherefore was it glorious? not because the way was
 smooth and placid as southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and
 terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth
 and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and
 these you were to brave and overcome. for this was it glorious, for this
 was it an honourable undertaking. you were hereafter to be hailed as the
 benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men
 who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. and now,
 behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first
 mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content
 to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
 peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
 firesides. why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come
 thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of defeat merely to prove
 yourselves cowards. oh! be men, or be more than men. be steady to your
 purposes and firm as rock. this ice is not made of such stuff as your
 hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
 shall not. do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
 marked on your brows. return as heroes who have fought and conquered and
 who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”
 
spoke this with voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed
 in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can
 you wonder that these men were moved? they looked at one another and were
 unable to reply. i spoke; i told them to retire and consider of what had
 been said, that i would not lead them farther north if they strenuously
 desired the contrary, but that i hoped that, with reflection, their courage
 would return.
 
they retired and i turned towards my friend, but was sunk in languor and
 almost deprived of life.
 
how all this will terminate, i know not, but i had rather die than
 return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. yet i fear such will be my
 fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
 willingly continue to endure their present hardships.
 
september 7th.
 

the die is cast; i have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
 thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; i come back
 ignorant and disappointed. it requires more philosophy than i possess
 to bear this injustice with patience.
 
september 12th.
 

it is past; i am returning to england. i have lost my hopes of utility
 and glory; i have lost my friend. but i will endeavour to detail these
 bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while i am wafted
 towards england and towards you, i will not despond.
 
september 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard
 at distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. we were
 in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief
 attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in
 such degree that was entirely confined to his bed. the ice cracked
 behind us and was driven with force towards the north; breeze sprang from
 the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
 free. when the sailors saw this and that their return to their native
 country was apparently assured, shout of tumultuous joy broke from them,
 loud and long-continued. frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
 cause of the tumult. “they shout,” i said, “because they
 will soon return to england.”
 
“do you, then, really return?”
 
“alas! yes; i cannot withstand their demands. i cannot lead them
 unwillingly to danger, and i must return.”
 
“do so, if you will; but i will not. you may give up your purpose, but
 mine is assigned to by heaven, and i dare not. i am weak, but
 surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow with
 sufficient strength.” saying this, endeavoured to spring from the
 bed, but the exertion was too great for him; fell back and fainted.
 
it was long before was restored, and i often thought that life was
 entirely extinct. at length opened his eyes; breathed with
 difficulty and was unable to speak. the surgeon gave him composing
 draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. in the meantime he
 told that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.
 
his sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient. i sat
 by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and i thought slept; but
 presently called to in feeble voice, and bidding come near,
 said, “alas! the strength i relied on is gone; i feel that i shall
 soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. think
 not, walton, that in the last moments of my existence i feel that burning
 hatred and ardent desire of revenge i once expressed; but i feel myself
 justified in desiring the death of my adversary. during these last days i
 have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do i find it blamable.
 in fit of enthusiastic madness i created rational creature and was
 bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and
 well-being. this was my duty, but there was another still paramount to
 that. my duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to
 my attention because they included greater proportion of happiness or
 misery. urged by this view, i refused, and i did right in refusing, to
 create companion for the first creature. showed unparalleled malignity
 and selfishness in evil; destroyed my friends; devoted to destruction
 beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do i
 know where this thirst for vengeance may end. miserable himself that may
 render other wretched, ought to die. the task of his destruction was
 mine, but i have failed. when actuated by selfish and vicious motives, i
 asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and i renew this request now,
 when i am only induced by reason and virtue.
 
“yet i cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil
 this task; and now that you are returning to england, you will have
 little chance of meeting with him. but the consideration of these
 points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, i
 leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
 approach of death. i dare not ask you to do what i think right, for i
 may still be misled by passion.
 
“that should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
 other respects, this hour, when i momentarily expect my release, is the
 only happy one which i have enjoyed for several years. the forms of
 the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms. farewell,
 walton! seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
 be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
 science and discoveries. yet why do i say this? i have myself been
 blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.”
 
his voice became fainter as spoke, and at length, exhausted by his
 effort, sank into silence. about half an hour afterwards he
 attempted again to speak but was unable; pressed my hand feebly, and
 his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of gentle smile passed
 away from his lips.
 
margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this
 glorious spirit? what can i say that will enable you to understand the
 depth of my sorrow? all that i should express would be inadequate and
 feeble. my tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by cloud of
 disappointment. but i journey towards england, and i may there find
 consolation.
 
i am interrupted. what do these sounds portend? it is midnight; the
 breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. again there
 is sound as of human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
 where the remains of frankenstein still lie. i must arise and examine.
 good night, my sister.
 
great god! what scene has just taken place! i am yet dizzy with the
 remembrance of it. i hardly know whether i shall have the power to detail
 it; yet the tale which i have recorded would be incomplete without this
 final and wonderful catastrophe.
 
i entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
 friend. over him hung form which i cannot find words to
 describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
 proportions. as hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long
 locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
 apparent texture like that of mummy. when heard the sound of my
 approach, ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung
 towards the window. never did i behold vision so horrible as his face, of
 such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. i shut my eyes involuntarily and
 endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
 i called on him to stay.
 
paused, looking on with wonder, and again turning towards the
 lifeless form of his creator, seemed to forget my presence, and
 every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
 uncontrollable passion.
 
“that is also my victim!” exclaimed. “in his murder my
 crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
 close! oh, frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does it
 avail that i now ask thee to pardon me? i, who irretrievably destroyed thee
 by destroying all thou lovedst. alas! is cold, cannot answer
 me.”
 
his voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to
 the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his
 enemy, were now suspended by mixture of curiosity and compassion. i
 approached this tremendous being; i dared not again raise my eyes to his
 face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. i
 attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. the monster
 continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. at length i
 gathered resolution to address him in pause of the tempest of his passion.
 
“your repentance,” i said, “is now superfluous. if you
 had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse
 before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity,
 frankenstein would yet have lived.”
 
“and do you dream?” said the dæmon. “do you think that i was then
 dead to agony and remorse? he,” continued, pointing to the corpse,
 “he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. oh! not the
 ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
 lingering detail of its execution. frightful selfishness hurried me
 on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. think you that the
 groans of clerval were music to my ears? my heart was fashioned to be
 susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
 and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without
 torture such as you cannot even imagine.
 
“after the murder of clerval i returned to switzerland, heart-broken
 and overcome. i pitied frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; i
 abhorred myself. but when i discovered that he, the author at once of
 my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
 happiness, that while accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
 sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
 indulgence of which i was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter
 indignation filled with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. i
 recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. i
 knew that i was preparing for myself deadly torture, but i was the
 slave, not the master, of an impulse which i detested yet could not
 disobey. yet when she died! nay, then i was not miserable. i had
 cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my
 despair. evil thenceforth became my good. urged thus far, i had no
 choice but to adapt my nature to an element which i had willingly
 chosen. the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable
 passion. and now it is ended; there is my last victim!”
 
i was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when i called
 to mind what frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and
 persuasion, and when i again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
 friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “wretch!” i said.
 “it is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
 have made. you throw torch into pile of buildings, and when they are
 consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. hypocritical fiend!
 if whom you mourn still lived, still would be the object, again would
 become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. it is not pity that you
 feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
 from your power.”
 
“oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being.
 “yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to
 be the purport of my actions. yet i seek not fellow feeling in my misery.
 sympathy may i ever find. when i first sought it, it was the love of
 virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
 overflowed, that i wished to be participated. but now that virtue has
 become to shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
 bitter and loathing despair, in what should i seek for sympathy? i am
 content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when i die, i am
 well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. once
 my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. once
 i falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would
 love for the excellent qualities which i was capable of unfolding. i was
 nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. but now crime has
 degraded beneath the meanest animal. guilt, mischief, no
 malignity, misery, can be found comparable to mine. when i run over the
 frightful catalogue of my sins, i cannot believe that i am the same
 creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
 visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. but it is even so; the
 fallen angel becomes malignant devil. yet even that enemy of god and man
 had friends and associates in his desolation; i am alone.
 
“you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have knowledge of my
 crimes and his misfortunes. but in the detail which gave you of them
 could not sum up the hours and months of misery which i endured
 wasting in impotent passions. for while i destroyed his hopes, i did
 not satisfy my own desires. they were for ever ardent and craving; still
 i desired love and fellowship, and i was still spurned. was there no
 injustice in this? am i to be thought the only criminal, when all
 humankind sinned against me? why do you not hate felix, who drove his
 friend from his door with contumely? why do you not execrate the rustic
 who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? nay, these are virtuous
 and immaculate beings! i, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
 abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. even now my
 blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.
 
“but it is true that i am wretch. i have murdered the lovely and
 the helpless; i have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to
 death his throat who never injured or any other living thing. i have
 devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and
 admiration among men, to misery; i have pursued him even to that
 irremediable ruin. there lies, white and cold in death. you hate me, but
 your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself. i look on the
 hands which executed the deed; i think on the heart in which the
 imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
 will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts more.
 
“fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief. my work
 is nearly complete. neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
 consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done,
 but it requires my own. do not think that i shall be slow to perform this
 sacrifice. i shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
 thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; i shall
 collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its
 remains may afford light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would
 create such another as i have been. i shall die. i shall longer feel the
 agonies which now consume or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet
 unquenched. is dead who called into being; and when i shall be no
 more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. i shall no
 longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. light,
 feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must i find my
 happiness. some years ago, when the images which this world affords first
 opened upon me, when i felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the
 rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to
 me, i should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. polluted by
 crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can i find rest but in
 death?
 
“farewell! i leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these
 eyes will ever behold. farewell, frankenstein! if thou wert yet alive
 and yet cherished desire of revenge against me, it would be better
 satiated in my life than in my destruction. but it was not so; thou
 didst seek my extinction, that i might not cause greater wretchedness;
 and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
 and feel, thou wouldst not desire against vengeance greater than
 that which i feel. blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to
 thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my
 wounds until death shall close them for ever.
 
“but soon,” cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “i
 shall die, and what i now feel be longer felt. soon these burning
 miseries will be extinct. i shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and
 exult in the agony of the torturing flames. the light of that conflagration
 will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the by the winds. my spirit
 will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
 farewell.”
 
sprang from the cabin-window as said this, upon the ice raft
 which lay close to the vessel. was soon borne away by the waves and
 lost in darkness and distance.
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 
the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
 
author: mary wollstonecraft shelley
 
release date: october 1, 1993 [ebook #84]
 most recently updated: december 2, 2022
 
language: english
 
credits: judith boss, christy phillips, lynn hanninen and david meltzer. html version by haines.
 further corrections by menno leeuw.
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***
 



frankenstein;
 
or, the modern prometheus
 
by mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley
 

contents
 
letter 1
 letter 2
 letter 3
 letter 4
 chapter 1
 chapter 2
 chapter 3
 chapter 4
 chapter 5
 chapter 6
 chapter 7
 chapter 8
 chapter 9
 chapter 10
 chapter 11
 chapter 12
 chapter 13
 chapter 14
 chapter 15
 chapter 16
 chapter 17
 chapter 18
 chapter 19
 chapter 20
 chapter 21
 chapter 22
 chapter 23
 chapter 24
 



letter 1
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 

st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17—.
 

you will rejoice to hear that disaster has accompanied the
 commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
 forebodings. i arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure
 my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success
 of my undertaking.
 
i am already far north of london, and as i walk in the streets of
 petersburgh, i feel cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
 braces my nerves and fills with delight. do you understand this
 feeling? this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards
 which i am advancing, gives foretaste of those icy climes.
 inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent
 and vivid. i try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of
 frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the
 region of beauty and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever
 visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a
 perpetual splendour. there—for with your leave, my sister, i will put
 some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished;
 and, sailing over calm sea, we may be wafted to land surpassing in
 wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable
 globe. its productions and features may be without example, as the
 phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
 solitudes. what may not be expected in country of eternal light? i
 may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may
 regulate thousand celestial observations that require only this
 voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. i
 shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of part of the world
 never before visited, and may tread land never before imprinted by
 the foot of man. these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to
 conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce to commence this
 laborious voyage with the joy child feels when embarks in little
 boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his
 native river. but supposing all these conjectures to be false, you
 cannot contest the inestimable benefit which i shall confer on all
 mankind, to the last generation, by discovering passage near the pole
 to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
 requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
 all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.
 
these reflections have dispelled the agitation with which i began my
 letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me
 to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as
 steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual
 eye. this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. i
 have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have
 been made in the prospect of arriving at the north pacific ocean
 through the seas which surround the pole. you may remember that a
 history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the
 whole of our good uncle thomas’ library. my education was neglected,
 yet i was passionately fond of reading. these volumes were my study
 day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which
 i had felt, as child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction
 had forbidden my uncle to allow to embark in seafaring life.
 
these visions faded when i perused, for the first time, those poets
 whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. i also
 became poet and for one year lived in paradise of my own creation;
 i imagined that i also might obtain niche in the temple where the
 names of homer and shakespeare are consecrated. you are well
 acquainted with my failure and how heavily i bore the disappointment.
 but just at that time i inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
 thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
 
six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking. i
 can, even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this
 great enterprise. i commenced by inuring my body to hardship. i
 accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the north sea;
 i voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often
 worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my
 nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those
 branches of physical science from which naval adventurer might derive
 the greatest practical advantage. twice i actually hired myself as an
 under-mate in greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. i
 must own i felt little proud when my captain offered the second
 dignity in the vessel and entreated to remain with the greatest
 earnestness, so valuable did consider my services.
 
and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
 my life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but i preferred glory to
 every enticement that wealth placed in my path. oh, that some encouraging
 voice would answer in the affirmative! my courage and my resolution is
 firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. i am
 about to proceed on long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which
 will demand all my fortitude: i am required not only to raise the spirits
 of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.
 
this is the most favourable period for travelling in russia. they fly
 quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
 my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stagecoach. the
 cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which i have
 already adopted, for there is great difference between walking the
 deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when exercise
 prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. i have no
 ambition to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and
 archangel.
 
i shall depart for the latter town in fortnight or three weeks; and my
 intention is to hire ship there, which can easily be done by paying the
 insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as i think necessary
 among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. i do not intend to
 sail until the month of june; and when shall i return? ah, dear sister, how
 can i answer this question? if i succeed, many, many months, perhaps years,
 will pass before you and i may meet. if i fail, you will see again soon,
 or never.
 
farewell, my dear, excellent margaret. heaven shower down blessings on you,
 and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for all your
 love and kindness.
 
your affectionate brother,
 
r. walton
 



letter 2
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 
archangel, 28th march, 17—.
 

how slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow!
 yet second step is taken towards my enterprise. i have hired a
 vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom i have
 already engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend and are certainly
 possessed of dauntless courage.
 
but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy, and the
 absence of the object of which i now feel as most severe evil, i have no
 friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there
 will be none to participate my joy; if i am assailed by disappointment, no
 one will endeavour to sustain in dejection. i shall commit my thoughts
 to paper, it is true; but that is poor medium for the communication of
 feeling. i desire the company of man who could sympathise with me, whose
 eyes would reply to mine. you may deem romantic, my dear sister, but i
 bitterly feel the want of friend. i have one near me, gentle yet
 courageous, possessed of cultivated as well as of capacious mind, whose
 tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. how would such a
 friend repair the faults of your poor brother! i am too ardent in execution
 and too impatient of difficulties. but it is still greater evil to me
 that i am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild
 on common and read nothing but our uncle thomas’ books of voyages.
 at that age i became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
 country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its
 most important benefits from such conviction that i perceived the
 necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
 country. now i am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
 schoolboys of fifteen. it is true that i have thought more and that my
 daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters
 call it) _keeping;_ and i greatly need friend who would have sense
 enough not to despise as romantic, and affection enough for to
 endeavour to regulate my mind.
 
well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find friend on the
 wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchants and seamen. yet
 some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these
 rugged bosoms. my lieutenant, for instance, is man of wonderful courage
 and enterprise; is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
 more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. is an
 englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
 unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
 humanity. i first became acquainted with him on board whale vessel;
 finding that was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to assist
 in my enterprise.
 
the master is person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the
 ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. this
 circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made
 very desirous to engage him. youth passed in solitude, my best years
 spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the
 groundwork of my character that i cannot overcome an intense distaste to
 the usual brutality exercised on board ship: i have never believed it to be
 necessary, and when i heard of mariner equally noted for his kindliness
 of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, i felt
 myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. i heard
 of him first in rather romantic manner, from lady who owes to him the
 happiness of her life. this, briefly, is his story. some years ago loved
 young russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed considerable
 sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. saw
 his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in
 tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her,
 confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that was poor,
 and that her father would never consent to the union. my generous friend
 reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover,
 instantly abandoned his pursuit. had already bought farm with his
 money, on which had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he
 bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his
 prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young
 woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. but the old
 man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who,
 when found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned
 until heard that his former mistress was married according to her
 inclinations. “what noble fellow!” you will exclaim. is
 so; but then is wholly uneducated: is as silent as turk, and kind
 of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
 the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
 otherwise would command.
 
yet do not suppose, because i complain little or because i can
 conceive consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am
 wavering in my resolutions. those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage
 is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the
 winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it
 is considered as remarkably early season, so that perhaps i may sail
 sooner than i expected. i shall do nothing rashly: you know me
 sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
 safety of others is committed to my care.
 
i cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
 undertaking. it is impossible to communicate to you conception of
 the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which
 i am preparing to depart. i am going to unexplored regions, to “the
 land of mist and snow,” but i shall kill albatross; therefore do not
 be alarmed for my safety or if i should come back to you as worn and
 woeful as the “ancient mariner.” you will smile at my allusion, but i
 will disclose secret. i have often attributed my attachment to, my
 passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that
 production of the most imaginative of modern poets. there is something
 at work in my soul which i do not understand. i am practically
 industrious—painstaking, workman to execute with perseverance and
 labour—but besides this there is love for the marvellous, belief
 in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries out
 of the common pathways of men, even to the wild and unvisited
 regions i am about to explore.
 
but to return to dearer considerations. shall i meet you again, after
 having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of
 africa or america? i dare not expect such success, yet i cannot bear to
 look on the reverse of the picture. continue for the present to write to
 by every opportunity: i may receive your letters on some occasions when
 i need them most to support my spirits. i love you very tenderly. 
remember with affection, should you never hear from again.
 
your affectionate brother,
 robert walton
 



letter 3
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 
july 7th, 17—.
 

my dear sister,
 
i write few lines in haste to say that i am safe—and well advanced
 on my voyage. this letter will reach england by merchantman now on
 its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not
 see my native land, perhaps, for many years. i am, however, in good
 spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the
 floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
 of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. we
 have already reached very high latitude; but it is the height of
 summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales,
 which blow us speedily towards those shores which i so ardently desire
 to attain, breathe degree of renovating warmth which i had not
 expected.
 
incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make figure in a
 letter. one or two stiff gales and the springing of leak are
 accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and
 i shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.
 
adieu, my dear margaret. be assured that for my own sake, as well as
 yours, i will not rashly encounter danger. i will be cool,
 persevering, and prudent.
 
but success _shall_ crown my endeavours. wherefore not? thus far i
 have gone, tracing secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars
 themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. why not
 still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? what can stop the
 determined heart and resolved will of man?
 
my swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. but i must
 finish. heaven bless my beloved sister!
 
r.w.
 



letter 4
 

_to mrs. saville, england._
 
august 5th, 17—.
 
so strange an accident has happened to us that i cannot forbear
 recording it, although it is very probable that you will see before
 these papers can come into your possession.
 
last monday (july 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
 in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which
 she floated. our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we
 were compassed round by very thick fog. we accordingly lay to,
 hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
 
about two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out
 in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to
 have end. some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to
 grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when strange sight suddenly
 attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own
 situation. we perceived low carriage, fixed on sledge and drawn by
 dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half mile; a
 being which had the shape of man, but apparently of gigantic stature,
 sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. we watched the rapid progress
 of the traveller with our telescopes until was lost among the
 distant inequalities of the ice.
 
this appearance excited our unqualified wonder. we were, as we believed,
 many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that
 it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in, however, by
 ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the
 greatest attention.
 
about two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before
 night the ice broke and freed our ship. we, however, lay to until the
 morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which
 float about after the breaking up of the ice. i profited of this time to
 rest for few hours.
 
in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck and
 found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently
 talking to someone in the sea. it was, in fact, sledge, like that we
 had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on large
 fragment of ice. only one dog remained alive; but there was human
 being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
 was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, savage inhabitant of
 some undiscovered island, but european. when i appeared on deck the
 master said, “here is our captain, and will not allow you to perish
 on the open sea.”
 
on perceiving me, the stranger addressed in english, although with a
 foreign accent. “before i come on board your vessel,” said he,
 “will you have the kindness to inform whither you are bound?”
 
you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such question addressed
 to from man on the brink of destruction and to whom i should have
 supposed that my vessel would have been resource which would not
 have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. i
 replied, however, that we were on voyage of discovery towards the
 northern pole.
 
upon hearing this appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
 good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for
 his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. his limbs were
 nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and
 suffering. i never saw man in so wretched condition. we attempted
 to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as had quitted the fresh
 air fainted. we accordingly brought him back to the deck and
 restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to
 swallow small quantity. as soon as showed signs of life we
 wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the
 kitchen stove. by slow degrees recovered and ate little soup,
 which restored him wonderfully.
 
two days passed in this manner before was able to speak, and i often
 feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. when he
 had in some measure recovered, i removed him to my own cabin and
 attended on him as much as my duty would permit. i never saw more
 interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of
 wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone
 performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most
 trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with
 beam of benevolence and sweetness that i never saw equalled. but he
 is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes gnashes his
 teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.
 
when my guest was little recovered i had great trouble to keep off
 the men, who wished to ask him thousand questions; but i would not
 allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in state of body
 and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
 once, however, the lieutenant asked why had come so far upon the ice
 in so strange vehicle.
 
his countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and
 replied, “to seek one who fled from me.”
 
“and did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then i fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we
 saw some dogs drawing sledge, with man in it, across the ice.”
 
this aroused the stranger’s attention, and asked multitude of
 questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as called him, had
 pursued. soon after, when was alone with me, said, “i have,
 doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good
 people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.”
 
“certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in to
 trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”
 
“and yet you rescued from strange and perilous situation; you have
 benevolently restored to life.”
 
soon after this inquired if i thought that the breaking up of the
 ice had destroyed the other sledge. i replied that i could not answer
 with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near
 midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at place of safety
 before that time; but of this i could not judge.
 
from this time new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the
 stranger. manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for
 the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuaded him to remain in
 the cabin, for is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
 i have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant
 notice if any new object should appear in sight.
 
such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the
 present day. the stranger has gradually improved in health but is very
 silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
 yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all
 interested in him, although they have had very little communication
 with him. for my own part, i begin to love him as brother, and his
 constant and deep grief fills with sympathy and compassion. must
 have been noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck
 so attractive and amiable.
 
i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find friend
 on the wide ocean; yet i have found man who, before his spirit had been
 broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as the brother
 of my heart.
 
i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals,
 should i have any fresh incidents to record.
 



august 13th, 17—.
 

my affection for my guest increases every day. excites at once my
 admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. how can i see so
 noble creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant
 grief? is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and
 when speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art,
 yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
 
is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck,
 apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. yet, although
 unhappy, is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he
 interests himself deeply in the projects of others. has frequently
 conversed with on mine, which i have communicated to him without
 disguise. entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my
 eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures i had taken
 to secure it. i was easily led by the sympathy which evinced to use the
 language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul
 and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly i would
 sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my
 enterprise. one man’s life or death were but small price to pay for
 the acquirement of the knowledge which i sought, for the dominion i should
 acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. as i spoke, a
 dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. at first i
 perceived that tried to suppress his emotion; placed his hands before
 his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed as i beheld tears trickle
 fast from between his fingers; groan burst from his heaving breast. i
 paused; at length spoke, in broken accents: “unhappy man! do you
 share my madness? have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? hear me;
 let reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”
 
such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the
 paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened
 powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were
 necessary to restore his composure.
 
having conquered the violence of his feelings, appeared to despise
 himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of
 despair, led again to converse concerning myself personally. asked
 the history of my earlier years. the tale was quickly told, but it
 awakened various trains of reflection. i spoke of my desire of finding a
 friend, of my thirst for more intimate sympathy with fellow mind than
 had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that man could
 boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
 
“i agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are
 unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
 ourselves—such friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
 perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. i once had friend, the most
 noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting
 friendship. you have hope, and the world before you, and have cause for
 despair. but i—i have lost everything and cannot begin life
 anew.”
 
as said this his countenance became expressive of calm, settled
 grief that touched to the heart. but was silent and presently
 retired to his cabin.
 
even broken in spirit as is, one can feel more deeply than he
 does the beauties of nature. the starry sky, the sea, and every sight
 afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of
 elevating his soul from earth. such man has double existence: he
 may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he
 has retired into himself, will be like celestial spirit that has a
 halo around him, within whose circle grief or folly ventures.
 
will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine
 wanderer? you would not if you saw him. you have been tutored and
 refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore
 somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to
 appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. sometimes i
 have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which possesses that
 elevates him so immeasurably above any other person i ever knew. i
 believe it to be an intuitive discernment, quick but never-failing
 power of judgment, penetration into the causes of things, unequalled
 for clearness and precision; add to this facility of expression and a
 voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.
 



august 19th, 17—.
 

yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easily perceive, captain
 walton, that i have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. i had
 determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with
 me, but you have won to alter my determination. you seek for
 knowledge and wisdom, as i once did; and i ardently hope that the
 gratification of your wishes may not be serpent to sting you, as mine
 has been. i do not know that the relation of my disasters will be
 useful to you; yet, when i reflect that you are pursuing the same
 course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me
 what i am, i imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one
 that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you
 in case of failure. prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually
 deemed marvellous. were we among the tamer scenes of nature i might
 fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things
 will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would
 provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers
 of nature; nor can i doubt but that my tale conveys in its series
 internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”
 
you may easily imagine that i was much gratified by the offered
 communication, yet i could not endure that should renew his grief by
 recital of his misfortunes. i felt the greatest eagerness to hear
 the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from strong
 desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. i expressed
 these feelings in my answer.
 
“i thank you,” replied, “for your sympathy, but it is
 useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. i wait but for one event, and then i
 shall repose in peace. i understand your feeling,” continued he,
 perceiving that i wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my
 friend, if thus you will allow to name you; nothing can alter my
 destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is
 determined.”
 
then told that would commence his narrative the next day when i
 should be at leisure. this promise drew from the warmest thanks. i have
 resolved every night, when i am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to
 record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what has related during
 the day. if i should be engaged, i will at least make notes. this
 manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who
 know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and
 sympathy shall i read it in some future day! even now, as i commence my
 task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me
 with all their melancholy sweetness; i see his thin hand raised in
 animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul
 within. strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which
 embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!
 



chapter 1
 

i am by birth genevese, and my family is one of the most
 distinguished of that republic. my ancestors had been for many years
 counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public
 situations with honour and reputation. was respected by all who
 knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public
 business. passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the
 affairs of his country; variety of circumstances had prevented his
 marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that became a
 husband and the father of family.
 
as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot
 refrain from relating them. one of his most intimate friends was a
 merchant who, from flourishing state, fell, through numerous
 mischances, into poverty. this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a
 proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty
 and oblivion in the same country where had formerly been
 distinguished for his rank and magnificence. having paid his debts,
 therefore, in the most honourable manner, retreated with his
 daughter to the town of lucerne, where lived unknown and in
 wretchedness. my father loved beaufort with the truest friendship and
 was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
 bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to conduct
 so little worthy of the affection that united them. lost time in
 endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin
 the world again through his credit and assistance.
 
beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten
 months before my father discovered his abode. overjoyed at this discovery,
 hastened to the house, which was situated in mean street near the
 reuss. but when entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. beaufort
 had saved but very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but
 it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in
 the meantime hoped to procure some respectable employment in a
 merchant’s house. the interval was, consequently, spent in inaction;
 his grief only became more deep and rankling when had leisure for
 reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end
 of three months lay on bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
 
his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw
 with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that
 there was other prospect of support. but caroline beaufort
 possessed mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support
 her in her adversity. she procured plain work; she plaited straw and
 by various means contrived to earn pittance scarcely sufficient to
 support life.
 
several months passed in this manner. her father grew worse; her time
 was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
 decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
 her an orphan and beggar. this last blow overcame her, and she knelt
 by beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
 chamber. came like protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
 committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he
 conducted her to geneva and placed her under the protection of a
 relation. two years after this event caroline became his wife.
 
there was considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but
 this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted
 affection. there was sense of justice in my father’s upright mind
 which rendered it necessary that should approve highly to love
 strongly. perhaps during former years had suffered from the
 late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set
 greater value on tried worth. there was show of gratitude and
 worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the
 doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her
 virtues and desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing
 her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace
 to his behaviour to her. everything was made to yield to her wishes
 and her convenience. strove to shelter her, as fair exotic is
 sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her
 with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and
 benevolent mind. her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto
 constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. during
 the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had
 gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after
 their union they sought the pleasant climate of italy, and the change
 of scene and interest attendant on tour through that land of wonders,
 as restorative for her weakened frame.
 
from italy they visited germany and france. i, their eldest child, was born
 at naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. i remained
 for several years their only child. much as they were attached to each
 other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from very
 mine of love to bestow them upon me. my mother’s tender caresses and
 my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding are my
 first recollections. i was their plaything and their idol, and something
 better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on
 them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in
 their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled
 their duties towards me. with this deep consciousness of what they owed
 towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit
 of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during
 every hour of my infant life i received lesson of patience, of charity,
 and of self-control, i was so guided by silken cord that all seemed but
 one train of enjoyment to me.
 
for long time i was their only care. my mother had much desired to have a
 daughter, but i continued their single offspring. when i was about five
 years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of italy, they
 passed week on the shores of the lake of como. their benevolent
 disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. this, to my
 mother, was more than duty; it was necessity, a
 passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been
 relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the
 afflicted. during one of their walks poor cot in the foldings of vale
 attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number
 of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst
 shape. one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother,
 accompanied by me, visited this abode. she found peasant and his wife,
 hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing scanty meal to
 five hungry babes. among these there was one which attracted my mother far
 above all the rest. she appeared of different stock. the four others were
 dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. her
 hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her
 clothing, seemed to set crown of distinction on her head. her brow was
 clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of
 her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold
 her without looking on her as of distinct species, being heaven-sent,
 and bearing celestial stamp in all her features.
 
the peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and
 admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. she was
 not her child, but the daughter of milanese nobleman. her mother was a
 german and had died on giving her birth. the infant had been placed with
 these good people to nurse: they were better off then. they had not been
 long married, and their eldest child was but just born. the father of their
 charge was one of those italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory
 of italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted
 himself to obtain the liberty of his country. became the victim of its
 weakness. whether had died or still lingered in the dungeons of austria
 was not known. his property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and
 beggar. she continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude
 abode, fairer than garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.
 
when my father returned from milan, found playing with in the hall of
 our villa child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed
 to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter
 than the chamois of the hills. the apparition was soon explained. with his
 permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their
 charge to her. they were fond of the sweet orphan. her presence had seemed
 blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty
 and want when providence afforded her such powerful protection. they
 consulted their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza
 became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than
 sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and
 my pleasures.
 
everyone loved elizabeth. the passionate and almost reverential
 attachment with which all regarded her became, while i shared it, my
 pride and my delight. on the evening previous to her being brought to
 my home, my mother had said playfully, “i have pretty present for my
 victor—tomorrow shall have it.” and when, on the morrow, she
 presented elizabeth to as her promised gift, i, with childish
 seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon elizabeth
 as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. all praises bestowed on
 her i received as made to possession of my own. we called each other
 familiarly by the name of cousin. word, expression could body
 forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than
 sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
 



chapter 2
 

we were brought up together; there was not quite year difference in
 our ages. i need not say that we were strangers to any species of
 disunion or dispute. harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
 the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
 nearer together. elizabeth was of calmer and more concentrated
 disposition; but, with all my ardour, i was capable of more intense
 application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
 she busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
 and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our swiss
 home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
 tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of
 our alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
 while my companion contemplated with serious and satisfied spirit the
 magnificent appearances of things, i delighted in investigating their
 causes. the world was to secret which i desired to divine.
 curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature,
 gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the
 earliest sensations i can remember.
 
on the birth of second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave
 up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native
 country. we possessed house in geneva, and _campagne_ on belrive,
 the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a
 league from the city. we resided principally in the latter, and the
 lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. it was my
 temper to avoid crowd and to attach myself fervently to few. i was
 indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but i united
 myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. henry
 clerval was the of merchant of geneva. was boy of singular
 talent and fancy. loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for
 its own sake. was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. he
 composed heroic songs and began to write many tale of enchantment and
 knightly adventure. tried to make us act plays and to enter into
 masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
 roncesvalles, of the round table of king arthur, and the chivalrous
 train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands
 of the infidels.
 
human being could have passed happier childhood than myself. my
 parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
 we felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to
 their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights
 which we enjoyed. when i mingled with other families i distinctly
 discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted
 the development of filial love.
 
my temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some
 law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits
 but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
 indiscriminately. i confess that neither the structure of languages,
 nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states
 possessed attractions for me. it was the secrets of heaven and earth
 that i desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
 things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
 that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical,
 or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
 
meanwhile clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
 relations of things. the busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
 and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
 to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the
 gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. the saintly soul
 of elizabeth shone like shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
 her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
 her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. she was
 the living spirit of love to soften and attract; i might have become
 sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that
 she was there to subdue to semblance of her own gentleness. and
 clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval? yet
 might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his
 generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for
 adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of
 beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring
 ambition.
 
i feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood,
 before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of
 extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. besides,
 in drawing the picture of my early days, i also record those events which
 led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when i would
 account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my
 destiny i find it arise, like mountain river, from ignoble and almost
 forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent
 which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
 
natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; i desire,
 therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
 predilection for that science. when i was thirteen years of age we all went
 on party of pleasure to the baths near thonon; the inclemency of the
 weather obliged us to remain day confined to the inn. in this house i
 chanced to find volume of the works of cornelius agrippa. i opened it
 with apathy; the theory which attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful
 facts which relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. new
 light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, i communicated my
 discovery to my father. my father looked carelessly at the title page of my
 book and said, “ah! cornelius agrippa! my dear victor, do not waste
 your time upon this; it is sad trash.”
 
if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me
 that the principles of agrippa had been entirely exploded and that modern
 system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers
 than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
 those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances i
 should certainly have thrown agrippa aside and have contented my
 imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my
 former studies. it is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
 have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. but the cursory glance
 my father had taken of my volume by means assured that was
 acquainted with its contents, and i continued to read with the greatest
 avidity.
 
when i returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this
 author, and afterwards of paracelsus and albertus magnus. i read and
 studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me
 treasures known to few besides myself. i have described myself as always
 having been imbued with fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of
 nature. in spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern
 philosophers, i always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
 sir isaac newton is said to have avowed that felt like child picking
 up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. those of his
 successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom i was acquainted
 appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same
 pursuit.
 
the untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted
 with their practical uses. the most learned philosopher knew little
 more. had partially unveiled the face of nature, but her immortal
 lineaments were still wonder and mystery. might dissect,
 anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of final cause, causes
 in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. i
 had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep
 human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and
 ignorantly i had repined.
 
but here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew
 more. i took their word for all that they averred, and i became their
 disciple. it may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth
 century; but while i followed the routine of education in the schools of
 geneva, i was, to great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite
 studies. my father was not scientific, and i was left to struggle with a
 child’s blindness, added to student’s thirst for knowledge.
 under the guidance of my new preceptors i entered with the greatest
 diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir
 of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. wealth was an
 inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if i could
 banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but
 violent death!
 
nor were these my only visions. the raising of ghosts or devils was a
 promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
 i most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, i
 attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
 want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. and thus for time i was
 occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, thousand
 contradictory theories and floundering desperately in very slough of
 multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish
 reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
 
when i was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near
 belrive, when we witnessed most violent and terrible thunderstorm. it
 advanced from behind the mountains of jura, and the thunder burst at once
 with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. i remained,
 while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
 as i stood at the door, on sudden i beheld stream of fire issue from an
 old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
 soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing
 remained but blasted stump. when we visited it the next morning, we found
 the tree shattered in singular manner. it was not splintered by the
 shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. i never beheld
 anything so utterly destroyed.
 
before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
 electricity. on this occasion man of great research in natural
 philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, entered on
 the explanation of theory which had formed on the subject of
 electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
 all that said threw greatly into the shade cornelius agrippa,
 albertus magnus, and paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
 some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined to pursue my
 accustomed studies. it seemed to as if nothing would or could ever
 be known. all that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
 despicable. by one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps
 most subject to in early youth, i at once gave up my former
 occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as deformed
 and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a
 would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of
 real knowledge. in this mood of mind i betook myself to the
 mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as
 being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
 
thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments
 are we bound to prosperity or ruin. when i look back, it seems to me
 as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the
 immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort
 made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even
 then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. her victory was
 announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which
 followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting
 studies. it was thus that i was to be taught to associate evil with
 their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
 
it was strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
 destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and
 terrible destruction.
 



chapter 3
 

when i had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that i
 should become student at the university of ingolstadt. i had
 hitherto attended the schools of geneva, but my father thought it
 necessary for the completion of my education that i should be made
 acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. my
 departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day
 resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
 occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
 
elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was
 in the greatest danger. during her illness many arguments had been urged to
 persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. she had at first
 yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her
 favourite was menaced, she could longer control her anxiety. she
 attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity
 of the distemper—elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this
 imprudence were fatal to her preserver. on the third day my mother
 sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the
 looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. on her
 deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert
 her. she joined the hands of elizabeth and myself. “my
 children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were
 placed on the prospect of your union. this expectation will now be the
 consolation of your father. elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to
 my younger children. alas! i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy
 and beloved as i have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are
 not thoughts befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to
 death and will indulge hope of meeting you in another world.”
 
she died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
 i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent
 by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the
 soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. it is so
 long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day
 and whose very existence appeared part of our own can have departed
 for ever—that the brightness of beloved eye can have been
 extinguished and the sound of voice so familiar and dear to the ear
 can be hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflections of
 the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the
 evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. yet from whom has
 not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? and why should i
 describe sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at
 length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than necessity; and
 the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a
 sacrilege, is not banished. my mother was dead, but we had still
 duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the
 rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the
 spoiler has not seized.
 
my departure for ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events,
 was now again determined upon. i obtained from my father respite of
 some weeks. it appeared to sacrilege so soon to leave the repose,
 akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of
 life. i was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. i was
 unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above
 all, i desired to see my sweet elizabeth in some degree consoled.
 
she indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
 she looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and
 zeal. she devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call
 her uncle and cousins. never was she so enchanting as at this time,
 when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
 she forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
 
the day of my departure at length arrived. clerval spent the last
 evening with us. had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit
 him to accompany and to become my fellow student, but in vain. his
 father was narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the
 aspirations and ambition of his son. henry deeply felt the misfortune
 of being debarred from liberal education. said little, but when
 spoke i read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a
 restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details
 of commerce.
 
we sat late. we could not tear ourselves away from each other nor
 persuade ourselves to say the word “farewell!” it was said, and we
 retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the
 other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn i descended to the
 carriage which was to convey away, they were all there—my father
 again to bless me, clerval to press my hand once more, my elizabeth to
 renew her entreaties that i would write often and to bestow the last
 feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.
 
i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey away and indulged in
 the most melancholy reflections. i, who had ever been surrounded by
 amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual
 pleasure—i was now alone. in the university whither i was going i
 must form my own friends and be my own protector. my life had hitherto
 been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given invincible
 repugnance to new countenances. i loved my brothers, elizabeth, and
 clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but i believed myself
 totally unfitted for the company of strangers. such were my reflections as
 i commenced my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. i
 ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. i had often, when at home,
 thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had
 longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to
 repent.
 
i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
 journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. at length the
 high white steeple of the town met my eyes. i alighted and was
 conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased.
 
the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction and paid visit to
 some of the principal professors. chance—or rather the evil
 influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me
 from the moment i turned my reluctant steps from my father’s
 door—led first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy. he
 was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. he
 asked several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
 of science appertaining to natural philosophy. i replied carelessly, and
 partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal
 authors i had studied. the professor stared. “have you,” he
 said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?”
 
i replied in the affirmative. “every minute,” continued m. krempe with
 warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
 and entirely lost. you have burdened your memory with exploded systems
 and useless names. good god! in what desert land have you lived,
 where one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you
 have so greedily imbibed are thousand years old and as musty as they
 are ancient? i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
 age, to find disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus. my dear
 sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”
 
so saying, stepped aside and wrote down list of several books
 treating of natural philosophy which desired to procure, and
 dismissed after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
 week intended to commence course of lectures upon natural
 philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, fellow
 professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
 omitted.
 
i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long
 considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i
 returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
 shape. m. krempe was little squat man with gruff voice and a
 repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess in
 favour of his pursuits. in rather too philosophical and connected a
 strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusions i had come
 to concerning them in my early years. as child i had not been
 content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural
 science. with confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my
 extreme youth and my want of guide on such matters, i had retrod the
 steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the
 discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
 besides, i had contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
 it was very different when the masters of the science sought
 immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now
 the scene was changed. the ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit
 itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in
 science was chiefly founded. i was required to exchange chimeras of
 boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
 
such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my
 residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
 acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new
 abode. but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information
 which m. krempe had given concerning the lectures. and although i
 could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
 sentences out of pulpit, i recollected what had said of m.
 waldman, whom i had never seen, as had hitherto been out of town.
 
partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the lecturing
 room, which m. waldman entered shortly after. this professor was very
 unlike his colleague. appeared about fifty years of age, but with an
 aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; few grey hairs covered his
 temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. his person
 was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest i had ever heard.
 began his lecture by recapitulation of the history of chemistry and
 the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
 with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. then took
 cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of
 its elementary terms. after having made few preparatory experiments, he
 concluded with panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i
 shall never forget:
 
“the ancient teachers of this science,” said he,
 “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. the modern masters
 promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that
 the elixir of life is chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem
 only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or
 crucible, have indeed performed miracles. they penetrate into the recesses
 of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. they ascend into the
 heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of
 the air we breathe. they have acquired new and almost unlimited powers;
 they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even
 mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”
 
such were the professor’s words—rather let say such the words of
 the fate—enounced to destroy me. as went on i felt as if my soul
 were grappling with palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were
 touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was
 sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception,
 one purpose. so much has been done, exclaimed the soul of
 frankenstein—more, far more, will i achieve; treading in the steps
 already marked, i will pioneer new way, explore unknown powers, and
 unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
 
i closed not my eyes that night. my internal being was in state of
 insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i
 had power to produce it. by degrees, after the morning’s dawn,
 sleep came. i awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as dream.
 there only remained resolution to return to my ancient studies and to
 devote myself to science for which i believed myself to possess a
 natural talent. on the same day i paid m. waldman visit. his
 manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
 for there was certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
 his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. i
 gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had
 given to his fellow professor. heard with attention the little
 narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius
 agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had
 exhibited. said that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal
 modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
 knowledge. they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
 and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a
 great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. the
 labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever
 fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” i
 listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption
 or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my
 prejudices against modern chemists; i expressed myself in measured
 terms, with the modesty and deference due from youth to his
 instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
 made ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
 labours. i requested his advice concerning the books i ought to
 procure.
 
“i am happy,” said m. waldman, “to have gained a
 disciple; and if your application equals your ability, i have doubt of
 your success. chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the
 greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that
 i have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not
 neglected the other branches of science. man would make but very sorry
 chemist if attended to that department of human knowledge alone. if your
 wish is to become really man of science and not merely petty
 experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of natural
 philosophy, including mathematics.”
 
then took into his laboratory and explained to the uses of his
 various machines, instructing as to what i ought to procure and
 promising the use of his own when i should have advanced far enough in
 the science not to derange their mechanism. also gave the list of
 books which i had requested, and i took my leave.
 
thus ended day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
 



chapter 4
 

from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
 most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
 i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
 which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. i attended the
 lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
 university, and i found even in m. krempe great deal of sound sense
 and real information, combined, it is true, with repulsive
 physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. in
 m. waldman i found true friend. his gentleness was never tinged by
 dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
 good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. in thousand ways
 smoothed for the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
 inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. my application was at
 first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as i proceeded and
 soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
 light of morning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory.
 
as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress
 was rapid. my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and
 my proficiency that of the masters. professor krempe often asked me,
 with sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman
 expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. two years
 passed in this manner, during which i paid visit to geneva, but was
 engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which i
 hoped to make. none but those who have experienced them can conceive
 of the enticements of science. in other studies you go as far as
 others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in
 scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
 mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must
 infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and i, who
 continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was
 solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two
 years i made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical
 instruments, which procured great esteem and admiration at the
 university. when i had arrived at this point and had become as well
 acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as
 depended on the lessons of any of the professors at ingolstadt, my
 residence there being longer conducive to my improvements, i thought
 of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident
 happened that protracted my stay.
 
one of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was
 the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with
 life. whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
 it was bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a
 mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
 acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our
 inquiries. i revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined
 thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of
 natural philosophy which relate to physiology. unless i had been
 animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this
 study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. to examine the
 causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. i became
 acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; i
 must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
 in my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my
 mind should be impressed with supernatural horrors. i do not ever
 remember to have trembled at tale of superstition or to have feared
 the apparition of spirit. darkness had effect upon my fancy, and
 churchyard was to merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of
 life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become
 food for the worm. now i was led to examine the cause and progress of
 this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and
 charnel-houses. my attention was fixed upon every object the most
 insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. i saw how the
 fine form of man was degraded and wasted; i beheld the corruption of
 death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i saw how the worm
 inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. i paused, examining and
 analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change
 from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
 darkness sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and
 wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the immensity
 of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprised that among so
 many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same
 science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a
 secret.
 
remember, i am not recording the vision of madman. the sun does not
 more certainly shine in the heavens than that which i now affirm is
 true. some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
 discovery were distinct and probable. after days and nights of
 incredible labour and fatigue, i succeeded in discovering the cause of
 generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestowing
 animation upon lifeless matter.
 
the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery
 soon gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in
 painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the
 most gratifying consummation of my toils. but this discovery was so
 great and overwhelming that all the steps by which i had been
 progressively led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result.
 what had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation
 of the world was now within my grasp. not that, like magic scene, it
 all opened upon at once: the information i had obtained was of a
 nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as i should point them
 towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
 accomplished. i was like the arabian who had been buried with the dead
 and found passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly
 ineffectual light.
 
i see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes
 express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
 which i am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end
 of my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that
 subject. i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was,
 to your destruction and infallible misery. learn from me, if not by my
 precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
 knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
 to be the world, than who aspires to become greater than his nature
 will allow.
 
when i found so astonishing power placed within my hands, i hesitated
 long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it.
 although i possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to
 prepare frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of
 fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained work of inconceivable
 difficulty and labour. i doubted at first whether i should attempt the
 creation of being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my
 imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit to
 doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful
 as man. the materials at present within my command hardly appeared
 adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but i doubted not that i should
 ultimately succeed. i prepared myself for multitude of reverses; my
 operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be
 imperfect, yet when i considered the improvement which every day takes
 place in science and mechanics, i was encouraged to hope my present
 attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. nor
 could i consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any
 argument of its impracticability. it was with these feelings that i
 began the creation of human being. as the minuteness of the parts
 formed great hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first
 intention, to make the being of gigantic stature, that is to say,
 about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. after having
 formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully
 collecting and arranging my materials, i began.
 
one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore onwards, like
 hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death
 appeared to ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and
 pour torrent of light into our dark world. new species would bless
 as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would
 owe their being to me. father could claim the gratitude of his
 child so completely as i should deserve theirs. pursuing these
 reflections, i thought that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless
 matter, i might in process of time (although i now found it impossible)
 renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
 
these thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking
 with unremitting ardour. my cheek had grown pale with study, and my
 person had become emaciated with confinement. sometimes, on the very
 brink of certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the
 next day or the next hour might realise. one secret which i alone
 possessed was the hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon
 gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless
 eagerness, i pursued nature to her hiding-places. who shall conceive
 the horrors of my secret toil as i dabbled among the unhallowed damps
 of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless
 clay? my limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but
 then resistless and almost frantic impulse urged forward; i seemed
 to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. it was
 indeed but passing trance, that only made feel with renewed
 acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, i had
 returned to my old habits. i collected bones from charnel-houses and
 disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human
 frame. in solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
 and separated from all the other apartments by gallery and staircase,
 i kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from
 their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. the
 dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials;
 and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation,
 whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, i
 brought my work near to conclusion.
 
the summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
 one pursuit. it was most beautiful season; never did the fields
 bestow more plentiful harvest or the vines yield more luxuriant
 vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. and the
 same feelings which made neglect the scenes around caused also
 to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom i had
 not seen for so long time. i knew my silence disquieted them, and i
 well remembered the words of my father: “i know that while you are
 pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall
 hear regularly from you. you must pardon if i regard any
 interruption in your correspondence as proof that your other duties
 are equally neglected.”
 
i knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but i could
 not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
 had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. i wished, as it
 were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection
 until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature,
 should be completed.
 
i then thought that my father would be unjust if ascribed my neglect
 to vice or faultiness on my part, but i am now convinced that was
 justified in conceiving that i should not be altogether free from
 blame. human being in perfection ought always to preserve calm and
 peaceful mind and never to allow passion or transitory desire to
 disturb his tranquillity. i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge
 is an exception to this rule. if the study to which you apply yourself
 has tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for
 those simple pleasures in which alloy can possibly mix, then that
 study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human
 mind. if this rule were always observed; if man allowed any pursuit
 whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
 affections, greece had not been enslaved, cæsar would have spared his
 country, america would have been discovered more gradually, and the
 empires of mexico and peru had not been destroyed.
 
but i forget that i am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
 tale, and your looks remind to proceed.
 
my father made reproach in his letters and only took notice of my
 silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
 winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but i did not
 watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always
 yielded supreme delight—so deeply was i engrossed in my
 occupation. the leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near
 to close, and now every day showed more plainly how well i had
 succeeded. but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appeared
 rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
 unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
 every night i was oppressed by slow fever, and i became nervous to most
 painful degree; the fall of leaf startled me, and i shunned my fellow
 creatures as if i had been guilty of crime. sometimes i grew alarmed at
 the wreck i perceived that i had become; the energy of my purpose alone
 sustained me: my labours would soon end, and i believed that exercise and
 amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and i promised myself
 both of these when my creation should be complete.
 



chapter 5
 

it was on dreary night of november that i beheld the accomplishment
 of my toils. with an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, i
 collected the instruments of life around me, that i might infuse a
 spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. it was
 already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the
 panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the
 half-extinguished light, i saw the dull yellow eye of the creature
 open; it breathed hard, and convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
 
how can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate
 the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavoured to
 form? his limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as
 beautiful. beautiful! great god! his yellow skin scarcely covered
 the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of lustrous
 black, and flowing; his teeth of pearly whiteness; but these
 luxuriances only formed more horrid contrast with his watery eyes,
 that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which
 they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.
 
the different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings
 of human nature. i had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
 purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. for this i had
 deprived myself of rest and health. i had desired it with an ardour
 that far exceeded moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty
 of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my
 heart. unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i
 rushed out of the room and continued long time traversing my
 bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. at length lassitude
 succeeded to the tumult i had before endured, and i threw myself on the
 bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek few moments of forgetfulness.
 but it was in vain; i slept, indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest
 dreams. i thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in
 the streets of ingolstadt. delighted and surprised, i embraced her,
 but as i imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with
 the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i
 held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; shroud enveloped her
 form, and i saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
 i started from my sleep with horror; cold dew covered my forehead, my
 teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and
 yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window
 shutters, i beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom i had
 created. held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
 may be called, were fixed on me. his jaws opened, and muttered some
 inarticulate sounds, while grin wrinkled his cheeks. might have
 spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to
 detain me, but i escaped and rushed downstairs. i took refuge in the
 courtyard belonging to the house which i inhabited, where i remained
 during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest
 agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if
 it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which i
 had so miserably given life.
 
oh! mortal could support the horror of that countenance. mummy
 again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. i
 had gazed on him while unfinished; was ugly then, but when those
 muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became thing
 such as even dante could not have conceived.
 
i passed the night wretchedly. sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
 hardly that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly
 sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. mingled with
 this horror, i felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had
 been my food and pleasant rest for so long space were now become a
 hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!
 
morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my
 sleepless and aching eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple
 and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. the porter opened the gates
 of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issued into
 the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the
 wretch whom i feared every turning of the street would present to my
 view. i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but
 felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured
 from black and comfortless sky.
 
i continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by
 bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. i
 traversed the streets without any clear conception of where i was or
 what i was doing. my heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and i
 hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
 
like one who, on lonely road,
 doth walk in fear and dread,
 and, having once turned round, walks on,
 and turns more his head;
 because knows frightful fiend
 doth close behind him tread.
 
[coleridge’s “ancient mariner.”]
 


continuing thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the various
 diligences and carriages usually stopped. here i paused, i knew not why;
 but i remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on coach that was coming
 towards from the other end of the street. as it drew nearer i observed
 that it was the swiss diligence; it stopped just where i was standing, and
 on the door being opened, i perceived henry clerval, who, on seeing me,
 instantly sprung out. “my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed he,
 “how glad i am to see you! how fortunate that you should be here at
 the very moment of my alighting!”
 
nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought back
 to my thoughts my father, elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear
 to my recollection. i grasped his hand, and in moment forgot my horror
 and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months,
 calm and serene joy. i welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial
 manner, and we walked towards my college. clerval continued talking for
 some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being
 permitted to come to ingolstadt. “you may easily believe,” said
 he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all
 necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping;
 and, indeed, i believe i left him incredulous to the last, for his constant
 answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the dutch
 schoolmaster in the vicar of wakefield: ‘i have ten thousand florins
 year without greek, i eat heartily without greek.’ but his
 affection for at length overcame his dislike of learning, and has
 permitted to undertake voyage of discovery to the land of
 knowledge.”
 
“it gives the greatest delight to see you; but tell how you left
 my father, brothers, and elizabeth.”
 
“very well, and very happy, only little uneasy that they hear from
 you so seldom. by the by, i mean to lecture you little upon their
 account myself. but, my dear frankenstein,” continued he, stopping
 short and gazing full in my face, “i did not before remark how very ill
 you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
 several nights.”
 
“you have guessed right; i have lately been so deeply engaged in one
 occupation that i have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see;
 but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
 end and that i am at length free.”
 
i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to
 allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. i walked with a
 quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. i then reflected, and
 the thought made shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my
 apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. i dreaded to
 behold this monster, but i feared still more that henry should see him.
 entreating him, therefore, to remain few minutes at the bottom of the
 stairs, i darted up towards my own room. my hand was already on the
 lock of the door before i recollected myself. i then paused, and a
 cold shivering came over me. i threw the door forcibly open, as
 children are accustomed to do when they expect spectre to stand in
 waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. i stepped
 fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed
 from its hideous guest. i could hardly believe that so great good
 fortune could have befallen me, but when i became assured that my enemy
 had indeed fled, i clapped my hands for joy and ran down to clerval.
 
we ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
 but i was unable to contain myself. it was not joy only that possessed
 me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
 beat rapidly. i was unable to remain for single instant in the same
 place; i jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
 clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival,
 but when observed more attentively, saw wildness in my eyes
 for which could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
 laughter frightened and astonished him.
 
“my dear victor,” cried he, “what, for god’s sake,
 is the matter? do not laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the
 cause of all this?”
 
“do not ask me,” cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i
 thought i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can
 tell. oh, save me! save me!” i imagined that the monster seized me;
 i struggled furiously and fell down in fit.
 
poor clerval! what must have been his feelings? meeting, which he
 anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. but i
 was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not
 recover my senses for long, long time.
 
this was the commencement of nervous fever which confined for
 several months. during all that time henry was my only nurse. i
 afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness
 for so long journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
 elizabeth, spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
 disorder. knew that i could not have more kind and attentive
 nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope felt of my recovery, he
 did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, performed the kindest
 action that could towards them.
 
but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and
 unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored to life.
 the form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was for ever
 before my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him. doubtless my
 words surprised henry; at first believed them to be the wanderings
 of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which i
 continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder
 indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
 
by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and
 grieved my friend, i recovered. i remember the first time i became
 capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, i
 perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young
 buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. it was
 divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my
 convalescence. i felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in
 my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in short time i became as
 cheerful as before i was attacked by the fatal passion.
 
“dearest clerval,” exclaimed i, “how kind, how very good
 you are to me. this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you
 promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. how shall i ever
 repay you? i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i
 have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.”
 
“you will repay entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get
 well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i
 may speak to you on one subject, may i not?”
 
i trembled. one subject! what could it be? could allude to an object on
 whom i dared not even think?
 
“compose yourself,” said clerval, who observed my change of
 colour, “i will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father
 and cousin would be very happy if they received letter from you in your
 own handwriting. they hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at
 your long silence.”
 
“is that all, my dear henry? how could you suppose that my first
 thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love and
 who are so deserving of my love?”
 
“if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad
 to see letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from
 your cousin, i believe.”
 



chapter 6
 

clerval then put the following letter into my hands. it was from my
 own elizabeth:
 
“my dearest cousin,
 
“you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear
 kind henry are not sufficient to reassure on your account. you are
 forbidden to write—to hold pen; yet one word from you, dear victor,
 is necessary to calm our apprehensions. for long time i have thought
 that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have
 restrained my uncle from undertaking journey to ingolstadt. i have
 prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so
 long journey, yet how often have i regretted not being able to
 perform it myself! i figure to myself that the task of attending on
 your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never
 guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of
 your poor cousin. yet that is over now: clerval writes that indeed
 you are getting better. i eagerly hope that you will confirm this
 intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
 
“get well—and return to us. you will find happy, cheerful home and
 friends who love you dearly. your father’s health is vigorous, and he
 asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a
 care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. how pleased you would
 be to remark the improvement of our ernest! is now sixteen and full
 of activity and spirit. is desirous to be true swiss and to enter
 into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his
 elder brother returns to us. my uncle is not pleased with the idea of
 military career in distant country, but ernest never had your
 powers of application. looks upon study as an odious fetter; his
 time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the
 lake. i fear that will become an idler unless we yield the point
 and permit him to enter on the profession which has selected.
 
“little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken
 place since you left us. the blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they
 never change; and i think our placid home and our contented hearts are
 regulated by the same immutable laws. my trifling occupations take up
 my time and amuse me, and i am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
 none but happy, kind faces around me. since you left us, but one
 change has taken place in our little household. do you remember on
 what occasion justine moritz entered our family? probably you do not;
 i will relate her history, therefore in few words. madame moritz,
 her mother, was widow with four children, of whom justine was the
 third. this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but
 through strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and
 after the death of m. moritz, treated her very ill. my aunt observed
 this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother
 to allow her to live at our house. the republican institutions of our
 country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which
 prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. hence there is less
 distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the
 lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are
 more refined and moral. servant in geneva does not mean the same
 thing as servant in france and england. justine, thus received in
 our family, learned the duties of servant, condition which, in our
 fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a
 sacrifice of the dignity of human being.
 
“justine, you may remember, was great favourite of yours; and i
 recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one
 glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that
 ariosto gives concerning the beauty of angelica—she looked so
 frank-hearted and happy. my aunt conceived great attachment for her,
 by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that
 which she had at first intended. this benefit was fully repaid;
 justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: i do not
 mean that she made any professions i never heard one pass her lips, but
 you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
 although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate,
 yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. she
 thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her
 phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds of her.
 
“when my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own
 grief to notice poor justine, who had attended her during her illness
 with the most anxious affection. poor justine was very ill; but other
 trials were reserved for her.
 
“one by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
 exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. the
 conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the
 deaths of her favourites was judgement from heaven to chastise her
 partiality. she was roman catholic; and i believe her confessor
 confirmed the idea which she had conceived. accordingly, few months
 after your departure for ingolstadt, justine was called home by her
 repentant mother. poor girl! she wept when she quitted our house; she
 was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness
 and winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable
 for vivacity. nor was her residence at her mother’s house of nature
 to restore her gaiety. the poor woman was very vacillating in her
 repentance. she sometimes begged justine to forgive her unkindness,
 but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her
 brothers and sister. perpetual fretting at length threw madame moritz
 into decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is
 now at peace for ever. she died on the first approach of cold weather,
 at the beginning of this last winter. justine has just returned to us;
 and i assure you i love her tenderly. she is very clever and gentle,
 and extremely pretty; as i mentioned before, her mien and her
 expression continually remind of my dear aunt.
 
“i must say also few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
 william. i wish you could see him; is very tall of his age, with
 sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. when he
 smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
 health. has already had one or two little _wives,_ but louisa biron
 is his favourite, pretty little girl of five years of age.
 
“now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulged in little
 gossip concerning the good people of geneva. the pretty miss mansfield
 has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching
 marriage with young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugly
 sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your
 favourite schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffered several misfortunes
 since the departure of clerval from geneva. but has already
 recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a
 lively pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier. she is widow, and much
 older than manoir; but she is very much admired, and favourite with
 everybody.
 
“i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety
 returns upon as i conclude. write, dearest victor,—one line—one
 word will be blessing to us. ten thousand thanks to henry for his
 kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely
 grateful. adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, i entreat
 you, write!
 
“elizabeth lavenza.
 

“geneva, march 18th, 17—.”
 


“dear, dear elizabeth!” i exclaimed, when i had read her
 letter: “i will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety
 they must feel.” i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but
 my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. in another
 fortnight i was able to leave my chamber.
 
one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the
 several professors of the university. in doing this, i underwent a
 kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had
 sustained. ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the
 beginning of my misfortunes, i had conceived violent antipathy even
 to the name of natural philosophy. when i was otherwise quite restored
 to health, the sight of chemical instrument would renew all the agony
 of my nervous symptoms. henry saw this, and had removed all my
 apparatus from my view. had also changed my apartment; for he
 perceived that i had acquired dislike for the room which had
 previously been my laboratory. but these cares of clerval were made of
 avail when i visited the professors. m. waldman inflicted torture
 when praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress i
 had made in the sciences. soon perceived that i disliked the
 subject; but not guessing the real cause, attributed my feelings to
 modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science
 itself, with desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing out. what
 could i do? meant to please, and tormented me. i felt as if he
 had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which
 were to be afterwards used in putting to slow and cruel death. i
 writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
 clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
 sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
 total ignorance; and the conversation took more general turn. i
 thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak. i saw plainly
 that was surprised, but never attempted to draw my secret from
 me; and although i loved him with mixture of affection and reverence
 that knew bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in
 him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
 i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
 
m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
 almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave even
 more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman. “d—n
 the fellow!” cried he; “why, m. clerval, i assure you has
 outstript us all. ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. a
 youngster who, but few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as firmly
 as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if
 is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—ay,
 ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering,
 “m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in young man.
 young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval: i was
 myself when young; but that wears out in very short time.”
 
m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
 the conversation from subject that was so annoying to me.
 
clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his
 literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me. he
 came to the university with the design of making himself complete
 master of the oriental languages, and thus should open field for
 the plan of life had marked out for himself. resolved to pursue no
 inglorious career, turned his eyes toward the east, as affording
 scope for his spirit of enterprise. the persian, arabic, and sanskrit
 languages engaged his attention, and i was easily induced to enter on
 the same studies. idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that i
 wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, i felt
 great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not
 only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. i
 did not, like him, attempt critical knowledge of their dialects, for
 i did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary
 amusement. i read merely to understand their meaning, and they well
 repaid my labours. their melancholy is soothing, and their joy
 elevating, to degree i never experienced in studying the authors of
 any other country. when you read their writings, life appears to
 consist in warm sun and garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns
 of fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. how
 different from the manly and heroical poetry of greece and rome!
 
summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was
 fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
 accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
 and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. i felt this
 delay very bitterly; for i longed to see my native town and my beloved
 friends. my return had only been delayed so long, from an
 unwillingness to leave clerval in strange place, before had become
 acquainted with any of its inhabitants. the winter, however, was spent
 cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came
 its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.
 
the month of may had already commenced, and i expected the letter daily
 which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry proposed a
 pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt, that i might bid a
 personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited. i acceded
 with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval
 had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature
 that i had taken among the scenes of my native country.
 
we passed fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits
 had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
 salubrious air i breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
 the conversation of my friend. study had before secluded from the
 intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered unsocial; but
 clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; again taught
 to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
 excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to
 elevate my mind until it was on level with your own. selfish
 pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and
 affection warmed and opened my senses; i became the same happy creature
 who, few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had sorrow or care.
 when happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on the most
 delightful sensations. serene sky and verdant fields filled with
 ecstasy. the present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring
 bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. i
 was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed
 upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an
 invincible burden.
 
henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he
 exerted himself to amuse me, while expressed the sensations that filled
 his soul. the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
 astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in
 imitation of the persian and arabic writers, invented tales of wonderful
 fancy and passion. at other times repeated my favourite poems, or drew
 out into arguments, which supported with great ingenuity.
 
we returned to our college on sunday afternoon: the peasants were
 dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. my own spirits were
 high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
 



chapter 7
 

on my return, i found the following letter from my father:—
 
“my dear victor,
 
“you have probably waited impatiently for letter to fix the date of
 your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only few
 lines, merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you. but
 that would be cruel kindness, and i dare not do it. what would be
 your surprise, my son, when you expected happy and glad welcome, to
 behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness? and how, victor, can
 i relate our misfortune? absence cannot have rendered you callous to
 our joys and griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on my long absent
 son? i wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is
 impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words
 which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.
 
“william is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
 my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! victor, is murdered!
 
“i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
 circumstances of the transaction.
 
“last thursday (may 7th), i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
 walk in plainpalais. the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
 our walk farther than usual. it was already dusk before we thought of
 returning; and then we discovered that william and ernest, who had gone
 on before, were not to be found. we accordingly rested on seat until
 they should return. presently ernest came, and enquired if we had seen
 his brother; said, that had been playing with him, that william
 had run away to hide himself, and that vainly sought for him, and
 afterwards waited for long time, but that did not return.
 
“this account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
 until night fell, when elizabeth conjectured that might have
 returned to the house. was not there. we returned again, with
 torches; for i could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had
 lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night;
 elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. about five in the morning i
 discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before i had seen blooming and
 active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the
 print of the murder’s finger was on his neck.
 
“he was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
 countenance betrayed the secret to elizabeth. she was very earnest to
 see the corpse. at first i attempted to prevent her but she persisted,
 and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
 victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘o god! i have murdered my
 darling child!’
 
“she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. when she again
 lived, it was only to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same
 evening william had teased her to let him wear very valuable
 miniature that she possessed of your mother. this picture is gone, and
 was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. we
 have trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him
 are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved william!
 
“come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth. she weeps
 continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death;
 her words pierce my heart. we are all unhappy; but will not that be an
 additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
 your dear mother! alas, victor! i now say, thank god she did not live
 to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
 
“come, victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
 but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
 festering, the wounds of our minds. enter the house of mourning, my
 friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
 with hatred for your enemies.
 
“your affectionate and afflicted father,
 
“alphonse frankenstein.
 


“geneva, may 12th, 17—.”
 


clerval, who had watched my countenance as i read this letter, was
 surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy i at first
 expressed on receiving new from my friends. i threw the letter on the
 table, and covered my face with my hands.
 
“my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed henry, when perceived me
 weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? my dear friend,
 what has happened?”
 
i motioned him to take up the letter, while i walked up and down the
 room in the extremest agitation. tears also gushed from the eyes of
 clerval, as read the account of my misfortune.
 
“i can offer you consolation, my friend,” said he;
 “your disaster is irreparable. what do you intend to do?”
 
“to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.”
 
during our walk, clerval endeavoured to say few words of consolation;
 could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “poor william!” said he,
 “dear lovely child, now sleeps with his angel mother! who that had
 seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
 untimely loss! to die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! how
 much more murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! poor little
 fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
 is at rest. the pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
 sod covers his gentle form, and knows pain. can longer
 be subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable
 survivors.”
 
clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
 impressed themselves on my mind and i remembered them afterwards in
 solitude. but now, as soon as the horses arrived, i hurried into a
 cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.
 
my journey was very melancholy. at first i wished to hurry on, for i longed
 to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when i
 drew near my native town, i slackened my progress. i could hardly sustain
 the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. i passed through
 scenes familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for nearly six years.
 how altered every thing might be during that time! one sudden and
 desolating change had taken place; but thousand little circumstances
 might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were
 done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. fear overcame me; i
 dared advance, dreading thousand nameless evils that made tremble,
 although i was unable to define them.
 
i remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind. i
 contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the
 snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. by
 degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and i continued my journey
 towards geneva.
 
the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as i
 approached my native town. i discovered more distinctly the black
 sides of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc. i wept like a
 child. “dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
 wanderer? your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
 placid. is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?”
 
i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
 these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
 happiness, and i think of them with pleasure. my country, my beloved
 country! who but native can tell the delight i took in again
 beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely
 lake!
 
yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. night also
 closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt still
 more gloomily. the picture appeared vast and dim scene of evil, and i
 foresaw obscurely that i was destined to become the most wretched of human
 beings. alas! i prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
 circumstance, that in all the misery i imagined and dreaded, i did not
 conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure.
 
it was completely dark when i arrived in the environs of geneva; the gates
 of the town were already shut; and i was obliged to pass the night at
 secheron, village at the distance of half league from the city. the sky
 was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolved to visit the spot
 where my poor william had been murdered. as i could not pass through the
 town, i was obliged to cross the lake in boat to arrive at plainpalais.
 during this short voyage i saw the lightning playing on the summit of mont
 blanc in the most beautiful figures. the storm appeared to approach
 rapidly, and, on landing, i ascended low hill, that i might observe its
 progress. it advanced; the heavens were clouded, and i soon felt the rain
 coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.
 
i quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
 increased every minute, and the thunder burst with terrific crash
 over my head. it was echoed from salêve, the juras, and the alps of
 savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
 lake, making it appear like vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
 every thing seemed of pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
 from the preceding flash. the storm, as is often the case in
 switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. the
 most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the
 lake which lies between the promontory of belrive and the village of
 copêt. another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another
 darkened and sometimes disclosed the môle, peaked mountain to the
 east of the lake.
 
while i watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, i wandered on with
 hasty step. this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasped my
 hands, and exclaimed aloud, “william, dear angel! this is thy
 funeral, this thy dirge!” as i said these words, i perceived in the
 gloom figure which stole from behind clump of trees near me; i stood
 fixed, gazing intently: i could not be mistaken. flash of lightning
 illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
 gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs
 to humanity, instantly informed that it was the wretch, the filthy
 dæmon, to whom i had given life. what did there? could be (i
 shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? sooner did that
 idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my teeth
 chattered, and i was forced to lean against tree for support. the figure
 passed quickly, and i lost it in the gloom. nothing in human shape could
 have destroyed the fair child. _he_ was the murderer! i could not
 doubt it. the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the
 fact. i thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
 another flash discovered him to hanging among the rocks of the nearly
 perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, hill that bounds plainpalais on the
 south. soon reached the summit, and disappeared.
 
i remained motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still
 continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. i
 revolved in my mind the events which i had until now sought to forget:
 the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of
 the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. two years had
 now nearly elapsed since the night on which first received life; and
 was this his first crime? alas! i had turned loose into the world a
 depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had not
 murdered my brother?
 
one can conceive the anguish i suffered during the remainder of the
 night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but i did not
 feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
 scenes of evil and despair. i considered the being whom i had cast
 among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes
 of horror, such as the deed which had now done, nearly in the light
 of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
 to destroy all that was dear to me.
 
day dawned; and i directed my steps towards the town. the gates were
 open, and i hastened to my father’s house. my first thought was to
 discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
 made. but i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell. a
 being whom i myself had formed, and endued with life, had met at
 midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. i
 remembered also the nervous fever with which i had been seized just at
 the time that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of
 delirium to tale otherwise so utterly improbable. i well knew that
 if any other had communicated such relation to me, i should have
 looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. besides, the strange nature
 of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credited
 as to persuade my relatives to commence it. and then of what use would
 be pursuit? who could arrest creature capable of scaling the
 overhanging sides of mont salêve? these reflections determined me, and
 i resolved to remain silent.
 
it was about five in the morning when i entered my father’s house. i
 told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
 to attend their usual hour of rising.
 
six years had elapsed, passed in dream but for one indelible trace, and i
 stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father before my
 departure for ingolstadt. beloved and venerable parent! still remained
 to me. i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the
 mantel-piece. it was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
 desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
 by the coffin of her dead father. her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale;
 but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the
 sentiment of pity. below this picture was miniature of william; and my
 tears flowed when i looked upon it. while i was thus engaged, ernest
 entered: had heard arrive, and hastened to welcome me:
 “welcome, my dearest victor,” said he. “ah! i wish you
 had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and
 delighted. you come to us now to share misery which nothing can
 alleviate; yet your presence will, i hope, revive our father, who seems
 sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor
 elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—poor
 william! was our darling and our pride!”
 
tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; sense of mortal
 agony crept over my frame. before, i had only imagined the
 wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on as new, and
 not less terrible, disaster. i tried to calm ernest; i enquired more
 minutely concerning my father, and here i named my cousin.
 
“she most of all,” said ernest, “requires consolation; she accused
 herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her
 very wretched. but since the murderer has been discovered—”
 
“the murderer discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt
 to pursue him? it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
 winds, or confine mountain-stream with straw. i saw him too; he
 was free last night!”
 
“i do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of
 wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. no
 one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be
 convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. indeed, who would credit
 that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
 could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling crime?”
 
“justine moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is
 wrongfully; every one knows that; one believes it, surely, ernest?”
 
“no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
 almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
 confused, as to add to the evidence of facts weight that, i fear,
 leaves hope for doubt. but she will be tried today, and you will
 then hear all.”
 
then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william
 had been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
 bed for several days. during this interval, one of the servants,
 happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
 murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
 had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. the servant
 instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying word to
 any of the family, went to magistrate; and, upon their deposition,
 justine was apprehended. on being charged with the fact, the poor girl
 confirmed the suspicion in great measure by her extreme confusion of
 manner.
 
this was strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i replied
 earnestly, “you are all mistaken; i know the murderer. justine, poor,
 good justine, is innocent.”
 
at that instant my father entered. i saw unhappiness deeply impressed
 on his countenance, but endeavoured to welcome cheerfully; and,
 after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced
 some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed,
 “good god, papa! victor says that knows who was the murderer of
 poor william.”
 
“we do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed i had
 rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
 depravity and ungratitude in one i valued so highly.”
 
“my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.”
 
“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be
 tried today, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.”
 
this speech calmed me. i was firmly convinced in my own mind that
 justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. i
 had fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
 brought forward strong enough to convict her. my tale was not one to
 announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
 madness by the vulgar. did any one indeed exist, except i, the
 creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
 existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
 which i had let loose upon the world?
 
we were soon joined by elizabeth. time had altered her since i last
 beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of
 her childish years. there was the same candour, the same vivacity, but
 it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
 she welcomed with the greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear
 cousin,” said she, “fills with hope. you perhaps will find some
 means to justify my poor guiltless justine. alas! who is safe, if she
 be convicted of crime? i rely on her innocence as certainly as i do
 upon my own. our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
 lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom i sincerely
 love, is to be torn away by even worse fate. if she is condemned, i
 never shall know joy more. but she will not, i am sure she will not;
 and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
 william.”
 
“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said i, “and that shall
 be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance
 of her acquittal.”
 
“how kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt,
 and that made wretched, for i knew that it was impossible: and to
 see every one else prejudiced in so deadly manner rendered me
 hopeless and despairing.” she wept.
 
“dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. if she
 is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
 activity with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of
 partiality.”
 



chapter 8
 

we passed few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to
 commence. my father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
 as witnesses, i accompanied them to the court. during the whole of
 this wretched mockery of justice i suffered living torture. it was to
 be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
 cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one smiling babe full of
 innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
 aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
 justine also was girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
 to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an
 ignominious grave, and i the cause! thousand times rather would i
 have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to justine, but i
 was absent when it was committed, and such declaration would have
 been considered as the ravings of madman and would not have
 exculpated her who suffered through me.
 
the appearance of justine was calm. she was dressed in mourning, and
 her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
 feelings, exquisitely beautiful. yet she appeared confident in
 innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
 thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
 excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
 imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. she
 was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
 her confusion had before been adduced as proof of her guilt, she
 worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. when she entered the
 court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were
 seated. tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
 recovered herself, and look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest
 her utter guiltlessness.
 
the trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the
 charge, several witnesses were called. several strange facts combined
 against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof
 of her innocence as i had. she had been out the whole of the night on
 which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been
 perceived by market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
 murdered child had been afterwards found. the woman asked her what she
 did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned confused
 and unintelligible answer. she returned to the house about eight
 o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
 replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly
 if anything had been heard concerning him. when shown the body, she
 fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. the
 picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
 and when elizabeth, in faltering voice, proved that it was the same
 which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round
 his neck, murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.
 
justine was called on for her defence. as the trial had proceeded, her
 countenance had altered. surprise, horror, and misery were strongly
 expressed. sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was
 desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible
 although variable voice.
 
“god knows,” she said, “how entirely i am innocent. but i
 do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; i rest my innocence
 on plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
 against me, and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my
 judges to favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
 doubtful or suspicious.”
 
she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had passed
 the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the
 house of an aunt at chêne, village situated at about league from
 geneva. on her return, at about nine o’clock, she met man who asked
 her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. she was
 alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him,
 when the gates of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain
 several hours of the night in barn belonging to cottage, being
 unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. most
 of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that
 she slept for few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
 it was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour
 to find my brother. if she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
 it was without her knowledge. that she had been bewildered when
 questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed
 sleepless night and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain.
 concerning the picture she could give account.
 
“i know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and
 fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but i have power of
 explaining it; and when i have expressed my utter ignorance, i am only left
 to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
 placed in my pocket. but here also i am checked. i believe that i have no
 enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me
 wantonly. did the murderer place it there? i know of opportunity
 afforded him for so doing; or, if i had, why should have stolen the
 jewel, to part with it again so soon?
 
“i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see room for
 hope. i beg permission to have few witnesses examined concerning my
 character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed
 guilt, i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my
 innocence.”
 
several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and
 they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
 supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come
 forward. elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
 dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
 when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
 the court.
 
“i am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who
 was murdered, or rather his sister, for i was educated by and have lived
 with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. it may
 therefore be judged indecent in to come forward on this occasion, but
 when i see fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her
 pretended friends, i wish to be allowed to speak, that i may say what i
 know of her character. i am well acquainted with the accused. i have lived
 in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly
 two years. during all that period she appeared to the most amiable and
 benevolent of human creatures. she nursed madame frankenstein, my aunt, in
 her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards
 attended her own mother during tedious illness, in manner that excited
 the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my
 uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. she was
 warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a
 most affectionate mother. for my own part, i do not hesitate to say that,
 notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, i believe and rely
 on her perfect innocence. she had temptation for such an action; as to
 the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it,
 i should have willingly given it to her, so much do i esteem and value
 her.”
 
murmur of approbation followed elizabeth’s simple and powerful
 appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
 favour of poor justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
 renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. she
 herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. my own
 agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. i believed
 in her innocence; i knew it. could the dæmon who had (i did not for a
 minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
 betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? i could not sustain the
 horror of my situation, and when i perceived that the popular voice and
 the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
 i rushed out of the court in agony. the tortures of the accused did
 not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
 remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.
 
i passed night of unmingled wretchedness. in the morning i went to
 the court; my lips and throat were parched. i dared not ask the fatal
 question, but i was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
 visit. the ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and justine
 was condemned.
 
i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt. i had before
 experienced sensations of horror, and i have endeavoured to bestow upon
 them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
 heart-sickening despair that i then endured. the person to whom i
 addressed myself added that justine had already confessed her guilt.
 “that evidence,” observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a
 case, but i am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
 condemn criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
 decisive.”
 
this was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? had
 my eyes deceived me? and was i really as mad as the whole world would
 believe to be if i disclosed the object of my suspicions? i
 hastened to return home, and elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
 
“my cousin,” replied i, “it is decided as you may have expected; all
 judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
 should escape. but she has confessed.”
 
this was dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon
 justine’s innocence. “alas!” said she. “how shall i
 ever again believe in human goodness? justine, whom i loved and esteemed as
 my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
 her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has
 committed murder.”
 
soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed desire to see my
 cousin. my father wished her not to go but said that left it to her own
 judgment and feelings to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth,
 “i will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany
 me; i cannot go alone.” the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet
 i could not refuse.
 
we entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld justine sitting on some
 straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on
 her knees. she rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with
 her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly. my
 cousin wept also.
 
“oh, justine!” said she. “why did you rob of my last consolation?
 i relied on your innocence, and although i was then very wretched, i
 was not so miserable as i am now.”
 
“and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked? do you also
 join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn as murderer?” her
 voice was suffocated with sobs.
 
“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth; “why do you kneel,
 if you are innocent? i am not one of your enemies, i believed you
 guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had
 yourself declared your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be
 assured, dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a
 moment, but your own confession.”
 
“i did confess, but i confessed lie. i confessed, that i might
 obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
 all my other sins. the god of heaven forgive me! ever since i was
 condemned, my confessor has besieged me; threatened and menaced,
 until i almost began to think that i was the monster that said i
 was. threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
 i continued obdurate. dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked
 on as wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. what could i do?
 in an evil hour i subscribed to lie; and now only am i truly
 miserable.”
 
she paused, weeping, and then continued, “i thought with horror, my
 sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed
 aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was creature capable
 of crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
 dear william! dearest blessed child! i soon shall see you again in
 heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as i
 am to suffer ignominy and death.”
 
“oh, justine! forgive for having for one moment distrusted you.
 why did you confess? but do not mourn, dear girl. do not fear. i
 will proclaim, i will prove your innocence. i will melt the stony
 hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. you shall not die!
 you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
 no! no! i never could survive so horrible misfortune.”
 
justine shook her head mournfully. “i do not fear to die,” she said;
 “that pang is past. god raises my weakness and gives courage to
 endure the worst. i leave sad and bitter world; and if you remember
 and think of as of one unjustly condemned, i am resigned to the
 fate awaiting me. learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
 the will of heaven!”
 
during this conversation i had retired to corner of the prison room,
 where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. despair!
 who dared talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
 the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as i did, such
 deep and bitter agony. i gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
 uttering groan that came from my inmost soul. justine started. when
 she saw who it was, she approached and said, “dear sir, you are very
 kind to visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty?”
 
i could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more
 convinced of your innocence than i was, for even when heard that you
 had confessed, did not credit it.”
 
“i truly thank him. in these last moments i feel the sincerest
 gratitude towards those who think of with kindness. how sweet is
 the affection of others to such wretch as i am! it removes more than
 half my misfortune, and i feel as if i could die in peace now that my
 innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”
 
thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. she indeed
 gained the resignation she desired. but i, the true murderer, felt the
 never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of hope or
 consolation. elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
 the misery of innocence, which, like cloud that passes over the fair
 moon, for while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. anguish and
 despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; i bore hell within
 which nothing could extinguish. we stayed several hours with
 justine, and it was with great difficulty that elizabeth could tear
 herself away. “i wish,” cried she, “that i were to die with you; i
 cannot live in this world of misery.”
 
justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
 repressed her bitter tears. she embraced elizabeth and said in voice
 of half-suppressed emotion, “farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth,
 my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
 preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
 suffer! live, and be happy, and make others so.”
 
and on the morrow justine died. elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence
 failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
 criminality of the saintly sufferer. my passionate and indignant
 appeals were lost upon them. and when i received their cold answers
 and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
 avowal died away on my lips. thus i might proclaim myself madman,
 but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. she
 perished on the scaffold as murderess!
 
from the tortures of my own heart, i turned to contemplate the deep and
 voiceless grief of my elizabeth. this also was my doing! and my
 father’s woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
 the work of my thrice-accursed hands! ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
 are not your last tears! again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
 the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
 frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
 who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
 thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
 countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
 in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
 his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
 pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!
 
thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
 i beheld those i loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of william and
 justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.
 



chapter 9
 

nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
 been worked up by quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
 inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
 and fear. justine died, she rested, and i was alive. the blood flowed
 freely in my veins, but weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
 heart which nothing could remove. sleep fled from my eyes; i wandered
 like an evil spirit, for i had committed deeds of mischief beyond
 description horrible, and more, much more (i persuaded myself) was yet
 behind. yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
 i had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
 when i should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
 beings. now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
 which allowed to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
 from thence to gather promise of new hopes, i was seized by remorse and
 the sense of guilt, which hurried away to hell of intense tortures
 such as language can describe.
 
this state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
 entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. i shunned
 the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
 solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude.
 
my father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition
 and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
 serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire with fortitude and
 awaken in the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
 “do you think, victor,” said he, “that i do not suffer
 also? one could love child more than i loved your
 brother”—tears came into his eyes as spoke—“but
 is it not duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting
 their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? it is also duty
 owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment,
 or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which man is fit for
 society.”
 
this advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; i
 should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
 remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
 other sensations. now i could only answer my father with look of
 despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.
 
about this time we retired to our house at belrive. this change was
 particularly agreeable to me. the shutting of the gates regularly at
 ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
 hour had rendered our residence within the walls of geneva very irksome
 to me. i was now free. often, after the rest of the family had
 retired for the night, i took the boat and passed many hours upon the
 water. sometimes, with my sails set, i was carried by the wind; and
 sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, i left the boat to
 pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. i
 was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and i the only
 unquiet thing that wandered restless in scene so beautiful and
 heavenly—if i except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
 interrupted croaking was heard only when i approached the shore—often,
 i say, i was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
 might close over and my calamities for ever. but i was restrained,
 when i thought of the heroic and suffering elizabeth, whom i tenderly
 loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. i thought also of my
 father and surviving brother; should i by my base desertion leave them
 exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose
 among them?
 
at these moments i wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
 mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness. but that
 could not be. remorse extinguished every hope. i had been the author of
 unalterable evils, and i lived in daily fear lest the monster whom i had
 created should perpetrate some new wickedness. i had an obscure feeling
 that all was not over and that would still commit some signal crime,
 which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
 there was always scope for fear so long as anything i loved remained
 behind. my abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. when i thought of
 him i gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and i ardently wished to
 extinguish that life which i had so thoughtlessly bestowed. when i
 reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds
 of moderation. i would have made pilgrimage to the highest peak of the
 andes, could i, when there, have precipitated him to their base. i wished
 to see him again, that i might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
 head and avenge the deaths of william and justine.
 
our house was the house of mourning. my father’s health was deeply
 shaken by the horror of the recent events. elizabeth was sad and
 desponding; she longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
 pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
 then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
 and destroyed. she was longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
 wandered with on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our
 future prospects. the first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from
 the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
 smiles.
 
“when i reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of
 justine moritz, i longer see the world and its works as they before
 appeared to me. before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and
 injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
 days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
 reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
 appear to as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. yet i am
 certainly unjust. everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
 if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
 she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. for the sake
 of few jewels, to have murdered the of her benefactor and friend,
 child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
 it had been her own! i could not consent to the death of any human
 being, but certainly i should have thought such creature unfit to
 remain in the society of men. but she was innocent. i know, i feel
 she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
 alas! victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
 assure themselves of certain happiness? i feel as if i were walking on
 the edge of precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
 endeavouring to plunge into the abyss. william and justine were
 assassinated, and the murderer escapes; walks about the world free,
 and perhaps respected. but even if i were condemned to suffer on the
 scaffold for the same crimes, i would not change places with such a
 wretch.”
 
i listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. i, not in deed,
 but in effect, was the true murderer. elizabeth read my anguish in my
 countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “my dearest friend, you
 must calm yourself. these events have affected me, god knows how
 deeply; but i am not so wretched as you are. there is an expression of
 despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
 tremble. dear victor, banish these dark passions. remember the
 friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. have we lost
 the power of rendering you happy? ah! while we love, while we are
 true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
 country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our
 peace?”
 
and could not such words from her whom i fondly prized before every
 other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
 heart? even as she spoke i drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
 that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob of her.
 
thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
 heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
 ineffectual. i was encompassed by cloud which beneficial
 influence could penetrate. the wounded deer dragging its fainting
 limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
 pierced it, and to die, was but type of me.
 
sometimes i could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
 sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove to seek, by bodily
 exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
 sensations. it was during an access of this kind that i suddenly left
 my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys, sought
 in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
 my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. my wanderings were directed
 towards the valley of chamounix. i had visited it frequently during my
 boyhood. six years had passed since then: _i_ was wreck, but nought
 had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
 
i performed the first part of my journey on horseback. i afterwards
 hired mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
 injury on these rugged roads. the weather was fine; it was about the
 middle of the month of august, nearly two months after the death of
 justine, that miserable epoch from which i dated all my woe. the
 weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as i plunged yet deeper in
 the ravine of arve. the immense mountains and precipices that overhung
 on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
 the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of power mighty as
 omnipotence—and i ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
 almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
 displayed in their most terrific guise. still, as i ascended higher,
 the valley assumed more magnificent and astonishing character.
 ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
 impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
 among the trees formed scene of singular beauty. but it was
 augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty alps, whose white and
 shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
 earth, the habitations of another race of beings.
 
i passed the bridge of pélissier, where the ravine, which the river
 forms, opened before me, and i began to ascend the mountain that
 overhangs it. soon after, i entered the valley of chamounix. this
 valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
 picturesque as that of servox, through which i had just passed. the
 high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but i saw no
 more ruined castles and fertile fields. immense glaciers approached
 the road; i heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
 marked the smoke of its passage. mont blanc, the supreme and
 magnificent mont blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_,
 and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.
 
tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across during this
 journey. some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
 recognised, reminded of days gone by, and were associated with the
 lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. the very winds whispered in soothing
 accents, and maternal nature bade weep more. then again the
 kindly influence ceased to act—i found myself fettered again to grief
 and indulging in all the misery of reflection. then i spurred on my
 animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
 myself—or, in more desperate fashion, i alighted and threw myself on
 the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
 
at length i arrived at the village of chamounix. exhaustion succeeded
 to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which i had endured.
 for short space of time i remained at the window watching the pallid
 lightnings that played above mont blanc and listening to the rushing of
 the arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. the same lulling sounds
 acted as lullaby to my too keen sensations; when i placed my head
 upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; i felt it as it came and blessed
 the giver of oblivion.
 



chapter 10
 

i spent the following day roaming through the valley. i stood beside
 the sources of the arveiron, which take their rise in glacier, that
 with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
 barricade the valley. the abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
 me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; few shattered pines were
 scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
 presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling
 waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
 avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
 accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
 was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but plaything in
 their hands. these sublime and magnificent scenes afforded the
 greatest consolation that i was capable of receiving. they elevated me
 from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
 grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. in some degree, also, they
 diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
 last month. i retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
 waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which i
 had contemplated during the day. they congregated round me; the
 unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
 and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all
 gathered round and bade be at peace.
 
where had they fled when the next morning i awoke? all of
 soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
 thought. the rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
 summits of the mountains, so that i even saw not the faces of those
 mighty friends. still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
 in their cloudy retreats. what were rain and storm to me? my mule was
 brought to the door, and i resolved to ascend to the summit of
 montanvert. i remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
 and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when i first saw it.
 it had then filled with sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
 soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
 the sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
 effect of solemnising my mind and causing to forget the passing
 cares of life. i determined to go without guide, for i was well
 acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
 solitary grandeur of the scene.
 
the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
 windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
 mountain. it is scene terrifically desolate. in thousand spots
 the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
 broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
 leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
 other trees. the path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
 of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
 particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
 in loud voice, produces concussion of air sufficient to draw
 destruction upon the head of the speaker. the pines are not tall or
 luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
 i looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
 which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
 mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
 poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression i
 received from the objects around me. alas! why does man boast of
 sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
 them more necessary beings. if our impulses were confined to hunger,
 thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
 every wind that blows and chance word or scene that that word may
 convey to us.
 
we rest; dream has power to poison sleep.
 we rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
 we feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
 embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
 it is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
 the path of its departure still is free.
 man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
 nought may endure but mutability!
 

it was nearly noon when i arrived at the top of the ascent. for some
 time i sat upon the rock that overlooks the of ice. mist covered
 both that and the surrounding mountains. presently breeze dissipated
 the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier. the surface is very
 uneven, rising like the waves of troubled sea, descending low, and
 interspersed by rifts that sink deep. the field of ice is almost a
 league in width, but i spent nearly two hours in crossing it. the
 opposite mountain is bare perpendicular rock. from the side where i
 now stood montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of league;
 and above it rose mont blanc, in awful majesty. i remained in recess
 of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. the sea,
 or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
 whose aerial summits hung over its recesses. their icy and glittering
 peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. my heart, which was
 before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; i exclaimed,
 “wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
 beds, allow this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
 away from the joys of life.”
 
as i said this i suddenly beheld the figure of man, at some distance,
 advancing towards with superhuman speed. bounded over the
 crevices in the ice, among which i had walked with caution; his
 stature, also, as approached, seemed to exceed that of man. i was
 troubled; mist came over my eyes, and i felt faintness seize me,
 but i was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. i
 perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
 that it was the wretch whom i had created. i trembled with rage and
 horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
 mortal combat. approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
 combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
 rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. but i scarcely
 observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived of utterance,
 and i recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
 detestation and contempt.
 
“devil,” i exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do
 not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
 begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust! and,
 oh! that i could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore
 those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”
 
“i expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “all men hate the
 wretched; how, then, must i be hated, who am miserable beyond all
 living things! yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
 to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
 one of us. you purpose to kill me. how dare you sport thus with life?
 do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of
 mankind. if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and
 you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it
 be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”
 
“abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too
 mild vengeance for thy crimes. wretched devil! you reproach with
 your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i
 so negligently bestowed.”
 
my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impelled by all the
 feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
 
easily eluded and said,
 
“be calm! i entreat you to hear before you give vent to your hatred
 on my devoted head. have i not suffered enough, that you seek to
 increase my misery? life, although it may only be an accumulation of
 anguish, is dear to me, and i will defend it. remember, thou hast made
 more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
 joints more supple. but i will not be tempted to set myself in
 opposition to thee. i am thy creature, and i will be even mild and
 docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
 the which thou owest me. oh, frankenstein, be not equitable to every
 other and trample upon alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
 clemency and affection, is most due. remember that i am thy creature;
 i ought to be thy adam, but i am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
 drivest from joy for misdeed. everywhere i see bliss, from which i
 alone am irrevocably excluded. i was benevolent and good; misery made
 fiend. make happy, and i shall again be virtuous.”
 
“begone! i will not hear you. there can be community between you
 and me; we are enemies. begone, or let us try our strength in fight,
 in which one must fall.”
 
“how can i move thee? will entreaties cause thee to turn a
 favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
 compassion? believe me, frankenstein, i was benevolent; my soul glowed
 with love and humanity; but am i not alone, miserably alone? you, my
 creator, abhor me; what hope can i gather from your fellow creatures,
 who owe nothing? they spurn and hate me. the desert mountains and
 dreary glaciers are my refuge. i have wandered here many days; the
 caves of ice, which i only do not fear, are dwelling to me, and the
 only one which man does not grudge. these bleak skies i hail, for they
 are kinder to than your fellow beings. if the multitude of mankind
 knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
 my destruction. shall i not then hate them who abhor me? i will keep
 terms with my enemies. i am miserable, and they shall share my
 wretchedness. yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
 them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
 not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
 swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. let your compassion be
 moved, and do not disdain me. listen to my tale; when you have heard
 that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that i deserve.
 but hear me. the guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
 are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. listen
 to me, frankenstein. you accuse of murder, and yet you would, with
 satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. oh, praise the
 eternal justice of man! yet i ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
 and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”
 
“why do you call to my remembrance,” i rejoined, “circumstances of
 which i shudder to reflect, that i have been the miserable origin and
 author? cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
 light! cursed (although i curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
 you have made wretched beyond expression. you have left power
 to consider whether i am just to you or not. begone! relieve from
 the sight of your detested form.”
 
“thus i relieve thee, my creator,” said, and placed his hated hands
 before my eyes, which i flung from with violence; “thus i take from
 thee sight which you abhor. still thou canst listen to and grant
 thy compassion. by the virtues that i once possessed, i demand this
 from you. hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
 this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
 the mountain. the sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
 to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
 world, you will have heard my story and can decide. on you it rests,
 whether i quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead harmless
 life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
 your own speedy ruin.”
 
as said this led the way across the ice; i followed. my heart
 was full, and i did not answer him, but as i proceeded, i weighed the
 various arguments that had used and determined at least to listen to
 his tale. i was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
 resolution. i had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
 brother, and i eagerly sought confirmation or denial of this opinion.
 for the first time, also, i felt what the duties of creator towards
 his creature were, and that i ought to render him happy before i
 complained of his wickedness. these motives urged to comply with
 his demand. we crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
 rock. the air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
 entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, i with heavy
 heart and depressed spirits. but i consented to listen, and seating
 myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, thus began
 his tale.
 



chapter 11
 

“it is with considerable difficulty that i remember the original of
 my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
 strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and i saw, felt, heard,
 and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, long time before i
 learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. by
 degrees, i remember, stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that i
 was obliged to shut my eyes. darkness then came over and troubled
 me, but hardly had i felt this when, by opening my eyes, as i now
 suppose, the light poured in upon again. i walked and, i believe,
 descended, but i presently found great alteration in my sensations.
 before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my
 touch or sight; but i now found that i could wander on at liberty, with
 obstacles which i could not either surmount or avoid. the light
 became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying as i
 walked, i sought place where i could receive shade. this was the
 forest near ingolstadt; and here i lay by the side of brook resting
 from my fatigue, until i felt tormented by hunger and thirst. this
 roused from my nearly dormant state, and i ate some berries which i
 found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. i slaked my thirst
 at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
 
“it was dark when i awoke; i felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
 were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. before i had quitted
 your apartment, on sensation of cold, i had covered myself with some
 clothes, but these were insufficient to secure from the dews of
 night. i was poor, helpless, miserable wretch; i knew, and could
 distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade on all sides, i sat
 down and wept.
 
“soon gentle light stole over the heavens and gave sensation of
 pleasure. i started up and beheld radiant form rise from among the
 trees. [the moon] i gazed with kind of wonder. it moved slowly,
 but it enlightened my path, and i again went out in search of berries.
 i was still cold when under one of the trees i found huge cloak, with
 which i covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. distinct
 ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. i felt light, and hunger,
 and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on
 all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that i could
 distinguish was the bright moon, and i fixed my eyes on that with
 pleasure.
 
“several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
 greatly lessened, when i began to distinguish my sensations from each
 other. i gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied with
 drink and the trees that shaded with their foliage. i was delighted
 when i first discovered that pleasant sound, which often saluted my
 ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
 often intercepted the light from my eyes. i began also to observe,
 with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded and to perceive the
 boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. sometimes i
 tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
 sometimes i wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
 uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from frightened into
 silence again.
 
“the moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with lessened
 form, showed itself, while i still remained in the forest. my
 sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every
 day additional ideas. my eyes became accustomed to the light and to
 perceive objects in their right forms; i distinguished the insect from
 the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. i found that the
 sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
 thrush were sweet and enticing.
 
“one day, when i was oppressed by cold, i found fire which had been
 left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
 warmth i experienced from it. in my joy i thrust my hand into the live
 embers, but quickly drew it out again with cry of pain. how strange,
 i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! i
 examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
 composed of wood. i quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
 and would not burn. i was pained at this and sat still watching the
 operation of the fire. the wet wood which i had placed near the heat
 dried and itself became inflamed. i reflected on this, and by touching
 the various branches, i discovered the cause and busied myself in
 collecting great quantity of wood, that i might dry it and have a
 plentiful supply of fire. when night came on and brought sleep with
 it, i was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. i
 covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
 upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, i lay on the ground and sank
 into sleep.
 
“it was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
 i uncovered it, and gentle breeze quickly fanned it into flame. i
 observed this also and contrived fan of branches, which roused the
 embers when they were nearly extinguished. when night came again i
 found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
 the discovery of this element was useful to in my food, for i found
 some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
 tasted much more savoury than the berries i gathered from the trees. i
 tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on
 the live embers. i found that the berries were spoiled by this
 operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
 
“food, however, became scarce, and i often spent the whole day
 searching in vain for few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. when
 i found this, i resolved to quit the place that i had hitherto
 inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants i experienced would be
 more easily satisfied. in this emigration i exceedingly lamented the
 loss of the fire which i had obtained through accident and knew not how
 to reproduce it. i gave several hours to the serious consideration of
 this difficulty, but i was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
 it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, i struck across the wood
 towards the setting sun. i passed three days in these rambles and at
 length discovered the open country. great fall of snow had taken
 place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
 appearance was disconsolate, and i found my feet chilled by the cold
 damp substance that covered the ground.
 
“it was about seven in the morning, and i longed to obtain food and
 shelter; at length i perceived small hut, on rising ground, which
 had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. this
 was new sight to me, and i examined the structure with great
 curiosity. finding the door open, i entered. an old man sat in it,
 near fire, over which was preparing his breakfast. turned on
 hearing noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
 hut, ran across the fields with speed of which his debilitated form
 hardly appeared capable. his appearance, different from any i had ever
 before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. but i was enchanted
 by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
 penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to then as exquisite
 and divine retreat as pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell
 after their sufferings in the lake of fire. i greedily devoured the
 remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese,
 milk, and wine; the latter, however, i did not like. then, overcome by
 fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
 
“it was noon when i awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which
 shone brightly on the white ground, i determined to recommence my
 travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a
 wallet i found, i proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
 at sunset i arrived at village. how miraculous did this appear! the
 huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by
 turns. the vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that i saw
 placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. one
 of the best of these i entered, but i had hardly placed my foot within
 the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
 the whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
 grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, i
 escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in low hovel,
 quite bare, and making wretched appearance after the palaces i had
 beheld in the village. this hovel however, joined cottage of neat
 and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, i
 dared not enter it. my place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
 low that i could with difficulty sit upright in it. wood, however,
 was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
 although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, i found it an
 agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.
 
“here, then, i retreated and lay down happy to have found shelter,
 however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
 from the barbarity of man. as soon as morning dawned i crept from my
 kennel, that i might view the adjacent cottage and discover if i could
 remain in the habitation i had found. it was situated against the back
 of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by pig
 sty and clear pool of water. one part was open, and by that i had
 crept in; but now i covered every crevice by which i might be perceived
 with stones and wood, yet in such manner that i might move them on
 occasion to pass out; all the light i enjoyed came through the sty, and
 that was sufficient for me.
 
“having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, i
 retired, for i saw the figure of man at distance, and i remembered
 too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. i
 had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by loaf
 of coarse bread, which i purloined, and cup with which i could drink
 more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by
 my retreat. the floor was little raised, so that it was kept
 perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was
 tolerably warm.
 
“being thus provided, i resolved to reside in this hovel until
 something should occur which might alter my determination. it was
 indeed paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
 the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. i ate my breakfast with
 pleasure and was about to remove plank to procure myself little
 water when i heard step, and looking through small chink, i beheld
 young creature, with pail on her head, passing before my hovel. the
 girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what i have since found
 cottagers and farmhouse servants to be. yet she was meanly dressed, a
 coarse blue petticoat and linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
 hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. i lost
 sight of her, and in about quarter of an hour she returned bearing
 the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. as she walked along,
 seemingly incommoded by the burden, young man met her, whose
 countenance expressed deeper despondence. uttering few sounds with
 an air of melancholy, took the pail from her head and bore it to the
 cottage himself. she followed, and they disappeared. presently i saw
 the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
 behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the
 house and sometimes in the yard.
 
“on examining my dwelling, i found that one of the windows of the
 cottage had formerly occupied part of it, but the panes had been
 filled up with wood. in one of these was small and almost
 imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
 through this crevice small room was visible, whitewashed and clean
 but very bare of furniture. in one corner, near small fire, sat an
 old man, leaning his head on his hands in disconsolate attitude. the
 young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she
 took something out of drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat
 down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play
 and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
 nightingale. it was lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
 never beheld aught beautiful before. the silver hair and benevolent
 countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle
 manners of the girl enticed my love. played sweet mournful air
 which i perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of
 which the old man took notice, until she sobbed audibly; then
 pronounced few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
 at his feet. raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection
 that i felt sensations of peculiar and overpowering nature; they were
 mixture of pain and pleasure, such as i had never before experienced,
 either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and i withdrew from the
 window, unable to bear these emotions.
 
“soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a
 load of wood. the girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of
 his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on
 the fire; then she and the youth went apart into nook of the cottage,
 and showed her large loaf and piece of cheese. she seemed
 pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
 placed in water, and then upon the fire. she afterwards continued her
 work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
 employed in digging and pulling up roots. after had been employed
 thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
 cottage together.
 
“the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance
 of his companions assumed more cheerful air, and they sat down to
 eat. the meal was quickly dispatched. the young woman was again
 occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the
 cottage in the sun for few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
 nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent
 creatures. one was old, with silver hairs and countenance beaming
 with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his
 figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his
 eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. the
 old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different
 from those had used in the morning, directed his steps across the
 fields.
 
“night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, i found that the
 cottagers had means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was
 delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
 pleasure i experienced in watching my human neighbours. in the evening
 the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
 which i did not understand; and the old man again took up the
 instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted in
 the morning. so soon as had finished, the youth began, not to play,
 but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
 harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; i since
 found that read aloud, but at that time i knew nothing of the
 science of words or letters.
 
“the family, after having been thus occupied for short time,
 extinguished their lights and retired, as i conjectured, to rest.”
 



chapter 12
 

“i lay on my straw, but i could not sleep. i thought of the
 occurrences of the day. what chiefly struck was the gentle manners
 of these people, and i longed to join them, but dared not. i
 remembered too well the treatment i had suffered the night before from
 the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct i
 might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present i would
 remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the
 motives which influenced their actions.
 
“the cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. the young woman
 arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed
 after the first meal.
 
“this day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
 the young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in
 various laborious occupations within. the old man, whom i soon
 perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
 in contemplation. nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
 younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. they
 performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
 gentleness, and rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
 
“they were not entirely happy. the young man and his companion often
 went apart and appeared to weep. i saw cause for their unhappiness,
 but i was deeply affected by it. if such lovely creatures were
 miserable, it was less strange that i, an imperfect and solitary being,
 should be wretched. yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? they
 possessed delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
 luxury; they had fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands
 when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
 they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
 looks of affection and kindness. what did their tears imply? did they
 really express pain? i was at first unable to solve these questions,
 but perpetual attention and time explained to many appearances which
 were at first enigmatic.
 
“a considerable period elapsed before i discovered one of the causes of
 the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they
 suffered that evil in very distressing degree. their nourishment
 consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of
 one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters
 could scarcely procure food to support it. they often, i believe,
 suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two
 younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old
 man when they reserved none for themselves.
 
“this trait of kindness moved sensibly. i had been accustomed,
 during the night, to steal part of their store for my own
 consumption, but when i found that in doing this i inflicted pain on
 the cottagers, i abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and
 roots which i gathered from neighbouring wood.
 
“i discovered also another means through which i was enabled to assist
 their labours. i found that the youth spent great part of each day
 in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night i often
 took his tools, the use of which i quickly discovered, and brought home
 firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.
 
“i remember, the first time that i did this, the young woman, when she
 opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing great
 pile of wood on the outside. she uttered some words in loud voice, and the
 youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. i observed, with pleasure,
 that did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the
 cottage and cultivating the garden.
 
“by degrees i made discovery of still greater moment. i found that
 these people possessed method of communicating their experience and
 feelings to one another by articulate sounds. i perceived that the words
 they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the
 minds and countenances of the hearers. this was indeed godlike science,
 and i ardently desired to become acquainted with it. but i was baffled in
 every attempt i made for this purpose. their pronunciation was quick, and
 the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible
 objects, i was unable to discover any clue by which i could unravel the
 mystery of their reference. by great application, however, and after having
 remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, i
 discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of
 discourse; i learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and
 _wood._ i learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. the youth
 and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only
 one, which was _father._ the girl was called _sister_ or
 _agatha,_ and the youth _felix, brother,_ or _son_. i cannot
 describe the delight i felt when i learned the ideas appropriated to each of
 these sounds and was able to pronounce them. i distinguished several other
 words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good,
 dearest, unhappy._
 
“i spent the winter in this manner. the gentle manners and beauty of
 the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, i
 felt depressed; when they rejoiced, i sympathised in their joys. i saw
 few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the
 cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to the
 superior accomplishments of my friends. the old man, i could perceive,
 often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes i found that
 called them, to cast off their melancholy. would talk in a
 cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
 even upon me. agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
 with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but i
 generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after
 having listened to the exhortations of her father. it was not thus
 with felix. was always the saddest of the group, and even to my
 unpractised senses, appeared to have suffered more deeply than his
 friends. but if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more
 cheerful than that of his sister, especially when addressed the old
 man.
 
“i could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked
 the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. in the midst of poverty
 and want, felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little
 white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. early in
 the morning, before she had risen, cleared away the snow that
 obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and
 brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual
 astonishment, found his store always replenished by an invisible
 hand. in the day, i believe, worked sometimes for neighbouring
 farmer, because often went forth and did not return until dinner,
 yet brought wood with him. at other times worked in the garden,
 but as there was little to do in the frosty season, read to the old
 man and agatha.
 
“this reading had puzzled extremely at first, but by degrees i
 discovered that uttered many of the same sounds when read as when
 talked. i conjectured, therefore, that found on the paper signs
 for speech which understood, and i ardently longed to comprehend
 these also; but how was that possible when i did not even understand
 the sounds for which they stood as signs? i improved, however,
 sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of
 conversation, although i applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for i
 easily perceived that, although i eagerly longed to discover myself to
 the cottagers, i ought not to make the attempt until i had first become
 master of their language, which knowledge might enable to make them
 overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast
 perpetually presented to my eyes had made acquainted.
 
“i had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty,
 and delicate complexions; but how was i terrified when i viewed myself
 in transparent pool! at first i started back, unable to believe that
 it was indeed i who was reflected in the mirror; and when i became
 fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was
 filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
 alas! i did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
 deformity.
 
“as the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
 vanished, and i beheld the bare trees and the black earth. from this
 time felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of
 impending famine disappeared. their food, as i afterwards found, was
 coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured sufficiency of it.
 several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
 dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season
 advanced.
 
“the old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
 not rain, as i found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
 waters. this frequently took place, but high wind quickly dried the
 earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.
 
“my mode of life in my hovel was uniform. during the morning i
 attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in
 various occupations, i slept; the remainder of the day was spent in
 observing my friends. when they had retired to rest, if there was any
 moon or the night was star-light, i went into the woods and collected
 my own food and fuel for the cottage. when i returned, as often as it
 was necessary, i cleared their path from the snow and performed those
 offices that i had seen done by felix. i afterwards found that these
 labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and
 once or twice i heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good
 spirit, wonderful_; but i did not then understand the signification
 of these terms.
 
“my thoughts now became more active, and i longed to discover the
 motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; i was inquisitive to
 know why felix appeared so miserable and agatha so sad. i thought
 (foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to
 these deserving people. when i slept or was absent, the forms of the
 venerable blind father, the gentle agatha, and the excellent felix
 flitted before me. i looked upon them as superior beings who would be
 the arbiters of my future destiny. i formed in my imagination a
 thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of
 me. i imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle
 demeanour and conciliating words, i should first win their favour and
 afterwards their love.
 
“these thoughts exhilarated and led to apply with fresh ardour to
 the acquiring the art of language. my organs were indeed harsh, but
 supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their
 tones, yet i pronounced such words as i understood with tolerable ease.
 it was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose
 intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved
 better treatment than blows and execration.
 
“the pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
 aspect of the earth. men who before this change seemed to have been
 hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of
 cultivation. the birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves
 began to bud forth on the trees. happy, happy earth! fit habitation
 for gods, which, so short time before, was bleak, damp, and
 unwholesome. my spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of
 nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
 and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.”
 



chapter 13
 

“i now hasten to the more moving part of my story. i shall relate
 events that impressed with feelings which, from what i had been,
 have made what i am.
 
“spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies
 cloudless. it surprised that what before was desert and gloomy
 should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. my
 senses were gratified and refreshed by thousand scents of delight and
 thousand sights of beauty.
 
“it was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested
 from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children
 listened to him—that i observed the countenance of felix was
 melancholy beyond expression; sighed frequently, and once his father
 paused in his music, and i conjectured by his manner that inquired
 the cause of his son’s sorrow. felix replied in cheerful accent, and
 the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.
 
“it was lady on horseback, accompanied by country-man as guide.
 the lady was dressed in dark suit and covered with thick black
 veil. agatha asked question, to which the stranger only replied by
 pronouncing, in sweet accent, the name of felix. her voice was
 musical but unlike that of either of my friends. on hearing this word,
 felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her
 veil, and i beheld countenance of angelic beauty and expression. her
 hair of shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were
 dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of regular
 proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with
 lovely pink.
 
“felix seemed ravished with delight when saw her, every trait of
 sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed degree of
 ecstatic joy, of which i could hardly have believed it capable; his
 eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment i
 thought him as beautiful as the stranger. she appeared affected by
 different feelings; wiping few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
 out her hand to felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as
 well as i could distinguish, his sweet arabian. she did not appear to
 understand him, but smiled. assisted her to dismount, and
 dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. some
 conversation took place between him and his father, and the young
 stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand,
 but raised her and embraced her affectionately.
 
“i soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds
 and appeared to have language of her own, she was neither understood
 by nor herself understood the cottagers. they made many signs which i
 did not comprehend, but i saw that her presence diffused gladness
 through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
 morning mists. felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of
 delight welcomed his arabian. agatha, the ever-gentle agatha, kissed
 the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made
 signs which appeared to to mean that had been sorrowful until she
 came. some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances,
 expressed joy, the cause of which i did not comprehend. presently i
 found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger
 repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language;
 and the idea instantly occurred to that i should make use of the
 same instructions to the same end. the stranger learned about twenty
 words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which i had
 before understood, but i profited by the others.
 
“as night came on, agatha and the arabian retired early. when they
 separated felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘good night
 sweet safie.’ sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and
 by the frequent repetition of her name i conjectured that their lovely
 guest was the subject of their conversation. i ardently desired to
 understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found
 it utterly impossible.
 
“the next morning felix went out to his work, and after the usual
 occupations of agatha were finished, the arabian sat at the feet of the
 old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly
 beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my
 eyes. she sang, and her voice flowed in rich cadence, swelling or
 dying away like nightingale of the woods.
 
“when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first
 declined it. she played simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
 sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. the old
 man appeared enraptured and said some words which agatha endeavoured to
 explain to safie, and by which appeared to wish to express that she
 bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.
 
“the days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration
 that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
 safie was always gay and happy; she and i improved rapidly in the
 knowledge of language, so that in two months i began to comprehend most
 of the words uttered by my protectors.
 
“in the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and
 the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
 scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
 the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal
 rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably
 shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for i never
 ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same
 treatment i had formerly endured in the first village which i entered.
 
“my days were spent in close attention, that i might more speedily
 master the language; and i may boast that i improved more rapidly than
 the arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken
 accents, whilst i comprehended and could imitate almost every word that
 was spoken.
 
“while i improved in speech, i also learned the science of letters as
 it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before wide field
 for wonder and delight.
 
“the book from which felix instructed safie was volney’s _ruins
 of empires_. i should not have understood the purport of this book had not
 felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. had chosen this
 work, said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the
 eastern authors. through this work i obtained cursory knowledge of history
 and view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave
 an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different
 nations of the earth. i heard of the slothful asiatics, of the stupendous
 genius and mental activity of the grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue
 of the early romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the
 decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings. i heard
 of the discovery of the american hemisphere and wept with safie over the
 hapless fate of its original inhabitants.
 
“these wonderful narrations inspired with strange feelings. was
 man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so
 vicious and base? appeared at one time mere scion of the evil
 principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and
 godlike. to be great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour
 that can befall sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
 record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, condition more
 abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. for long time i
 could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or
 even why there were laws and governments; but when i heard details of
 vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and i turned away with disgust and
 loathing.
 
“every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
 while i listened to the instructions which felix bestowed upon the
 arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. i
 heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid
 poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.
 
“the words induced to turn towards myself. i learned that the
 possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and
 unsullied descent united with riches. man might be respected with
 only one of these advantages, but without either was considered,
 except in very rare instances, as vagabond and slave, doomed to
 waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! and what was i? of
 my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i
 possessed money, friends, kind of property. i was, besides,
 endued with figure hideously deformed and loathsome; i was not even
 of the same nature as man. i was more agile than they and could
 subsist upon coarser diet; i bore the extremes of heat and cold with
 less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. when i looked
 around i saw and heard of none like me. was i, then, monster, blot
 upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
 
“i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
 upon me; i tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
 knowledge. oh, that i had for ever remained in my native wood, nor
 known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!
 
“of what strange nature is knowledge! it clings to the mind when it
 has once seized on it like lichen on the rock. i wished sometimes to
 shake off all thought and feeling, but i learned that there was but one
 means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state
 which i feared yet did not understand. i admired virtue and good
 feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
 cottagers, but i was shut out from intercourse with them, except
 through means which i obtained by stealth, when i was unseen and
 unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire i had of
 becoming one among my fellows. the gentle words of agatha and the
 animated smiles of the charming arabian were not for me. the mild
 exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved
 felix were not for me. miserable, unhappy wretch!
 
“other lessons were impressed upon even more deeply. i heard of the
 difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the
 father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the
 older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up
 in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained
 knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which
 bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.
 
“but where were my friends and relations? father had watched my
 infant days, mother had blessed with smiles and caresses; or if
 they had, all my past life was now blot, blind vacancy in which i
 distinguished nothing. from my earliest remembrance i had been as i
 then was in height and proportion. i had never yet seen being
 resembling or who claimed any intercourse with me. what was i? the
 question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.
 
“i will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow now to
 return to the cottagers, whose story excited in such various
 feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated
 in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so i loved, in
 an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).”
 



chapter 14
 

“some time elapsed before i learned the history of my friends. it was
 one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
 as it did number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to
 one so utterly inexperienced as i was.
 
“the name of the old man was lacey. was descended from good
 family in france, where had lived for many years in affluence,
 respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. his was bred
 in the service of his country, and agatha had ranked with ladies of the
 highest distinction. few months before my arrival they had lived in
 large and luxurious city called paris, surrounded by friends and
 possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
 taste, accompanied by moderate fortune, could afford.
 
“the father of safie had been the cause of their ruin. was a
 turkish merchant and had inhabited paris for many years, when, for some
 reason which i could not learn, became obnoxious to the government.
 was seized and cast into prison the very day that safie arrived from
 constantinople to join him. was tried and condemned to death. the
 injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all paris was indignant;
 and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime
 alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.
 
“felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and
 indignation were uncontrollable when heard the decision of the
 court. made, at that moment, solemn vow to deliver him and then
 looked around for the means. after many fruitless attempts to gain
 admittance to the prison, found strongly grated window in an
 unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the
 unfortunate muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the
 execution of the barbarous sentence. felix visited the grate at night
 and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. the turk,
 amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer
 by promises of reward and wealth. felix rejected his offers with
 contempt, yet when saw the lovely safie, who was allowed to visit
 her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the
 youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed
 treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
 
“the turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made
 on the heart of felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in
 his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he
 should be conveyed to place of safety. felix was too delicate to
 accept this offer, yet looked forward to the probability of the
 event as to the consummation of his happiness.
 
“during the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for
 the escape of the merchant, the zeal of felix was warmed by several
 letters that received from this lovely girl, who found means to
 express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old
 man, servant of her father who understood french. she thanked him in
 the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and
 at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
 
“i have copies of these letters, for i found means, during my residence
 in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters
 were often in the hands of felix or agatha. before i depart i will
 give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present,
 as the sun is already far declined, i shall only have time to repeat
 the substance of them to you.
 
“safie related that her mother was christian arab, seized and made a
 slave by the turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of
 the father of safie, who married her. the young girl spoke in high and
 enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the
 bondage to which she was now reduced. she instructed her daughter in
 the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of
 intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female
 followers of muhammad. this lady died, but her lessons were indelibly
 impressed on the mind of safie, who sickened at the prospect of again
 returning to asia and being immured within the walls of harem,
 allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to
 the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and noble
 emulation for virtue. the prospect of marrying christian and
 remaining in country where women were allowed to take rank in
 society was enchanting to her.
 
“the day for the execution of the turk was fixed, but on the night
 previous to it quitted his prison and before morning was distant
 many leagues from paris. felix had procured passports in the name of
 his father, sister, and himself. had previously communicated his
 plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under
 the pretence of journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in
 an obscure part of paris.
 
“felix conducted the fugitives through france to lyons and across mont
 cenis to leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait favourable
 opportunity of passing into some part of the turkish dominions.
 
“safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his
 departure, before which time the turk renewed his promise that she
 should be united to his deliverer; and felix remained with them in
 expectation of that event; and in the meantime enjoyed the society
 of the arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest
 affection. they conversed with one another through the means of an
 interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and safie
 sang to him the divine airs of her native country.
 
“the turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes
 of the youthful lovers, while in his heart had formed far other
 plans. loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
 christian, but feared the resentment of felix if should appear
 lukewarm, for knew that was still in the power of his deliverer
 if should choose to betray him to the italian state which they
 inhabited. revolved thousand plans by which should be enabled
 to prolong the deceit until it might be longer necessary, and
 secretly to take his daughter with him when departed. his plans
 were facilitated by the news which arrived from paris.
 
“the government of france were greatly enraged at the escape of their
 victim and spared pains to detect and punish his deliverer. the
 plot of felix was quickly discovered, and lacey and agatha were
 thrown into prison. the news reached felix and roused him from his
 dream of pleasure. his blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay
 in noisome dungeon while enjoyed the free air and the society of
 her whom loved. this idea was torture to him. quickly arranged
 with the turk that if the latter should find favourable opportunity
 for escape before felix could return to italy, safie should remain as a
 boarder at convent at leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely arabian,
 hastened to paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the
 law, hoping to free lacey and agatha by this proceeding.
 
“he did not succeed. they remained confined for five months before the
 trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune
 and condemned them to perpetual exile from their native country.
 
“they found miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i
 discovered them. felix soon learned that the treacherous turk, for
 whom and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
 discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
 became traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted italy with
 his daughter, insultingly sending felix pittance of money to aid him,
 as said, in some plan of future maintenance.
 
“such were the events that preyed on the heart of felix and rendered
 him, when i first saw him, the most miserable of his family. could
 have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his
 virtue, gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the turk and the loss
 of his beloved safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. the
 arrival of the arabian now infused new life into his soul.
 
“when the news reached leghorn that felix was deprived of his wealth
 and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think more of her
 lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. the generous
 nature of safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
 expostulate with her father, but left her angrily, reiterating his
 tyrannical mandate.
 
“a few days after, the turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told
 her hastily that had reason to believe that his residence at leghorn
 had been divulged and that should speedily be delivered up to the
 french government; had consequently hired vessel to convey him to
 constantinople, for which city should sail in few hours. he
 intended to leave his daughter under the care of confidential
 servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his
 property, which had not yet arrived at leghorn.
 
“when alone, safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
 would become her to pursue in this emergency. residence in turkey
 was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse
 to it. by some papers of her father which fell into her hands she
 heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
 then resided. she hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
 determination. taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a
 sum of money, she quitted italy with an attendant, native of leghorn,
 but who understood the common language of turkey, and departed for
 germany.
 
“she arrived in safety at town about twenty leagues from the cottage
 of lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. safie nursed her
 with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the
 arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country
 and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. she fell, however,
 into good hands. the italian had mentioned the name of the spot for
 which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in
 which they had lived took care that safie should arrive in safety at
 the cottage of her lover.”
 



chapter 15
 

“such was the history of my beloved cottagers. it impressed deeply.
 i learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
 their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.
 
“as yet i looked upon crime as distant evil, benevolence and
 generosity were ever present before me, inciting within desire to
 become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
 were called forth and displayed. but in giving an account of the
 progress of my intellect, i must not omit circumstance which occurred
 in the beginning of the month of august of the same year.
 
“one night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where i
 collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, i found on
 the ground leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and
 some books. i eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel. 
fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which i
 had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of _paradise lost_, volume
 of _plutarch’s lives_, and the _sorrows of werter_. the
 possession of these treasures gave extreme delight; i now continually
 studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were
 employed in their ordinary occupations.
 
“i can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. they produced
 in an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
 to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk into the lowest dejection. in
 the _sorrows of werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
 story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
 what had hitherto been to obscure subjects that i found in it a
 never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. the gentle and
 domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
 feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
 well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
 were for ever alive in my own bosom. but i thought werter himself a
 more divine being than i had ever beheld or imagined; his character
 contained pretension, but it sank deep. the disquisitions upon
 death and suicide were calculated to fill with wonder. i did not
 pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet i inclined towards
 the opinions of the hero, whose extinction i wept, without precisely
 understanding it.
 
“as i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and
 condition. i found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
 unlike to the beings concerning whom i read and to whose conversation i
 was listener. i sympathised with and partly understood them, but i
 was unformed in mind; i was dependent on none and related to none.
 ‘the path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my
 annihilation. my person was hideous and my stature gigantic. what did
 this mean? who was i? what was i? whence did i come? what was my
 destination? these questions continually recurred, but i was unable to
 solve them.
 
“the volume of _plutarch’s lives_ which i possessed contained the
 histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. this book
 had far different effect upon from the _sorrows of werter_. i
 learned from werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but plutarch
 taught high thoughts; elevated above the wretched sphere of my
 own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. many
 things i read surpassed my understanding and experience. i had very
 confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
 and boundless seas. but i was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
 large assemblages of men. the cottage of my protectors had been the
 only school in which i had studied human nature, but this book
 developed new and mightier scenes of action. i read of men concerned
 in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. i felt the
 greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
 far as i understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
 were, as i applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. induced by these
 feelings, i was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, numa,
 solon, and lycurgus, in preference to romulus and theseus. the
 patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
 firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
 been made by young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, i should
 have been imbued with different sensations.
 
“but _paradise lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. i read
 it, as i had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
 true history. it moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
 picture of an omnipotent god warring with his creatures was capable of
 exciting. i often referred the several situations, as their similarity
 struck me, to my own. like adam, i was apparently united by link to
 any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
 in every other respect. had come forth from the hands of god a
 perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
 his creator; was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
 beings of superior nature, but i was wretched, helpless, and alone.
 many times i considered satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
 often, like him, when i viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
 gall of envy rose within me.
 
“another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. soon
 after my arrival in the hovel i discovered some papers in the pocket of
 the dress which i had taken from your laboratory. at first i had
 neglected them, but now that i was able to decipher the characters in
 which they were written, i began to study them with diligence. it was
 your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. you
 minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
 of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
 occurrences. you doubtless recollect these papers. here they are.
 everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
 origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
 which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
 and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
 horrors and rendered mine indelible. i sickened as i read. ‘hateful
 day when i received life!’ i exclaimed in agony. ‘accursed creator!
 why did you form monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from in
 disgust? god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
 image; but my form is filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
 very resemblance. satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
 and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.’
 
“these were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
 but when i contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
 benevolent dispositions, i persuaded myself that when they should
 become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would
 compassionate and overlook my personal deformity. could they turn
 from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
 and friendship? i resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
 to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. i
 postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
 attached to its success inspired with dread lest i should fail.
 besides, i found that my understanding improved so much with every
 day’s experience that i was unwilling to commence this undertaking
 until few more months should have added to my sagacity.
 
“several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. the
 presence of safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and i also
 found that greater degree of plenty reigned there. felix and agatha
 spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
 their labours by servants. they did not appear rich, but they were
 contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
 mine became every day more tumultuous. increase of knowledge only
 discovered to more clearly what wretched outcast i was. i
 cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when i beheld my person
 reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
 image and that inconstant shade.
 
“i endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
 which in few months i resolved to undergo; and sometimes i allowed my
 thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of paradise, and
 dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my
 feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
 smiles of consolation. but it was all dream; eve soothed my
 sorrows nor shared my thoughts; i was alone. i remembered adam’s
 supplication to his creator. but where was mine? had abandoned me,
 and in the bitterness of my heart i cursed him.
 
“autumn passed thus. i saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
 and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
 had worn when i first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. yet i did
 not heed the bleakness of the weather; i was better fitted by my
 conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. but my chief
 delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
 apparel of summer; when those deserted me, i turned with more attention
 towards the cottagers. their happiness was not decreased by the
 absence of summer. they loved and sympathised with one another; and
 their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
 casualties that took place around them. the more i saw of them, the
 greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
 heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
 their sweet looks directed towards with affection was the utmost
 limit of my ambition. i dared not think that they would turn them from
 with disdain and horror. the poor that stopped at their door were
 never driven away. i asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
 little food or rest: i required kindness and sympathy; but i did not
 believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
 
“the winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
 place since i awoke into life. my attention at this time was solely
 directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
 protectors. i revolved many projects, but that on which i finally
 fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
 i had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
 person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
 beheld me. my voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; i
 thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children i could gain
 the good will and mediation of the old lacey, i might by his means
 be tolerated by my younger protectors.
 
“one day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
 and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, safie, agatha,
 and felix departed on long country walk, and the old man, at his own
 desire, was left alone in the cottage. when his children had departed,
 took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
 sweet and mournful than i had ever heard him play before. at first his
 countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as continued,
 thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
 instrument, sat absorbed in reflection.
 
“my heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
 would decide my hopes or realise my fears. the servants were gone to a
 neighbouring fair. all was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
 excellent opportunity; yet, when i proceeded to execute my plan, my
 limbs failed and i sank to the ground. again i rose, and exerting
 all the firmness of which i was master, removed the planks which i had
 placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. the fresh air revived
 me, and with renewed determination i approached the door of their
 cottage.
 
“i knocked. ‘who is there?’ said the old man. ‘come in.’
 
“i entered. ‘pardon this intrusion,’ said i; ‘i am
 traveller in want of little rest; you would greatly oblige if you
 would allow to remain few minutes before the fire.’
 
“‘enter,’ said lacey, ‘and i will try in what
 manner i can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are
 from home, and as i am blind, i am afraid i shall find it difficult to
 procure food for you.’
 
“‘do not trouble yourself, my kind host; i have food; it is
 warmth and rest only that i need.’
 
“i sat down, and silence ensued. i knew that every minute was
 precious to me, yet i remained irresolute in what manner to commence
 the interview, when the old man addressed me.
 
‘by your language, stranger, i suppose you are my countryman; are you
 french?’
 
“‘no; but i was educated by french family and understand that
 language only. i am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
 whom i sincerely love, and of whose favour i have some hopes.’
 
“‘are they germans?’
 
“‘no, they are french. but let us change the subject. i am an
 unfortunate and deserted creature, i look around and i have relation
 or friend upon earth. these amiable people to whom i go have never
 seen and know little of me. i am full of fears, for if i fail
 there, i am an outcast in the world for ever.’
 
“‘do not despair. to be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
 the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
 full of brotherly love and charity. rely, therefore, on your hopes;
 and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’
 
“‘they are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
 but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. i have good
 dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
 beneficial; but fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
 ought to see feeling and kind friend, they behold only detestable
 monster.’
 
“‘that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
 you undeceive them?’
 
“‘i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i
 feel so many overwhelming terrors. i tenderly love these friends; i
 have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
 kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and
 it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.’
 
“‘where do these friends reside?’
 
“‘near this spot.’
 
“the old man paused and then continued, ‘if you will unreservedly
 confide to the particulars of your tale, i perhaps may be of use in
 undeceiving them. i am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
 there is something in your words which persuades that you are
 sincere. i am poor and an exile, but it will afford true pleasure
 to be in any way serviceable to human creature.’
 
“‘excellent man! i thank you and accept your generous offer. you
 raise from the dust by this kindness; and i trust that, by your aid,
 i shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
 creatures.’
 
“‘heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal, for that can only
 drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. i also am
 unfortunate; i and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
 judge, therefore, if i do not feel for your misfortunes.’
 
“‘how can i thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lips
 first have i heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; i shall
 be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures of success
 with those friends whom i am on the point of meeting.’
 
“‘may i know the names and residence of those friends?’
 
“i paused. this, i thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
 rob of or bestow happiness on for ever. i struggled vainly for
 firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
 remaining strength; i sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. at that
 moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors. i had not moment
 to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, i cried, ‘now is the
 time! save and protect me! you and your family are the friends whom i
 seek. do not you desert in the hour of trial!’
 
“‘great god!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘who are you?’
 
“at that instant the cottage door was opened, and felix, safie, and
 agatha entered. who can describe their horror and consternation on
 beholding me? agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her
 friend, rushed out of the cottage. felix darted forward, and with
 supernatural force tore from his father, to whose knees i clung, in
 transport of fury, dashed to the ground and struck violently
 with stick. i could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
 the antelope. but my heart sank within as with bitter sickness, and
 i refrained. i saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
 overcome by pain and anguish, i quitted the cottage, and in the general
 tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”
 



chapter 16
 

“cursed, cursed creator! why did i live? why, in that instant, did i
 not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
 bestowed? i know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
 feelings were those of rage and revenge. i could with pleasure have
 destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
 their shrieks and misery.
 
“when night came i quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
 now, longer restrained by the fear of discovery, i gave vent to my
 anguish in fearful howlings. i was like wild beast that had broken
 the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed and ranging
 through the wood with stag-like swiftness. oh! what miserable
 night i passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
 waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of bird
 burst forth amidst the universal stillness. all, save i, were at rest
 or in enjoyment; i, like the arch-fiend, bore hell within me, and
 finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
 havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
 the ruin.
 
“but this was luxury of sensation that could not endure; i became
 fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
 the sick impotence of despair. there was none among the myriads of men
 that existed who would pity or assist me; and should i feel kindness
 towards my enemies? no; from that moment i declared everlasting war
 against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
 and sent forth to this insupportable misery.
 
“the sun rose; i heard the voices of men and knew that it was
 impossible to return to my retreat during that day. accordingly i hid
 myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
 to reflection on my situation.
 
“the pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored to some
 degree of tranquillity; and when i considered what had passed at the
 cottage, i could not help believing that i had been too hasty in my
 conclusions. i had certainly acted imprudently. it was apparent that
 my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and i was a
 fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. i
 ought to have familiarised the old lacey to me, and by degrees to
 have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
 been prepared for my approach. but i did not believe my errors to be
 irretrievable, and after much consideration i resolved to return to the
 cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
 party.
 
“these thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon i sank into profound
 sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow to be visited by
 peaceful dreams. the horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
 acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged felix
 tearing from his father’s feet. i awoke exhausted, and finding that
 it was already night, i crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
 search of food.
 
“when my hunger was appeased, i directed my steps towards the
 well-known path that conducted to the cottage. all there was at peace.
 i crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
 accustomed hour when the family arose. that hour passed, the sun
 mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. i
 trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. the inside
 of the cottage was dark, and i heard motion; i cannot describe the
 agony of this suspense.
 
“presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
 entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but i did not
 understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
 which differed from that of my protectors. soon after, however, felix
 approached with another man; i was surprised, as i knew that had not
 quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
 his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.
 
“‘do you consider,’ said his companion to him,
 ‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
 the produce of your garden? i do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and
 i beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
 determination.’
 
“‘it is utterly useless,’ replied felix; ‘we can
 never again inhabit your cottage. the life of my father is in the greatest
 danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that i have related. my wife and
 my sister will never recover from their horror. i entreat you not to reason
 with any more. take possession of your tenement and let fly from this
 place.’
 
“felix trembled violently as said this. and his companion
 entered the cottage, in which they remained for few minutes, and then
 departed. i never saw any of the family of lacey more.
 
“i continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in state of
 utter and stupid despair. my protectors had departed and had broken
 the only link that held to the world. for the first time the
 feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and i did not strive to
 control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, i
 bent my mind towards injury and death. when i thought of my friends,
 of the mild voice of lacey, the gentle eyes of agatha, and the
 exquisite beauty of the arabian, these thoughts vanished and gush of
 tears somewhat soothed me. but again when i reflected that they had
 spurned and deserted me, anger returned, rage of anger, and unable to
 injure anything human, i turned my fury towards inanimate objects. as
 night advanced, i placed variety of combustibles around the cottage,
 and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
 i waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
 operations.
 
“as the night advanced, fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
 dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
 along like mighty avalanche and produced kind of insanity in my
 spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. i lighted the
 dry branch of tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
 my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
 nearly touched. part of its orb was at length hid, and i waved my
 brand; it sank, and with loud scream i fired the straw, and heath,
 and bushes, which i had collected. the wind fanned the fire, and the
 cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
 licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
 
“as soon as i was convinced that assistance could save any part of
 the habitation, i quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.
 
“and now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps? i
 resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
 and despised, every country must be equally horrible. at length the
 thought of you crossed my mind. i learned from your papers that you
 were my father, my creator; and to whom could i apply with more fitness
 than to him who had given life? among the lessons that felix had
 bestowed upon safie, geography had not been omitted; i had learned from
 these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
 you had mentioned geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
 this place i resolved to proceed.
 
“but how was i to direct myself? i knew that i must travel in a
 southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
 only guide. i did not know the names of the towns that i was to pass
 through, nor could i ask information from single human being; but i
 did not despair. from you only could i hope for succour, although
 towards you i felt sentiment but that of hatred. unfeeling,
 heartless creator! you had endowed with perceptions and passions
 and then cast abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
 but on you only had i any claim for pity and redress, and from you i
 determined to seek that justice which i vainly attempted to gain from
 any other being that wore the human form.
 
“my travels were long and the sufferings i endured intense. it was
 late in autumn when i quitted the district where i had so long resided.
 i travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
 human being. nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
 rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
 of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and i found shelter. oh,
 earth! how often did i imprecate curses on the cause of my being! the
 mildness of my nature had fled, and all within was turned to gall
 and bitterness. the nearer i approached to your habitation, the more
 deeply did i feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. snow
 fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rested not. few incidents
 now and then directed me, and i possessed map of the country; but i
 often wandered wide from my path. the agony of my feelings allowed me
 respite; incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
 not extract its food; but circumstance that happened when i arrived
 on the confines of switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
 and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
 manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.
 
“i generally rested during the day and travelled only when i was
 secured by night from the view of man. one morning, however, finding
 that my path lay through deep wood, i ventured to continue my journey
 after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
 cheered even by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
 the air. i felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
 appeared dead, revive within me. half surprised by the novelty of
 these sensations, i allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
 forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. soft tears
 again bedewed my cheeks, and i even raised my humid eyes with
 thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.
 
“i continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until i came to its
 boundary, which was skirted by deep and rapid river, into which many
 of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
 here i paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when i heard
 the sound of voices, that induced to conceal myself under the shade
 of cypress. i was scarcely hid when young girl came running
 towards the spot where i was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
 someone in sport. she continued her course along the precipitous sides
 of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
 rapid stream. i rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
 from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. she
 was senseless, and i endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
 animation, when i was suddenly interrupted by the approach of rustic,
 who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. on
 seeing me, darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
 hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. i followed speedily, i
 hardly knew why; but when the man saw draw near, aimed gun,
 which carried, at my body and fired. i sank to the ground, and my
 injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.
 
“this was then the reward of my benevolence! i had saved human being
 from destruction, and as recompense i now writhed under the miserable
 pain of wound which shattered the flesh and bone. the feelings of
 kindness and gentleness which i had entertained but few moments
 before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. inflamed by
 pain, i vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. but the
 agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and i fainted.
 
“for some weeks i led miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
 cure the wound which i had received. the ball had entered my shoulder,
 and i knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
 rate i had means of extracting it. my sufferings were augmented
 also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
 infliction. my daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge,
 such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish i had
 endured.
 
“after some weeks my wound healed, and i continued my journey. the
 labours i endured were longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
 gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but mockery which insulted my
 desolate state and made feel more painfully that i was not made for
 the enjoyment of pleasure.
 
“but my toils now drew near close, and in two months from this time i
 reached the environs of geneva.
 
“it was evening when i arrived, and i retired to hiding-place among
 the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner i should apply
 to you. i was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
 enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
 behind the stupendous mountains of jura.
 
“at this time slight sleep relieved from the pain of reflection,
 which was disturbed by the approach of beautiful child, who came
 running into the recess i had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
 infancy. suddenly, as i gazed on him, an idea seized that this
 little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short time to have
 imbibed horror of deformity. if, therefore, i could seize him and
 educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in
 this peopled earth.
 
“urged by this impulse, i seized on the boy as passed and drew him
 towards me. as soon as beheld my form, placed his hands before
 his eyes and uttered shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his
 face and said, ‘child, what is the meaning of this? i do not intend to
 hurt you; listen to me.’
 
“he struggled violently. ‘let go,’ cried;
 ‘monster! ugly wretch! you wish to eat and tear to pieces. you
 are an ogre. let go, or i will tell my papa.’
 
“‘boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’
 
“‘hideous monster! let go. my papa is syndic—he is m.
 frankenstein—he will punish you. you dare not keep me.’
 
“‘frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom i have
 sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’
 
“the child still struggled and loaded with epithets which carried
 despair to my heart; i grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
 moment lay dead at my feet.
 
“i gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
 triumph; clapping my hands, i exclaimed, ‘i too can create desolation;
 my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
 thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’
 
“as i fixed my eyes on the child, i saw something glittering on his
 breast. i took it; it was portrait of most lovely woman. in spite
 of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. for few moments i
 gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
 lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; i remembered that i was
 for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
 bestow and that she whose resemblance i contemplated would, in
 regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
 expressive of disgust and affright.
 
“can you wonder that such thoughts transported with rage? i only
 wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
 exclamations and agony, i did not rush among mankind and perish in the
 attempt to destroy them.
 
“while i was overcome by these feelings, i left the spot where i had
 committed the murder, and seeking more secluded hiding-place, i
 entered barn which had appeared to to be empty. woman was
 sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
 whose portrait i held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
 loveliness of youth and health. here, i thought, is one of those whose
 joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. and then i bent over
 her and whispered, ‘awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
 give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
 beloved, awake!’
 
“the sleeper stirred; thrill of terror ran through me. should she
 indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? thus
 would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
 the thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not i, but
 she, shall suffer; the murder i have committed because i am for ever
 robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. the crime had
 its source in her; be hers the punishment! thanks to the lessons of
 felix and the sanguinary laws of man, i had learned now to work
 mischief. i bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
 the folds of her dress. she moved again, and i fled.
 
“for some days i haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
 sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
 its miseries for ever. at length i wandered towards these mountains,
 and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by burning
 passion which you alone can gratify. we may not part until you have
 promised to comply with my requisition. i am alone and miserable; man
 will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
 would not deny herself to me. my companion must be of the same species
 and have the same defects. this being you must create.”
 



chapter 17
 

the being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon in the
 expectation of reply. but i was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
 arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
 proposition. continued,
 
“you must create female for with whom i can live in the
 interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. this you alone
 can do, and i demand it of you as right which you must not refuse to
 concede.”
 
the latter part of his tale had kindled anew in the anger that had
 died away while narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
 as said this i could longer suppress the rage that burned within
 me.
 
“i do refuse it,” i replied; “and torture shall ever extort a
 consent from me. you may render the most miserable of men, but you
 shall never make base in my own eyes. shall i create another like
 yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. begone! i
 have answered you; you may torture me, but i will never consent.”
 
“you are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead
 of threatening, i am content to reason with you. i am malicious because i
 am miserable. am i not shunned and hated by all mankind? you, my creator,
 would tear to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell why i
 should pity man more than pities me? you would not call it murder if you
 could precipitate into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
 work of your own hands. shall i respect man when condemns me? let him
 live with in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury i would
 bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
 but that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
 union. yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. i will
 revenge my injuries; if i cannot inspire love, i will cause fear, and
 chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do i swear
 inextinguishable hatred. have care; i will work at your destruction, nor
 finish until i desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
 your birth.”
 
fiendish rage animated him as said this; his face was wrinkled
 into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
 calmed himself and proceeded—
 
“i intended to reason. this passion is detrimental to me, for you do
 not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. if any being felt
 emotions of benevolence towards me, i should return them hundred and a
 hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake i would make peace with the
 whole kind! but i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
 what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand creature of
 another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
 is all that i can receive, and it shall content me. it is true, we shall be
 monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
 attached to one another. our lives will not be happy, but they will be
 harmless and free from the misery i now feel. oh! my creator, make me
 happy; let feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! let see that i
 excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny my
 request!”
 
i was moved. i shuddered when i thought of the possible consequences
 of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his argument.
 his tale and the feelings now expressed proved him to be creature
 of fine sensations, and did i not as his maker owe him all the portion
 of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? saw my change of
 feeling and continued,
 
“if you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
 us again; i will go to the vast wilds of south america. my food is not
 that of man; i do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
 acorns and berries afford sufficient nourishment. my companion will
 be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
 we shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
 man and will ripen our food. the picture i present to you is peaceful
 and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
 wantonness of power and cruelty. pitiless as you have been towards me,
 i now see compassion in your eyes; let seize the favourable moment
 and persuade you to promise what i so ardently desire.”
 
“you propose,” replied i, “to fly from the habitations of
 man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
 only companions. how can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
 persevere in this exile? you will return and again seek their kindness, and
 you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
 and you will then have companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
 this may not be; cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.”
 
“how inconstant are your feelings! but moment ago you were moved by
 my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
 i swear to you, by the earth which i inhabit, and by you that made me, that
 with the companion you bestow, i will quit the neighbourhood of man and
 dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. my evil passions
 will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy! my life will flow quietly
 away, and in my dying moments i shall not curse my maker.”
 
his words had strange effect upon me. i compassionated him and
 sometimes felt wish to console him, but when i looked upon him, when
 i saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
 feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. i tried to stifle
 these sensations; i thought that as i could not sympathise with him, i
 had right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
 was yet in my power to bestow.
 
“you swear,” i said, “to be harmless; but have you not
 already shown degree of malice that should reasonably make distrust
 you? may not even this be feint that will increase your triumph by
 affording wider scope for your revenge?”
 
“how is this? i must not be trifled with, and i demand an answer. if
 i have ties and affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
 the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and i shall
 become thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. my vices
 are the children of forced solitude that i abhor, and my virtues will
 necessarily arise when i live in communion with an equal. i shall feel
 the affections of sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
 existence and events from which i am now excluded.”
 
i paused some time to reflect on all had related and the various
 arguments which had employed. i thought of the promise of virtues which
 had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
 of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
 manifested towards him. his power and threats were not omitted in my
 calculations; creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
 and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
 was being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. after a
 long pause of reflection i concluded that the justice due both to him and
 my fellow creatures demanded of that i should comply with his request.
 turning to him, therefore, i said,
 
“i consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europe for ever,
 and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as i shall
 deliver into your hands female who will accompany you in your exile.”
 
“i swear,” cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
 heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
 prayer, while they exist you shall never behold again. depart to your
 home and commence your labours; i shall watch their progress with
 unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready i shall
 appear.”
 
saying this, suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
 my sentiments. i saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
 the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
 of ice.
 
his tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
 the horizon when departed. i knew that i ought to hasten my descent
 towards the valley, as i should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
 heart was heavy, and my steps slow. the labour of winding among the
 little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as i advanced
 perplexed me, occupied as i was by the emotions which the occurrences
 of the day had produced. night was far advanced when i came to the
 halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. the stars
 shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
 rose before me, and every here and there broken tree lay on the
 ground; it was scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
 thoughts within me. i wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, i
 exclaimed, “oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
 me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let become as
 nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave in darkness.”
 
these were wild and miserable thoughts, but i cannot describe to you
 how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon and how i
 listened to every blast of wind as if it were dull ugly siroc on its
 way to consume me.
 
morning dawned before i arrived at the village of chamounix; i took no
 rest, but returned immediately to geneva. even in my own heart i could
 give expression to my sensations—they weighed on with a
 mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
 thus i returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
 family. my haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but i
 answered question, scarcely did i speak. i felt as if i were placed
 under ban—as if i had right to claim their sympathies—as if
 never more might i enjoy companionship with them. yet even thus i
 loved them to adoration; and to save them, i resolved to dedicate
 myself to my most abhorred task. the prospect of such an occupation
 made every other circumstance of existence pass before like dream,
 and that thought only had to the reality of life.
 



chapter 18
 

day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to geneva; and
 i could not collect the courage to recommence my work. i feared the
 vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet i was unable to overcome my
 repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. i found that i could not
 compose female without again devoting several months to profound
 study and laborious disquisition. i had heard of some discoveries
 having been made by an english philosopher, the knowledge of which was
 material to my success, and i sometimes thought of obtaining my
 father’s consent to visit england for this purpose; but i clung to
 every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
 undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
 me. change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
 hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
 unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. my
 father saw this change with pleasure, and turned his thoughts
 towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
 which every now and then would return by fits, and with devouring
 blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. at these moments i took
 refuge in the most perfect solitude. i passed whole days on the lake
 alone in little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
 rippling of the waves, silent and listless. but the fresh air and
 bright sun seldom failed to restore to some degree of composure, and
 on my return i met the salutations of my friends with readier smile
 and more cheerful heart.
 
it was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
 calling aside, thus addressed me,
 
“i am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
 pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. and yet you are still
 unhappy and still avoid our society. for some time i was lost in
 conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
 and if it is well founded, i conjure you to avow it. reserve on such a
 point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.”
 
i trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued—
 
“i confess, my son, that i have always looked forward to your
 marriage with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the
 stay of my declining years. you were attached to each other from your
 earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and
 tastes, entirely suited to one another. but so blind is the experience of
 man that what i conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
 entirely destroyed it. you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any
 wish that she might become your wife. nay, you may have met with another
 whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to
 elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear
 to feel.”
 
“my dear father, reassure yourself. i love my cousin tenderly and
 sincerely. i never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my
 warmest admiration and affection. my future hopes and prospects are
 entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.”
 
“the expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear victor,
 gives more pleasure than i have for some time experienced. if you
 feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
 gloom over us. but it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
 strong hold of your mind that i wish to dissipate. tell me,
 therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the
 marriage. we have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
 from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. you
 are younger; yet i do not suppose, possessed as you are of competent
 fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
 plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. do not suppose,
 however, that i wish to dictate happiness to you or that delay on
 your part would cause any serious uneasiness. interpret my words
 with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and
 sincerity.”
 
i listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
 of offering any reply. i revolved rapidly in my mind multitude of
 thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. alas! to me
 the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and
 dismay. i was bound by solemn promise which i had not yet fulfilled
 and dared not break, or if i did, what manifold miseries might not
 impend over and my devoted family! could i enter into festival
 with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing to the
 ground? i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
 his mate before i allowed myself to enjoy the delight of union from
 which i expected peace.
 
i remembered also the necessity imposed upon of either journeying to
 england or entering into long correspondence with those philosophers
 of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
 use to in my present undertaking. the latter method of obtaining
 the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i
 had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
 loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar
 intercourse with those i loved. i knew that thousand fearful
 accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose tale to
 thrill all connected with with horror. i was aware also that i
 should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
 harrowing sensations that would possess during the progress of my
 unearthly occupation. i must absent myself from all i loved while thus
 employed. once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and i might be
 restored to my family in peace and happiness. my promise fulfilled,
 the monster would depart for ever. or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
 accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
 slavery for ever.
 
these feelings dictated my answer to my father. i expressed wish to
 visit england, but concealing the true reasons of this request, i
 clothed my desires under guise which excited suspicion, while i
 urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
 comply. after so long period of an absorbing melancholy that
 resembled madness in its intensity and effects, was glad to find
 that i was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such journey,
 and hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
 return, have restored entirely to myself.
 
the duration of my absence was left to my own choice; few months, or
 at most year, was the period contemplated. one paternal kind
 precaution had taken to ensure my having companion. without
 previously communicating with me, had, in concert with elizabeth,
 arranged that clerval should join at strasburgh. this interfered
 with the solitude i coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
 commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in way be
 an impediment, and truly i rejoiced that thus i should be saved many
 hours of lonely, maddening reflection. nay, henry might stand between
 and the intrusion of my foe. if i were alone, would not at times
 force his abhorred presence on to remind of my task or to
 contemplate its progress?
 
to england, therefore, i was bound, and it was understood that my union
 with elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. my father’s
 age rendered him extremely averse to delay. for myself, there was one
 reward i promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my
 unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
 enfranchised from my miserable slavery, i might claim elizabeth and
 forget the past in my union with her.
 
i now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
 which filled with fear and agitation. during my absence i should
 leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
 unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as might be by my
 departure. but had promised to follow wherever i might go, and
 would not accompany to england? this imagination was dreadful in
 itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
 i was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
 this might happen. but through the whole period during which i was the
 slave of my creature i allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
 the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
 would follow and exempt my family from the danger of his
 machinations.
 
it was in the latter end of september that i again quitted my native
 country. my journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth
 therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
 my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. it had
 been her care which provided companion in clerval—and yet man
 is blind to thousand minute circumstances which call forth woman’s
 sedulous attention. she longed to bid hasten my return; thousand
 conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade tearful, silent
 farewell.
 
i threw myself into the carriage that was to convey away, hardly
 knowing whither i was going, and careless of what was passing around.
 i remembered only, and it was with bitter anguish that i reflected on
 it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
 me. filled with dreary imaginations, i passed through many beautiful
 and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. i could
 only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
 whilst they endured.
 
after some days spent in listless indolence, during which i traversed
 many leagues, i arrived at strasburgh, where i waited two days for
 clerval. came. alas, how great was the contrast between us! he
 was alive to every new scene, joyful when saw the beauties of the
 setting sun, and more happy when beheld it rise and recommence new
 day. pointed out to the shifting colours of the landscape and
 the appearances of the sky. “this is what it is to live,” cried;
 “now i enjoy existence! but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are
 you desponding and sorrowful!” in truth, i was occupied by gloomy
 thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
 sunrise reflected in the rhine. and you, my friend, would be far more
 amused with the journal of clerval, who observed the scenery with an
 eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. i, a
 miserable wretch, haunted by curse that shut up every avenue to
 enjoyment.
 
we had agreed to descend the rhine in boat from strasburgh to
 rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for london. during this
 voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
 we stayed day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
 strasburgh, arrived at mainz. the course of the rhine below mainz
 becomes much more picturesque. the river descends rapidly and winds
 between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. we saw
 many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
 black woods, high and inaccessible. this part of the rhine, indeed,
 presents singularly variegated landscape. in one spot you view
 rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
 the dark rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of promontory,
 flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and meandering river
 and populous towns occupy the scene.
 
we travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers
 as we glided down the stream. even i, depressed in mind, and my spirits
 continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even i was pleased. i lay at the
 bottom of the boat, and as i gazed on the cloudless blue sky, i seemed to
 drink in tranquillity to which i had long been stranger. and if these
 were my sensations, who can describe those of henry? felt as if had
 been transported to fairy-land and enjoyed happiness seldom tasted by
 man. “i have seen,” said, “the most beautiful scenes
 of my own country; i have visited the lakes of lucerne and uri, where the
 snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black
 and impenetrable shades, which would cause gloomy and mournful appearance
 were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay
 appearance; i have seen this lake agitated by tempest, when the wind tore
 up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be
 on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
 where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and
 where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
 nightly wind; i have seen the mountains of valais, and the pays vaud;
 but this country, victor, pleases more than all those wonders. the
 mountains of switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a
 charm in the banks of this divine river that i never before saw equalled.
 look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
 island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now
 that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
 half hid in the recess of the mountain. oh, surely the spirit that inhabits
 and guards this place has soul more in harmony with man than those who
 pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of
 our own country.”
 
clerval! beloved friend! even now it delights to record your words and
 to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. was a
 being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” his wild and
 enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. his
 soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that
 devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
 in the imagination. but even human sympathies were not sufficient to
 satisfy his eager mind. the scenery of external nature, which others regard
 only with admiration, loved with ardour:—
 
——the sounding cataract
 haunted him like passion: the tall rock,
 the mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
 their colours and their forms, were then to him
 an appetite; feeling, and love,
 that had need of remoter charm,
 by thought supplied, or any interest
 unborrow’d from the eye.
 
[wordsworth’s “tintern abbey”.]
 
and where does now exist? is this gentle and lovely being lost
 for ever? has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
 and magnificent, which formed world, whose existence depended on the
 life of its creator;—has this mind perished? does it now only exist
 in my memory? no, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
 beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
 consoles your unhappy friend.
 
pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but slight
 tribute to the unexampled worth of henry, but they soothe my heart,
 overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. i will
 proceed with my tale.
 
beyond cologne we descended to the plains of holland; and we resolved to
 post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of
 the river was too gentle to aid us.
 
our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we
 arrived in few days at rotterdam, whence we proceeded by to england.
 it was on clear morning, in the latter days of december, that i first saw
 the white cliffs of britain. the banks of the thames presented new scene;
 they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the
 remembrance of some story. we saw tilbury fort and remembered the spanish
 armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwich—places which i had heard
 of even in my country.
 
at length we saw the numerous steeples of london, st. paul’s towering
 above all, and the tower famed in english history.
 



chapter 19
 

london was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
 months in this wonderful and celebrated city. clerval desired the
 intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
 time, but this was with secondary object; i was principally
 occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
 completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
 introduction that i had brought with me, addressed to the most
 distinguished natural philosophers.
 
if this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
 it would have afforded inexpressible pleasure. but blight had
 come over my existence, and i only visited these people for the sake of
 the information they might give on the subject in which my interest
 was so terribly profound. company was irksome to me; when alone, i
 could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
 henry soothed me, and i could thus cheat myself into transitory
 peace. but busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
 my heart. i saw an insurmountable barrier placed between and my
 fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of william and
 justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
 my soul with anguish.
 
but in clerval i saw the image of my former self; was inquisitive
 and anxious to gain experience and instruction. the difference of
 manners which observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
 instruction and amusement. was also pursuing an object had long
 had in view. his design was to visit india, in the belief that had
 in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views had
 taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
 european colonization and trade. in britain only could further the
 execution of his plan. was for ever busy, and the only check to his
 enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. i tried to conceal this
 as much as possible, that i might not debar him from the pleasures
 natural to one who was entering on new scene of life, undisturbed by
 any care or bitter recollection. i often refused to accompany him,
 alleging another engagement, that i might remain alone. i now also
 began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
 was to like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
 on the head. every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
 anguish, and every word that i spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
 to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.
 
after passing some months in london, we received letter from person in
 scotland who had formerly been our visitor at geneva. mentioned the
 beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient
 allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as perth,
 where resided. clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and i,
 although i abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and
 all the wondrous works with which nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.
 
we had arrived in england at the beginning of october, and it was now
 february. we accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
 north at the expiration of another month. in this expedition we did not
 intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford,
 matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of
 this tour about the end of july. i packed up my chemical instruments and
 the materials i had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
 obscure nook in the northern highlands of scotland.
 
we quitted london on the 27th of march and remained few days at
 windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. this was new scene to us
 mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
 stately deer were all novelties to us.
 
from thence we proceeded to oxford. as we entered this city, our minds
 were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
 there more than century and half before. it was here that charles
 i. had collected his forces. this city had remained faithful to him,
 after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
 parliament and liberty. the memory of that unfortunate king and his
 companions, the amiable falkland, the insolent goring, his queen, and
 son, gave peculiar interest to every part of the city which they
 might be supposed to have inhabited. the spirit of elder days found a
 dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. if these
 feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of
 the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
 the colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
 magnificent; and the lovely isis, which flows beside it through meadows
 of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into placid expanse of waters,
 which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and
 domes, embosomed among aged trees.
 
i enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
 memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. i was formed
 for peaceful happiness. during my youthful days discontent never
 visited my mind, and if i was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what
 is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
 the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate
 elasticity to my spirits. but i am blasted tree; the bolt has
 entered my soul; and i felt then that i should survive to exhibit what
 i shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
 pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
 
we passed considerable period at oxford, rambling among its environs
 and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
 animating epoch of english history. our little voyages of discovery
 were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented
 themselves. we visited the tomb of the illustrious hampden and the
 field on which that patriot fell. for moment my soul was elevated
 from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas
 of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments
 and the remembrancers. for an instant i dared to shake off my chains
 and look around with free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
 into my flesh, and i sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
 miserable self.
 
we left oxford with regret and proceeded to matlock, which was our next
 place of rest. the country in the neighbourhood of this village
 resembled, to greater degree, the scenery of switzerland; but
 everything is on lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
 distant white alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my
 native country. we visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
 of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same
 manner as in the collections at servox and chamounix. the latter name
 made tremble when pronounced by henry, and i hastened to quit
 matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
 
from derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in
 cumberland and westmorland. i could now almost fancy myself among the
 swiss mountains. the little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
 northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the
 rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. here also we
 made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat into
 happiness. the delight of clerval was proportionably greater than
 mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and found
 in his own nature greater capacities and resources than could have
 imagined himself to have possessed while associated with his
 inferiors. “i could pass my life here,” said to me; “and among
 these mountains i should scarcely regret switzerland and the rhine.”
 
but found that traveller’s life is one that includes much pain
 amidst its enjoyments. his feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
 when begins to sink into repose, finds himself obliged to quit
 that on which rests in pleasure for something new, which again
 engages his attention, and which also forsakes for other novelties.
 
we had scarcely visited the various lakes of cumberland and westmorland
 and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period
 of our appointment with our scotch friend approached, and we left them
 to travel on. for my own part i was not sorry. i had now neglected my
 promise for some time, and i feared the effects of the dæmon’s
 disappointment. might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance
 on my relatives. this idea pursued and tormented at every moment
 from which i might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. i waited
 for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed i was
 miserable and overcome by thousand fears; and when they arrived and i
 saw the superscription of elizabeth or my father, i hardly dared to
 read and ascertain my fate. sometimes i thought that the fiend
 followed and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
 when these thoughts possessed me, i would not quit henry for moment,
 but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
 his destroyer. i felt as if i had committed some great crime, the
 consciousness of which haunted me. i was guiltless, but i had indeed
 drawn down horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.
 
i visited edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
 have interested the most unfortunate being. clerval did not like it so well
 as oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
 but the beauty and regularity of the new town of edinburgh, its romantic
 castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, arthur’s
 seat, st. bernard’s well, and the pentland hills, compensated him for
 the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. but i was
 impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
 
we left edinburgh in week, passing through coupar, st. andrew’s, and
 along the banks of the tay, to perth, where our friend expected us.
 but i was in mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
 their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from guest; and
 accordingly i told clerval that i wished to make the tour of scotland
 alone. “do you,” said i, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our
 rendezvous. i may be absent month or two; but do not interfere with
 my motions, i entreat you; leave to peace and solitude for short
 time; and when i return, i hope it will be with lighter heart, more
 congenial to your own temper.”
 
henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing bent on this plan, ceased to
 remonstrate. entreated to write often. “i had rather be with
 you,” said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch
 people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return,
 that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in
 your absence.”
 
having parted from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of
 scotland and finish my work in solitude. i did not doubt but that the
 monster followed and would discover himself to when i should have
 finished, that might receive his companion.
 
with this resolution i traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of
 the remotest of the orkneys as the scene of my labours. it was place
 fitted for such work, being hardly more than rock whose high sides were
 continually beaten upon by the waves. the soil was barren, scarcely
 affording pasture for few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
 inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
 gave tokens of their miserable fare. vegetables and bread, when they
 indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from
 the mainland, which was about five miles distant.
 
on the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
 these was vacant when i arrived. this i hired. it contained but two
 rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
 penury. the thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
 door was off its hinges. i ordered it to be repaired, bought some
 furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
 occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been
 benumbed by want and squalid poverty. as it was, i lived ungazed at
 and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes
 which i gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations
 of men.
 
in this retreat i devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
 when the weather permitted, i walked on the stony beach of the to
 listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. it was a
 monotonous yet ever-changing scene. i thought of switzerland; it was
 far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. its hills
 are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
 plains. its fair lakes reflect blue and gentle sky, and when
 troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of lively
 infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
 
in this manner i distributed my occupations when i first arrived, but
 as i proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
 irksome to me. sometimes i could not prevail on myself to enter my
 laboratory for several days, and at other times i toiled day and night
 in order to complete my work. it was, indeed, filthy process in
 which i was engaged. during my first experiment, kind of
 enthusiastic frenzy had blinded to the horror of my employment; my
 mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes
 were shut to the horror of my proceedings. but now i went to it in
 cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
 
thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in
 solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from
 the actual scene in which i was engaged, my spirits became unequal; i
 grew restless and nervous. every moment i feared to meet my
 persecutor. sometimes i sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
 to raise them lest they should encounter the object which i so much
 dreaded to behold. i feared to wander from the sight of my fellow
 creatures lest when alone should come to claim his companion.
 
in the mean time i worked on, and my labour was already considerably
 advanced. i looked towards its completion with tremulous and eager
 hope, which i dared not trust myself to question but which was
 intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
 in my bosom.
 



chapter 20
 

i sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
 rising from the sea; i had not sufficient light for my employment, and i
 remained idle, in pause of consideration of whether i should leave my
 labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
 to it. as i sat, train of reflection occurred to which led to
 consider the effects of what i was now doing. three years before, i was
 engaged in the same manner and had created fiend whose unparalleled
 barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
 remorse. i was now about to form another being of whose dispositions i was
 alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her
 mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. had
 sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she
 had not; and she, who in all probability was to become thinking and
 reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with compact made before her
 creation. they might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
 loathed his own deformity, and might not conceive greater abhorrence
 for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? she also might turn
 with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him,
 and be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
 deserted by one of his own species.
 
even if they were to leave europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world,
 yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon
 thirsted would be children, and race of devils would be propagated upon
 the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a
 condition precarious and full of terror. had i right, for my own benefit,
 to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? i had before been moved
 by the sophisms of the being i had created; i had been struck senseless by
 his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my
 promise burst upon me; i shuddered to think that future ages might curse me
 as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
 the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.
 
i trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, i saw by
 the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. ghastly grin
 wrinkled his lips as gazed on me, where i sat fulfilling the task
 which had allotted to me. yes, had followed in my travels; he
 had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
 and desert heaths; and now came to mark my progress and claim the
 fulfilment of my promise.
 
as i looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
 malice and treachery. i thought with sensation of madness on my
 promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
 tore to pieces the thing on which i was engaged. the wretch saw me
 destroy the creature on whose future existence depended for
 happiness, and with howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
 
i left the room, and locking the door, made solemn vow in my own
 heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, i
 sought my own apartment. i was alone; none were near to dissipate
 the gloom and relieve from the sickening oppression of the most
 terrible reveries.
 
several hours passed, and i remained near my window gazing on the sea;
 it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
 reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. few fishing vessels alone
 specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
 of voices as the fishermen called to one another. i felt the silence,
 although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
 was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
 person landed close to my house.
 
in few minutes after, i heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
 endeavoured to open it softly. i trembled from head to foot; i felt a
 presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
 dwelt in cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the sensation
 of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain
 endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.
 
presently i heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
 opened, and the wretch whom i dreaded appeared. shutting the door, he
 approached and said in smothered voice,
 
“you have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
 intend? do you dare to break your promise? i have endured toil and misery;
 i left switzerland with you; i crept along the shores of the rhine, among
 its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. i have dwelt many
 months in the heaths of england and among the deserts of scotland. i have
 endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my
 hopes?”
 
“begone! i do break my promise; never will i create another like
 yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.”
 
“slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
 unworthy of my condescension. remember that i have power; you believe
 yourself miserable, but i can make you so wretched that the light of
 day will be hateful to you. you are my creator, but i am your master;
 obey!”
 
“the hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
 arrived. your threats cannot move to do an act of wickedness; but
 they confirm in determination of not creating you companion in
 vice. shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth dæmon whose
 delight is in death and wretchedness? begone! i am firm, and your
 words will only exasperate my rage.”
 
the monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
 impotence of anger. “shall each man,” cried he, “find a
 wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone? i had
 feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
 man! you may hate, but beware! your hours will pass in dread and misery,
 and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for
 ever. are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my
 wretchedness? you can blast my other passions, but revenge
 remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! i may die, but
 first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
 misery. beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful. i will watch with
 the wiliness of snake, that i may sting with its venom. man, you shall
 repent of the injuries you inflict.”
 
“devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
 i have declared my resolution to you, and i am coward to bend
 beneath words. leave me; i am inexorable.”
 
“it is well. i go; but remember, i shall be with you on your
 wedding-night.”
 
i started forward and exclaimed, “villain! before you sign my
 death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.”
 
i would have seized him, but eluded and quitted the house with
 precipitation. in few moments i saw him in his boat, which shot
 across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
 waves.
 
all was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. i burned with rage to
 pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. i
 walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
 conjured up thousand images to torment and sting me. why had i not
 followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? but i had suffered him
 to depart, and had directed his course towards the mainland. i shuddered
 to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
 and then i thought again of his words—“_i will be with you on
 your wedding-night._” that, then, was the period fixed for the
 fulfilment of my destiny. in that hour i should die and at once satisfy and
 extinguish his malice. the prospect did not move to fear; yet when i
 thought of my beloved elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she
 should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first i
 had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and i resolved not to fall
 before my enemy without bitter struggle.
 
the night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became
 calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into
 the depths of despair. i left the house, the horrid scene of the last
 night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which i
 almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between and my fellow
 creatures; nay, wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. i
 desired that i might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true,
 but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. if i returned, it was to
 be sacrificed or to see those whom i most loved die under the grasp of a
 dæmon whom i had myself created.
 
i walked about the isle like restless spectre, separated from all it
 loved and miserable in the separation. when it became noon, and the
 sun rose higher, i lay down on the grass and was overpowered by deep
 sleep. i had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
 were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. the sleep
 into which i now sank refreshed me; and when i awoke, i again felt as
 if i belonged to race of human beings like myself, and i began to
 reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
 words of the fiend rang in my ears like death-knell; they appeared
 like dream, yet distinct and oppressive as reality.
 
the sun had far descended, and i still sat on the shore, satisfying my
 appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when i saw a
 fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought packet;
 it contained letters from geneva, and one from clerval entreating to
 join him. said that was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
 was, that letters from the friends had formed in london desired
 his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
 indian enterprise. could not any longer delay his departure; but as
 his journey to london might be followed, even sooner than now
 conjectured, by his longer voyage, entreated to bestow as much of
 my society on him as i could spare. besought me, therefore, to
 leave my solitary isle and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed
 southwards together. this letter in degree recalled to life, and
 i determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.
 
yet, before i departed, there was task to perform, on which i shuddered
 to reflect; i must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose i
 must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and i must
 handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. the next
 morning, at daybreak, i summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door
 of my laboratory. the remains of the half-finished creature, whom i had
 destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as if i had
 mangled the living flesh of human being. i paused to collect myself and
 then entered the chamber. with trembling hand i conveyed the instruments
 out of the room, but i reflected that i ought not to leave the relics of my
 work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and i accordingly
 put them into basket, with great quantity of stones, and laying them
 up, determined to throw them into the that very night; and in the
 meantime i sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my
 chemical apparatus.
 
nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
 in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. i had
 before regarded my promise with gloomy despair as thing that, with
 whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but i now felt as if film
 had been taken from before my eyes and that i for the first time saw
 clearly. the idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
 to me; the threat i had heard weighed on my thoughts, but i did not
 reflect that voluntary act of mine could avert it. i had resolved in
 my own mind that to create another like the fiend i had first made
 would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and i
 banished from my mind every thought that could lead to different
 conclusion.
 
between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and i then, putting my
 basket aboard little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
 the scene was perfectly solitary; few boats were returning towards land,
 but i sailed away from them. i felt as if i was about the commission of a
 dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my
 fellow creatures. at one time the moon, which had before been clear, was
 suddenly overspread by thick cloud, and i took advantage of the moment of
 darkness and cast my basket into the sea; i listened to the gurgling sound
 as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. the sky became clouded, but
 the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then
 rising. but it refreshed and filled with such agreeable sensations
 that i resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a
 direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. clouds hid the
 moon, everything was obscure, and i heard only the sound of the boat as its
 keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in short time i
 slept soundly.
 
i do not know how long i remained in this situation, but when i awoke i
 found that the sun had already mounted considerably. the wind was high, and
 the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. i found
 that the wind was northeast and must have driven far from the coast from
 which i had embarked. i endeavoured to change my course but quickly found
 that if i again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with
 water. thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. i
 confess that i felt few sensations of terror. i had compass with me
 and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the
 world that the sun was of little benefit to me. i might be driven into the
 wide atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in
 the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. i had already
 been out many hours and felt the torment of burning thirst, prelude to
 my other sufferings. i looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds
 that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; i looked upon the
 sea; it was to be my grave. “fiend,” i exclaimed, “your
 task is already fulfilled!” i thought of elizabeth, of my father, and
 of clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
 sanguinary and merciless passions. this idea plunged into reverie so
 despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
 closing before for ever, i shudder to reflect on it.
 
some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
 horizon, the wind died away into gentle breeze and the became
 free from breakers. but these gave place to heavy swell; i felt sick
 and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly i saw line of high
 land towards the south.
 
almost spent, as i was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense i endured
 for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like flood of
 warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.
 
how mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have
 of life even in the excess of misery! i constructed another sail with a
 part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. it had a
 wild and rocky appearance, but as i approached nearer i easily perceived
 the traces of cultivation. i saw vessels near the shore and found myself
 suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. i
 carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed steeple which i at
 length saw issuing from behind small promontory. as i was in state of
 extreme debility, i resolved to sail directly towards the town, as place
 where i could most easily procure nourishment. fortunately i had money with
 me. as i turned the promontory i perceived small neat town and good
 harbour, which i entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
 escape.
 
as i was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
 people crowded towards the spot. they seemed much surprised at my
 appearance, but instead of offering any assistance, whispered
 together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
 slight sensation of alarm. as it was, i merely remarked that they
 spoke english, and i therefore addressed them in that language. “my
 good friends,” said i, “will you be so kind as to tell the name of
 this town and inform where i am?”
 
“you will know that soon enough,” replied man with hoarse voice.
 “maybe you are come to place that will not prove much to your taste,
 but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, i promise you.”
 
i was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
 stranger, and i was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
 angry countenances of his companions. “why do you answer so
 roughly?” i replied. “surely it is not the custom of englishmen to
 receive strangers so inhospitably.”
 
“i do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the
 english may be, but it is the custom of the irish to hate villains.”
 
while this strange dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly
 increase. their faces expressed mixture of curiosity and anger, which
 annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. i inquired the way to the inn, but
 one replied. i then moved forward, and murmuring sound arose from the
 crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man
 approaching tapped on the shoulder and said, “come, sir, you must
 follow to mr. kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.”
 
“who is mr. kirwin? why am i to give an account of myself? is not
 this free country?”
 
“ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. mr. kirwin is magistrate,
 and you are to give an account of the death of gentleman who was
 found murdered here last night.”
 
this answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself. i was innocent;
 that could easily be proved; accordingly i followed my conductor in silence
 and was led to one of the best houses in the town. i was ready to sink from
 fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by crowd, i thought it politic
 to rouse all my strength, that physical debility might be construed into
 apprehension or conscious guilt. little did i then expect the calamity that
 was in few moments to overwhelm and extinguish in horror and despair
 all fear of ignominy or death.
 
i must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of
 the frightful events which i am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
 recollection.
 



chapter 21
 

i was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
 benevolent man with calm and mild manners. looked upon me, however,
 with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors,
 asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.
 
about half dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the
 magistrate, deposed that had been out fishing the night before with
 his and brother-in-law, daniel nugent, when, about ten o’clock,
 they observed strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
 for port. it was very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
 not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at creek about
 two miles below. walked on first, carrying part of the fishing tackle,
 and his companions followed him at some distance. as was proceeding
 along the sands, struck his foot against something and fell at his
 length on the ground. his companions came up to assist him, and by the
 light of their lantern they found that had fallen on the body of man,
 who was to all appearance dead. their first supposition was that it was the
 corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
 waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even
 that the body was not then cold. they instantly carried it to the cottage
 of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
 to life. it appeared to be handsome young man, about five and twenty
 years of age. had apparently been strangled, for there was sign of
 any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.
 
the first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but
 when the mark of the fingers was mentioned i remembered the murder of
 my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
 mist came over my eyes, which obliged to lean on chair for
 support. the magistrate observed with keen eye and of course drew
 an unfavourable augury from my manner.
 
the confirmed his father’s account, but when daniel nugent was
 called swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he
 saw boat, with single man in it, at short distance from the shore;
 and as far as could judge by the light of few stars, it was the same
 boat in which i had just landed.
 
woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door
 of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour
 before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw boat with
 only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
 was afterwards found.
 
another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
 body into her house; it was not cold. they put it into bed and
 rubbed it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was
 quite gone.
 
several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed
 that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
 was very probable that i had beaten about for many hours and had been
 obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed.
 besides, they observed that it appeared that i had brought the body
 from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know
 the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
 of the town of —— from the place where i had deposited the corpse.
 
mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that i should be taken into
 the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what
 effect the sight of it would produce upon me. this idea was probably
 suggested by the extreme agitation i had exhibited when the mode of the
 murder had been described. i was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate
 and several other persons, to the inn. i could not help being struck by the
 strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but,
 knowing that i had been conversing with several persons in the island i had
 inhabited about the time that the body had been found, i was perfectly
 tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.
 
i entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. how
 can i describe my sensations on beholding it? i feel yet parched with
 horror, nor can i reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and
 agony. the examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
 passed like dream from my memory when i saw the lifeless form of henry
 clerval stretched before me. i gasped for breath, and throwing myself on
 the body, i exclaimed, “have my murderous machinations deprived you
 also, my dearest henry, of life? two i have already destroyed; other
 victims await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my
 benefactor—”
 
the human frame could longer support the agonies that i endured, and
 i was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.
 
fever succeeded to this. i lay for two months on the point of death; my
 ravings, as i afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the
 murderer of william, of justine, and of clerval. sometimes i entreated my
 attendants to assist in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was
 tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already grasping
 my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. fortunately, as i spoke
 my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and
 bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
 
why did i not die? more miserable than man ever was before, why did i not
 sink into forgetfulness and rest? death snatches away many blooming
 children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and
 youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
 next prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! of what materials was i
 made that i could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of
 the wheel, continually renewed the torture?
 
but i was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from
 dream, in prison, stretched on wretched bed, surrounded by
 gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of dungeon.
 it was morning, i remember, when i thus awoke to understanding; i had
 forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some
 great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when i looked around
 and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which i
 was, all flashed across my memory and i groaned bitterly.
 
this sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in chair beside
 me. she was hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
 countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise
 that class. the lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
 persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. her
 tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed in english,
 and the voice struck as one that i had heard during my sufferings.
 
“are you better now, sir?” said she.
 
i replied in the same language, with feeble voice, “i believe i am;
 but if it be all true, if indeed i did not dream, i am sorry that i am
 still alive to feel this misery and horror.”
 
“for that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the
 gentleman you murdered, i believe that it were better for you if you
 were dead, for i fancy it will go hard with you! however, that’s none
 of my business; i am sent to nurse you and get you well; i do my duty
 with safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”
 
i turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
 speech to person just saved, on the very edge of death; but i felt
 languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. the whole series
 of my life appeared to as dream; i sometimes doubted if indeed it
 were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
 of reality.
 
as the images that floated before became more distinct, i grew
 feverish; darkness pressed around me; one was near who soothed
 with the gentle voice of love; dear hand supported me. the
 physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
 them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
 expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
 second. who could be interested in the fate of murderer but the
 hangman who would gain his fee?
 
these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had
 shown extreme kindness. had caused the best room in the prison
 to be prepared for (wretched indeed was the best); and it was who
 had provided physician and nurse. it is true, seldom came to
 see me, for although ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
 every human creature, did not wish to be present at the agonies and
 miserable ravings of murderer. came, therefore, sometimes to see
 that i was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
 intervals.
 
one day, while i was gradually recovering, i was seated in chair, my eyes
 half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. i was overcome by gloom
 and misery and often reflected i had better seek death than desire to
 remain in world which to was replete with wretchedness. at one time i
 considered whether i should not declare myself guilty and suffer the
 penalty of the law, less innocent than poor justine had been. such were my
 thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and mr. kirwin entered.
 his countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; drew chair close to
 mine and addressed in french,
 
“i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do anything to
 make you more comfortable?”
 
“i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
 earth there is comfort which i am capable of receiving.”
 
“i know that the sympathy of stranger can be but of little relief to
 one borne down as you are by so strange misfortune. but you will, i
 hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can
 easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”
 
“that is my least concern; i am, by course of strange events, become
 the most miserable of mortals. persecuted and tortured as i am and
 have been, can death be any evil to me?”
 
“nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
 strange chances that have lately occurred. you were thrown, by some
 surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
 seized immediately, and charged with murder. the first sight that was
 presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
 unaccountable manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
 your path.”
 
as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endured on
 this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at
 the knowledge seemed to possess concerning me. i suppose some
 astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hastened
 to say,
 
“immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on
 your person were brought me, and i examined them that i might discover some
 trace by which i could send to your relations an account of your misfortune
 and illness. i found several letters, and, among others, one which i
 discovered from its commencement to be from your father. i instantly wrote
 to geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
 but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any
 kind.”
 
“this suspense is thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
 tell what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am
 now to lament?”
 
“your family is perfectly well,” said mr. kirwin with
 gentleness; “and someone, friend, is come to visit you.”
 
i know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
 instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
 misery and taunt with the death of clerval, as new incitement for
 to comply with his hellish desires. i put my hand before my eyes,
 and cried out in agony,
 
“oh! take him away! i cannot see him; for god’s sake, do not
 let him enter!”
 
mr. kirwin regarded with troubled countenance. could not help
 regarding my exclamation as presumption of my guilt and said in
 rather severe tone,
 
“i should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
 would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.”
 
“my father!” cried i, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
 from anguish to pleasure. “is my father indeed come? how kind, how
 very kind! but where is he, why does not hasten to me?”
 
my change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
 thought that my former exclamation was momentary return of delirium,
 and now instantly resumed his former benevolence. rose and
 quitted the room with my nurse, and in moment my father entered it.
 
nothing, at this moment, could have given greater pleasure than the
 arrival of my father. i stretched out my hand to him and cried,
 
“are you then safe—and elizabeth—and ernest?”
 
my father calmed with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
 dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
 desponding spirits; but soon felt that prison cannot be the abode of
 cheerfulness. “what place is this that you inhabit, my son!”
 said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
 of the room. “you travelled to seek happiness, but fatality seems
 to pursue you. and poor clerval—”
 
the name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
 great to be endured in my weak state; i shed tears.
 
“alas! yes, my father,” replied i; “some destiny of the
 most horrible kind hangs over me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i
 should have died on the coffin of henry.”
 
we were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
 precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
 could ensure tranquillity. mr. kirwin came in and insisted that my
 strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. but the
 appearance of my father was to like that of my good angel, and i
 gradually recovered my health.
 
as my sickness quitted me, i was absorbed by gloomy and black
 melancholy that nothing could dissipate. the image of clerval was
 for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. more than once the agitation
 into which these reflections threw made my friends dread dangerous
 relapse. alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a
 life? it was surely that i might fulfil my destiny, which is now
 drawing to close. soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
 throbbings and relieve from the mighty weight of anguish that bears
 to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, i shall also
 sink to rest. then the appearance of death was distant, although the
 wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hours
 motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
 might bury and my destroyer in its ruins.
 
the season of the assizes approached. i had already been three months
 in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a
 relapse, i was obliged to travel nearly hundred miles to the country
 town where the court was held. mr. kirwin charged himself with every
 care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. i was spared
 the disgrace of appearing publicly as criminal, as the case was not
 brought before the court that decides on life and death. the grand
 jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that i was on the orkney
 islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and fortnight
 after my removal i was liberated from prison.
 
my father was enraptured on finding freed from the vexations of a
 criminal charge, that i was again allowed to breathe the fresh
 atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. i did not
 participate in these feelings, for to the walls of dungeon or a
 palace were alike hateful. the cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
 although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i
 saw around nothing but dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
 light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. sometimes
 they were the expressive eyes of henry, languishing in death, the dark
 orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
 them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as i
 first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt.
 
my father tried to awaken in the feelings of affection. talked
 of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but
 these words only drew deep groans from me. sometimes, indeed, i felt a
 wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
 cousin or longed, with devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
 the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to in early
 childhood; but my general state of feeling was torpor in which a
 prison was as welcome residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
 these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and
 despair. at these moments i often endeavoured to put an end to the
 existence i loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
 to restrain from committing some dreadful act of violence.
 
yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
 triumphed over my selfish despair. it was necessary that i should
 return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
 i so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
 chance led to the place of his concealment, or if dared again to
 blast by his presence, i might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
 the existence of the monstrous image which i had endued with the
 mockery of soul still more monstrous. my father still desired to
 delay our departure, fearful that i could not sustain the fatigues of a
 journey, for i was shattered wreck—the shadow of human being. my
 strength was gone. i was mere skeleton, and fever night and day
 preyed upon my wasted frame.
 
still, as i urged our leaving ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
 my father thought it best to yield. we took our passage on board vessel
 bound for havre-de-grace and sailed with fair wind from the irish shores.
 it was midnight. i lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to
 the dashing of the waves. i hailed the darkness that shut ireland from my
 sight, and my pulse beat with feverish joy when i reflected that i should
 soon see geneva. the past appeared to in the light of frightful dream;
 yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew from the detested
 shore of ireland, and the which surrounded me, told too forcibly
 that i was deceived by vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest
 companion, had fallen victim to and the monster of my creation. i
 repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
 with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
 ingolstadt. i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried on
 to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i called to mind the night in
 which first lived. i was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
 thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept bitterly.
 
ever since my recovery from the fever, i had been in the custom of taking
 every night small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
 only that i was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
 life. oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, i now
 swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. but sleep did
 not afford respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a
 thousand objects that scared me. towards morning i was possessed by kind
 of nightmare; i felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
 myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. my father, who was
 watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves
 were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: sense of
 security, feeling that truce was established between the present hour
 and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to kind of calm
 forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly
 susceptible.
 



chapter 22
 

the voyage came to an end. we landed, and proceeded to paris. i soon
 found that i had overtaxed my strength and that i must repose before i
 could continue my journey. my father’s care and attentions were
 indefatigable, but did not know the origin of my sufferings and
 sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. wished to
 seek amusement in society. i abhorred the face of man. oh, not
 abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and i felt
 attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an
 angelic nature and celestial mechanism. but i felt that i had right
 to share their intercourse. i had unchained an enemy among them whose
 joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. how they
 would, each and all, abhor and hunt from the world, did they know
 my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!
 
my father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by
 various arguments to banish my despair. sometimes thought that i
 felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer charge of
 murder, and endeavoured to prove to the futility of pride.
 
“alas! my father,” said i, “how little do you know me. 
human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such
 wretch as i felt pride. justine, poor unhappy justine, was as innocent
 as i, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and i am the cause
 of this—i murdered her. william, justine, and henry—they all
 died by my hands.”
 
my father had often, during my imprisonment, heard make the same
 assertion; when i thus accused myself, sometimes seemed to desire an
 explanation, and at others appeared to consider it as the offspring of
 delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
 itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which i preserved in my
 convalescence. i avoided explanation and maintained continual silence
 concerning the wretch i had created. i had persuasion that i should be
 supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. but,
 besides, i could not bring myself to disclose secret which would fill my
 hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of
 his breast. i checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was
 silent when i would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
 yet, still, words like those i have recorded would burst uncontrollably
 from me. i could offer explanation of them, but their truth in part
 relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.
 
upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder,
 “my dearest victor, what infatuation is this? my dear son, i entreat
 you never to make such an assertion again.”
 
“i am not mad,” i cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
 have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. i am the
 assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
 thousand times would i have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
 saved their lives; but i could not, my father, indeed i could not
 sacrifice the whole human race.”
 
the conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
 deranged, and instantly changed the subject of our conversation and
 endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. wished as much as
 possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
 ireland and never alluded to them or suffered to speak of my
 misfortunes.
 
as time passed away i became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my
 heart, but i longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
 crimes; sufficient for was the consciousness of them. by the utmost
 self-violence i curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
 sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners
 were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
 to the of ice.
 
few days before we left paris on our way to switzerland, i received the
 following letter from elizabeth:
 
“my dear friend,
 
“it gave the greatest pleasure to receive letter from my uncle
 dated at paris; you are longer at formidable distance, and i may
 hope to see you in less than fortnight. my poor cousin, how much you
 must have suffered! i expect to see you looking even more ill than
 when you quitted geneva. this winter has been passed most miserably,
 tortured as i have been by anxious suspense; yet i hope to see peace in
 your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
 comfort and tranquillity.
 
“yet i fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
 year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. i would not disturb you at
 this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a
 conversation that i had with my uncle previous to his departure renders
 some explanation necessary before we meet.
 
explanation! you may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain? if
 you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
 but you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet
 be pleased with this explanation; and in probability of this being the
 case, i dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, i
 have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.
 
“you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of
 your parents ever since our infancy. we were told this when young, and
 taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
 place. we were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, i
 believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. but
 as brother and sister often entertain lively affection towards each
 other without desiring more intimate union, may not such also be our
 case? tell me, dearest victor. answer me, i conjure you by our mutual
 happiness, with simple truth—do you not love another?
 
“you have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
 ingolstadt; and i confess to you, my friend, that when i saw you last
 autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every
 creature, i could not help supposing that you might regret our
 connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
 your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
 but this is false reasoning. i confess to you, my friend, that i love
 you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant
 friend and companion. but it is your happiness i desire as well as my
 own when i declare to you that our marriage would render eternally
 miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. even now
 i weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
 misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that
 love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. i, who
 have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries
 tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. ah! victor, be assured
 that your cousin and playmate has too sincere love for you not to be
 made miserable by this supposition. be happy, my friend; and if you
 obey in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
 will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.
 
“do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
 next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. my uncle
 will send news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your
 lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, i
 shall need other happiness.
 
“elizabeth lavenza.
 


“geneva, may 18th, 17—”
 


this letter revived in my memory what i had before forgotten, the threat of
 the fiend—“_i will be with you on your
 wedding-night!_” such was my sentence, and on that night would the
 dæmon employ every art to destroy and tear from the glimpse of
 happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. on that night he
 had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. well, be it so; a
 deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if were
 victorious i should be at peace and his power over be at an end. if he
 were vanquished, i should be free man. alas! what freedom? such as the
 peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
 cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and is turned adrift, homeless,
 penniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberty except that in my
 elizabeth i possessed treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
 remorse and guilt which would pursue until death.
 
sweet and beloved elizabeth! i read and reread her letter, and some
 softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
 dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
 angel’s arm bared to drive from all hope. yet i would die to make
 her happy. if the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
 again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. my
 destruction might indeed arrive few months sooner, but if my torturer
 should suspect that i postponed it, influenced by his menaces, would
 surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. had vowed
 _to be with on my wedding-night_, yet did not consider that
 threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show that
 was not yet satiated with blood, had murdered clerval immediately
 after the enunciation of his threats. i resolved, therefore, that if my
 immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
 father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life
 should not retard it single hour.
 
in this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth. my letter was calm and
 affectionate. “i fear, my beloved girl,” i said, “little happiness
 remains for us on earth; yet all that i may one day enjoy is centred in
 you. chase away your idle fears; to you alone do i consecrate my life
 and my endeavours for contentment. i have one secret, elizabeth, a
 dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
 horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
 wonder that i survive what i have endured. i will confide this tale of
 misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place,
 for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. but
 until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. this i most
 earnestly entreat, and i know you will comply.”
 
in about week after the arrival of elizabeth’s letter we returned
 to geneva. the sweet girl welcomed with warm affection, yet tears were
 in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. i saw a
 change in her also. she was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly
 vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of
 compassion made her more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as i
 was.
 
the tranquillity which i now enjoyed did not endure. memory brought madness
 with it, and when i thought of what had passed, real insanity possessed
 me; sometimes i was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and
 despondent. i neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless,
 bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
 
elizabeth alone had the power to draw from these fits; her gentle voice
 would soothe when transported by passion and inspire with human
 feelings when sunk in torpor. she wept with and for me. when reason
 returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire with
 resignation. ah! it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the
 guilty there is peace. the agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is
 otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.
 
soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
 elizabeth. i remained silent.
 
“have you, then, some other attachment?”
 
“none on earth. i love elizabeth and look forward to our union with
 delight. let the day therefore be fixed; and on it i will consecrate
 myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”
 
“my dear victor, do not speak thus. heavy misfortunes have befallen
 us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love
 for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. our circle will be
 small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
 and when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
 care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly
 deprived.”
 
such were the lessons of my father. but to the remembrance of the
 threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had
 yet been in his deeds of blood, i should almost regard him as
 invincible, and that when had pronounced the words “_i shall be with
 you on your wedding-night_,” i should regard the threatened fate as
 unavoidable. but death was evil to if the loss of elizabeth were
 balanced with it, and i therefore, with contented and even cheerful
 countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
 ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined,
 the seal to my fate.
 
great god! if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish
 intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banished myself
 for ever from my native country and wandered friendless outcast over
 the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. but, as if
 possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded to his real
 intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i
 hastened that of far dearer victim.
 
as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or
 prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me. but i concealed my
 feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the
 countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer
 eye of elizabeth. she looked forward to our union with placid contentment,
 not unmingled with little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed,
 that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate
 into an airy dream and leave trace but deep and everlasting regret.
 
preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
 and all wore smiling appearance. i shut up, as well as i could, in my own
 heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness
 into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
 decorations of my tragedy. through my father’s exertions part of
 the inheritance of elizabeth had been restored to her by the austrian
 government. small possession on the shores of belonged to her. it
 was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to villa
 lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake
 near which it stood.
 
in the meantime i took every precaution to defend my person in case the
 fiend should openly attack me. i carried pistols and dagger
 constantly about and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and
 by these means gained greater degree of tranquillity. indeed, as the
 period approached, the threat appeared more as delusion, not to be
 regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness i hoped for
 in my marriage wore greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed
 for its solemnisation drew nearer and i heard it continually spoken of
 as an occurrence which accident could possibly prevent.
 
elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
 calm her mind. but on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
 destiny, she was melancholy, and presentiment of evil pervaded her;
 and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which i had
 promised to reveal to her on the following day. my father was in the
 meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in
 the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of bride.
 
after the ceremony was performed large party assembled at my
 father’s, but it was agreed that elizabeth and i should commence our
 journey by water, sleeping that night at evian and continuing our
 voyage on the following day. the day was fair, the wind favourable;
 all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.
 
those were the last moments of my life during which i enjoyed the
 feeling of happiness. we passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we
 were sheltered from its rays by kind of canopy while we enjoyed the
 beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
 mont salêve, the pleasant banks of montalègre, and at distance,
 surmounting all, the beautiful mont blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
 mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
 opposite banks, we saw the mighty jura opposing its dark side to the
 ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
 insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.
 
i took the hand of elizabeth. “you are sorrowful, my love. ah! if
 you knew what i have suffered and what i may yet endure, you would
 endeavour to let taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
 one day at least permits to enjoy.”
 
“be happy, my dear victor,” replied elizabeth; “there is, i hope,
 nothing to distress you; and be assured that if lively joy is not
 painted in my face, my heart is contented. something whispers to me
 not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but i
 will not listen to such sinister voice. observe how fast we move
 along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise
 above the dome of mont blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
 interesting. look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in
 the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at
 the bottom. what divine day! how happy and serene all nature
 appears!”
 
thus elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
 reflection upon melancholy subjects. but her temper was fluctuating;
 joy for few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place
 to distraction and reverie.
 
the sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river drance and
 observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
 lower hills. the alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
 the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. the
 spire of evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range
 of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.
 
the wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
 sank at sunset to light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water
 and caused pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the
 shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and
 hay. the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as i touched
 the shore i felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp
 and cling to for ever.
 



chapter 23
 

it was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for short time on the
 shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and
 contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
 in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.
 
the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence
 in the west. the moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was
 beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
 flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the
 scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
 that were beginning to rise. suddenly heavy storm of rain descended.
 
i had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the
 shapes of objects, thousand fears arose in my mind. i was anxious
 and watchful, while my right hand grasped pistol which was hidden in
 my bosom; every sound terrified me, but i resolved that i would sell my
 life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that
 of my adversary was extinguished.
 
elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
 but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and
 trembling, she asked, “what is it that agitates you, my dear victor?
 what is it you fear?”
 
“oh! peace, peace, my love,” replied i; “this night, and
 all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.”
 
i passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly i reflected how
 fearful the combat which i momentarily expected would be to my wife,
 and i earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her
 until i had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
 
she left me, and i continued some time walking up and down the passages
 of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford retreat to
 my adversary. but i discovered trace of him and was beginning to
 conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
 execution of his menaces when suddenly i heard shrill and dreadful
 scream. it came from the room into which elizabeth had retired. as i
 heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
 motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; i could feel the blood
 trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. this
 state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and i rushed
 into the room.
 
great god! why did i not then expire! why am i here to relate the
 destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? she was
 there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
 and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. everywhere i
 turn i see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung
 by the murderer on its bridal bier. could i behold this and live? alas!
 life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. for moment
 only did i lose recollection; i fell senseless on the ground.
 
when i recovered i found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their
 countenances expressed breathless terror, but the horror of others
 appeared only as mockery, shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. i
 escaped from them to the room where lay the body of elizabeth, my love, my
 wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. she had been moved from the
 posture in which i had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
 her arm and handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, i might have
 supposed her asleep. i rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but
 the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told that what i now held
 in my arms had ceased to be the elizabeth whom i had loved and cherished.
 the murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
 breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
 
while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i happened to look up.
 the windows of the room had before been darkened, and i felt kind of
 panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
 the shutters had been thrown back, and with sensation of horror not to be
 described, i saw at the open window figure the most hideous and abhorred.
 grin was on the face of the monster; seemed to jeer, as with his
 fiendish finger pointed towards the corpse of my wife. i rushed towards
 the window, and drawing pistol from my bosom, fired; but eluded me,
 leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning,
 plunged into the lake.
 
the report of the pistol brought crowd into the room. i pointed to
 the spot where had disappeared, and we followed the track with
 boats; nets were cast, but in vain. after passing several hours, we
 returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a
 form conjured up by my fancy. after having landed, they proceeded to
 search the country, parties going in different directions among the
 woods and vines.
 
i attempted to accompany them and proceeded short distance from the
 house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of drunken
 man, i fell at last in state of utter exhaustion; film covered my
 eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. in this state i
 was carried back and placed on bed, hardly conscious of what had
 happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that
 i had lost.
 
after an interval i arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room
 where the corpse of my beloved lay. there were women weeping around; i
 hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
 distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
 various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their
 cause. i was bewildered, in cloud of wonder and horror. the death
 of william, the execution of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastly
 of my wife; even at that moment i knew not that my only remaining
 friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now
 might be writhing under his grasp, and ernest might be dead at his
 feet. this idea made shudder and recalled to action. i started
 up and resolved to return to geneva with all possible speed.
 
there were horses to be procured, and i must return by the lake; but the
 wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. however, it was
 hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night. i hired men
 to row and took an oar myself, for i had always experienced relief from
 mental torment in bodily exercise. but the overflowing misery i now felt,
 and the excess of agitation that i endured rendered incapable of any
 exertion. i threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way
 to every gloomy idea that arose. if i looked up, i saw scenes which were
 familiar to in my happier time and which i had contemplated but the day
 before in the company of her who was now but shadow and recollection.
 tears streamed from my eyes. the rain had ceased for moment, and i saw
 the fish play in the waters as they had done few hours before; they had
 then been observed by elizabeth. nothing is so painful to the human mind as
 great and sudden change. the sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
 but nothing could appear to as it had done the day before. fiend had
 snatched from every hope of future happiness; creature had ever been
 so miserable as i was; so frightful an event is single in the history of
 man.
 
but why should i dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
 overwhelming event? mine has been tale of horrors; i have reached their
 _acme_, and what i must now relate can but be tedious to you. know
 that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; i was left desolate. my
 own strength is exhausted, and i must tell, in few words, what remains of
 my hideous narration.
 
i arrived at geneva. my father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk
 under the tidings that i bore. i see him now, excellent and venerable old
 man! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their
 delight—his elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom doted on with
 all that affection which man feels, who in the decline of life, having
 few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. cursed, cursed
 be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
 in wretchedness! could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
 around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; was unable to
 rise from his bed, and in few days died in my arms.
 
what then became of me? i know not; i lost sensation, and chains and
 darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. sometimes,
 indeed, i dreamt that i wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
 with the friends of my youth, but i awoke and found myself in a
 dungeon. melancholy followed, but by degrees i gained clear
 conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
 prison. for they had called mad, and during many months, as i
 understood, solitary cell had been my habitation.
 
liberty, however, had been useless gift to me, had i not, as i
 awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. as the
 memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their
 cause—the monster whom i had created, the miserable dæmon whom i had
 sent abroad into the world for my destruction. i was possessed by a
 maddening rage when i thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
 that i might have him within my grasp to wreak great and signal
 revenge on his cursed head.
 
nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to
 reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
 month after my release, i repaired to criminal judge in the town
 and told him that i had an accusation to make, that i knew the
 destroyer of my family, and that i required him to exert his whole
 authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
 
the magistrate listened to with attention and kindness. “be
 assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall
 be spared to discover the villain.”
 
“i thank you,” replied i; “listen, therefore, to the
 deposition that i have to make. it is indeed tale so strange that i
 should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth
 which, however wonderful, forces conviction. the story is too connected to
 be mistaken for dream, and i have motive for falsehood.” my
 manner as i thus addressed him was impressive but calm; i had formed in my
 own heart resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose
 quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled to life. i now related
 my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
 accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
 
the magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as i continued
 became more attentive and interested; i saw him sometimes shudder with
 horror; at others lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted
 on his countenance.
 
when i had concluded my narration, i said, “this is the being whom i
 accuse and for whose seizure and punishment i call upon you to exert your
 whole power. it is your duty as magistrate, and i believe and hope that
 your feelings as man will not revolt from the execution of those
 functions on this occasion.”
 
this address caused considerable change in the physiognomy of my own
 auditor. had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given
 to tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when was called upon
 to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity
 returned. he, however, answered mildly, “i would willingly afford you
 every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to
 have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. who can follow an
 animal which can traverse the of ice and inhabit caves and dens where
 man would venture to intrude? besides, some months have elapsed since
 the commission of his crimes, and one can conjecture to what place he
 has wandered or what region may now inhabit.”
 
“i do not doubt that hovers near the spot which i inhabit, and if
 has indeed taken refuge in the alps, may be hunted like the chamois
 and destroyed as beast of prey. but i perceive your thoughts; you do not
 credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
 punishment which is his desert.”
 
as i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
 “you are mistaken,” said he. “i will exert myself, and if
 it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that shall suffer
 punishment proportionate to his crimes. but i fear, from what you have
 yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
 impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should
 make up your mind to disappointment.”
 
“that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail. my
 revenge is of moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be vice, i
 confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. my rage
 is unspeakable when i reflect that the murderer, whom i have turned
 loose upon society, still exists. you refuse my just demand; i have
 but one resource, and i devote myself, either in my life or death, to
 his destruction.”
 
i trembled with excess of agitation as i said this; there was frenzy
 in my manner, and something, i doubt not, of that haughty fierceness
 which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. but to genevan
 magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
 devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
 madness. endeavoured to soothe as nurse does child and
 reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.
 
“man,” i cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of
 wisdom! cease; you know not what it is you say.”
 
i broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on
 some other mode of action.
 



chapter 24
 

my present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
 swallowed up and lost. i was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
 endowed with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and
 allowed to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise
 delirium or death would have been my portion.
 
my first resolution was to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when i
 was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
 hateful. i provided myself with sum of money, together with few jewels
 which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
 
and now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. i have
 traversed vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships
 which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. how i
 have lived i hardly know; many times have i stretched my failing limbs upon
 the sandy plain and prayed for death. but revenge kept alive; i dared
 not die and leave my adversary in being.
 
when i quitted geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which i
 might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. but my plan was unsettled,
 and i wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain
 what path i should pursue. as night approached i found myself at the
 entrance of the cemetery where william, elizabeth, and my father
 reposed. i entered it and approached the tomb which marked their
 graves. everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which
 were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
 scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
 observer. the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
 cast shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
 mourner.
 
the deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
 rage and despair. they were dead, and i lived; their murderer also lived,
 and to destroy him i must drag out my weary existence. i knelt on the grass
 and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “by the
 sacred earth on which i kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
 deep and eternal grief that i feel, i swear; and by thee, night, and the
 spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery,
 until or i shall perish in mortal conflict. for this purpose i will
 preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will i again behold the sun
 and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my
 eyes for ever. and i call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering
 ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct in my work. let the cursed
 and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now
 torments me.”
 
i had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
 that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but
 the furies possessed as i concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
 
i was answered through the stillness of night by loud and fiendish
 laugh. it rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
 it, and i felt as if all hell surrounded with mockery and laughter.
 surely in that moment i should have been possessed by frenzy and have
 destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that i
 was reserved for vengeance. the laughter died away, when well-known
 and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed in an
 audible whisper, “i am satisfied, miserable wretch! you have
 determined to live, and i am satisfied.”
 
i darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil
 eluded my grasp. suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
 full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as fled with more than
 mortal speed.
 
i pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. guided by a
 slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly. the
 blue mediterranean appeared, and by strange chance, i saw the fiend
 enter by night and hide himself in vessel bound for the black sea. i
 took my passage in the same ship, but escaped, i know not how.
 
amidst the wilds of tartary and russia, although still evaded me, i
 have ever followed in his track. sometimes the peasants, scared by
 this horrid apparition, informed of his path; sometimes himself,
 who feared that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die,
 left some mark to guide me. the snows descended on my head, and i saw
 the print of his huge step on the white plain. to you first entering
 on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
 what i have felt and still feel? cold, want, and fatigue were the
 least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by some devil
 and carried about with my eternal hell; yet still spirit of good
 followed and directed my steps and when i most murmured would suddenly
 extricate from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. sometimes,
 when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, repast
 was prepared for in the desert that restored and inspirited me. the
 fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
 i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had
 invoked to aid me. often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
 i was parched by thirst, slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
 few drops that revived me, and vanish.
 
i followed, when i could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon
 generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
 country chiefly collected. in other places human beings were seldom
 seen, and i generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
 path. i had money with and gained the friendship of the villagers
 by distributing it; or i brought with some food that i had killed,
 which, after taking small part, i always presented to those who had
 provided with fire and utensils for cooking.
 
my life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
 sleep alone that i could taste joy. blessed sleep! often, when most
 miserable, i sank to repose, and my dreams lulled even to rapture. the
 spirits that guarded had provided these moments, or rather hours, of
 happiness that i might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. deprived of
 this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships. during the day i was
 sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep i saw my
 friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again i saw the benevolent
 countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my elizabeth’s
 voice, and beheld clerval enjoying health and youth. often, when wearied by
 toilsome march, i persuaded myself that i was dreaming until night should
 come and that i should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest
 friends. what agonising fondness did i feel for them! how did i cling to
 their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and
 persuade myself that they still lived! at such moments vengeance, that
 burned within me, died in my heart, and i pursued my path towards the
 destruction of the dæmon more as task enjoined by heaven, as the
 mechanical impulse of some power of which i was unconscious, than as the
 ardent desire of my soul.
 
what his feelings were whom i pursued i cannot know. sometimes, indeed, he
 left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
 and instigated my fury. “my reign is not yet
 over”—these words were legible in one of these
 inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. follow me; i
 seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
 cold and frost, to which i am impassive. you will find near this place, if
 you follow not too tardily, dead hare; eat and be refreshed. come on, my
 enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable
 hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.”
 
scoffing devil! again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee,
 miserable fiend, to torture and death. never will i give up my search
 until or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my
 elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for the
 reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!
 
as i still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the
 cold increased in degree almost too severe to support. the peasants were
 shut up in their hovels, and only few of the most hardy ventured forth to
 seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to
 seek for prey. the rivers were covered with ice, and fish could be
 procured; and thus i was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
 
the triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. one
 inscription that left was in these words: “prepare! your toils
 only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
 upon journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
 hatred.”
 
my courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; i
 resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support
 me, i continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
 until the ocean appeared at distance and formed the utmost boundary
 of the horizon. oh! how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the
 south! covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by
 its superior wildness and ruggedness. the greeks wept for joy when
 they beheld the mediterranean from the hills of asia, and hailed with
 rapture the boundary of their toils. i did not weep, but i knelt down
 and with full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting in
 safety to the place where i hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe,
 to meet and grapple with him.
 
some weeks before this period i had procured sledge and dogs and thus
 traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. i know not whether the
 fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had
 daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gained on him, so much so that
 when i first saw the ocean was but one day’s journey in advance, and
 i hoped to intercept him before should reach the beach. with new
 courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrived at wretched
 hamlet on the seashore. i inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
 fiend and gained accurate information. gigantic monster, they said,
 had arrived the night before, armed with gun and many pistols,
 putting to flight the inhabitants of solitary cottage through fear of
 his terrific appearance. had carried off their store of winter
 food, and placing it in sledge, to draw which had seized on a
 numerous drove of trained dogs, had harnessed them, and the same
 night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
 journey across the in direction that led to land; and they
 conjectured that must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
 ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.
 
on hearing this information i suffered temporary access of despair.
 had escaped me, and i must commence destructive and almost endless
 journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
 of the inhabitants could long endure and which i, the native of a
 genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. yet at the idea
 that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
 returned, and like mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
 after slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
 round and instigated to toil and revenge, i prepared for my journey.
 
i exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of
 the frozen ocean, and purchasing plentiful stock of provisions, i
 departed from land.
 
i cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but i have endured
 misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of just retribution
 burning within my heart could have enabled to support. immense and
 rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and i often heard
 the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. but
 again the frost came and made the paths of the secure.
 
by the quantity of provision which i had consumed, i should guess that
 i had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction
 of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
 despondency and grief from my eyes. despair had indeed almost secured
 her prey, and i should soon have sunk beneath this misery. once, after
 the poor animals that conveyed had with incredible toil gained the
 summit of sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue,
 died, i viewed the expanse before with anguish, when suddenly my eye
 caught dark speck upon the dusky plain. i strained my sight to
 discover what it could be and uttered wild cry of ecstasy when i
 distinguished sledge and the distorted proportions of well-known
 form within. oh! with what burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
 warm tears filled my eyes, which i hastily wiped away, that they might
 not intercept the view i had of the dæmon; but still my sight was
 dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that
 oppressed me, i wept aloud.
 
but this was not the time for delay; i disencumbered the dogs of their
 dead companion, gave them plentiful portion of food, and after an
 hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
 irksome to me, i continued my route. the sledge was still visible, nor
 did i again lose sight of it except at the moments when for short
 time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. i indeed
 perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, i
 beheld my enemy at more than mile distant, my heart bounded within
 me.
 
but now, when i appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
 suddenly extinguished, and i lost all trace of him more utterly than i had
 ever done before. ground was heard; the thunder of its progress, as
 the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous
 and terrific. i pressed on, but in vain. the wind arose; the roared;
 and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
 tremendous and overwhelming sound. the work was soon finished; in few
 minutes tumultuous rolled between and my enemy, and i was left
 drifting on scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and
 thus preparing for hideous death.
 
in this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and i
 myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when i saw your
 vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to hopes of succour and life.
 i had conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded
 at the sight. i quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and
 by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in
 the direction of your ship. i had determined, if you were going southwards,
 still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my
 purpose. i hoped to induce you to grant boat with which i could pursue
 my enemy. but your direction was northwards. you took on board when my
 vigour was exhausted, and i should soon have sunk under my multiplied
 hardships into death which i still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.
 
oh! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting to the dæmon, allow
 the rest i so much desire; or must i die, and yet live? if i do,
 swear to me, walton, that shall not escape, that you will seek him
 and satisfy my vengeance in his death. and do i dare to ask of you to
 undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that i have undergone?
 no; i am not so selfish. yet, when i am dead, if should appear, if
 the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
 shall not live—swear that shall not triumph over my accumulated
 woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. is eloquent
 and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
 trust him not. his soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
 and fiend-like malice. hear him not; call on the names of william,
 justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched victor, and
 thrust your sword into his heart. i will hover near and direct the
 steel aright.
 
walton, _in continuation._
 

august 26th, 17—.
 

you have read this strange and terrific story, margaret; and do you not
 feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles
 mine? sometimes, seized with sudden agony, could not continue his
 tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with
 difficulty the words so replete with anguish. his fine and lovely eyes
 were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
 and quenched in infinite wretchedness. sometimes commanded his
 countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
 tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
 volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
 of the wildest rage as shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.
 
his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth,
 yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which showed me,
 and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to a
 greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
 however earnest and connected. such monster has, then, really existence!
 i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration. sometimes i
 endeavoured to gain from frankenstein the particulars of his
 creature’s formation, but on this point was impenetrable.
 
“are you mad, my friend?” said he. “or whither does your
 senseless curiosity lead you? would you also create for yourself and the
 world demoniacal enemy? peace, peace! learn my miseries and do not seek
 to increase your own.”
 
frankenstein discovered that i made notes concerning his history; asked
 to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
 but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations held
 with his enemy. “since you have preserved my narration,” said
 he, “i would not that mutilated one should go down to
 posterity.”
 
thus has week passed away, while i have listened to the strangest
 tale that ever imagination formed. my thoughts and every feeling of my
 soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale
 and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. i wish to soothe
 him, yet can i counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of
 every hope of consolation, to live? oh, no! the only joy that can
 now know will be when composes his shattered spirit to peace and
 death. yet enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
 delirium; believes that when in dreams holds converse with his
 friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or
 excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his
 fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a
 remote world. this faith gives solemnity to his reveries that render
 them to almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
 
our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
 misfortunes. on every point of general literature displays
 unbounded knowledge and quick and piercing apprehension. his
 eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can i hear him, when relates
 pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love,
 without tears. what glorious creature must have been in the days
 of his prosperity, when is thus noble and godlike in ruin! seems
 to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.
 
“when younger,” said he, “i believed myself destined for
 some great enterprise. my feelings are profound, but i possessed coolness
 of judgment that fitted for illustrious achievements. this sentiment of
 the worth of my nature supported when others would have been oppressed,
 for i deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that
 might be useful to my fellow creatures. when i reflected on the work i had
 completed, less one than the creation of sensitive and rational
 animal, i could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. but
 this thought, which supported in the commencement of my career, now
 serves only to plunge lower in the dust. all my speculations and hopes
 are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, i am
 chained in an eternal hell. my imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
 analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities i
 conceived the idea and executed the creation of man. even now i cannot
 recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. i trod
 heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea
 of their effects. from my infancy i was imbued with high hopes and lofty
 ambition; but how am i sunk! oh! my friend, if you had known as i once
 was, you would not recognise in this state of degradation. despondency
 rarely visited my heart; high destiny seemed to bear on, until i fell,
 never, never again to rise.”
 
must i then lose this admirable being? i have longed for friend; i have
 sought one who would sympathise with and love me. behold, on these desert
 seas i have found such one, but i fear i have gained him only to know his
 value and lose him. i would reconcile him to life, but repulses the idea.
 
“i thank you, walton,” said, “for your kind intentions towards so
 miserable wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
 affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? can any
 man be to as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth? even
 where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence,
 the companions of our childhood always possess certain power over our
 minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. they know our
 infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified,
 are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more
 certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. sister or a
 brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
 suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
 however strongly may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be
 contemplated with suspicion. but i enjoyed friends, dear not only
 through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
 i am, the soothing voice of my elizabeth and the conversation of
 clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. they are dead, and but one
 feeling in such solitude can persuade to preserve my life. if i
 were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
 utility to my fellow creatures, then could i live to fulfil it. but
 such is not my destiny; i must pursue and destroy the being to whom i
 gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and i may die.”
 
my beloved sister,
 
september 2d.
 

i write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether i am ever
 doomed to see again dear england and the dearer friends that inhabit
 it. i am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of escape and
 threaten every moment to crush my vessel. the brave fellows whom i
 have persuaded to be my companions look towards for aid, but i have
 none to bestow. there is something terribly appalling in our
 situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. yet it is
 terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered
 through me. if we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
 
and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind? you will not hear of my
 destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. years will pass, and
 you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. oh! my
 beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is,
 in prospect, more terrible to than my own death. but you have husband
 and lovely children; you may be happy. heaven bless you and make you so!
 
my unfortunate guest regards with the tenderest compassion. he
 endeavours to fill with hope and talks as if life were possession
 which valued. reminds how often the same accidents have
 happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite
 of myself, fills with cheerful auguries. even the sailors feel
 the power of his eloquence; when speaks, they longer despair; he
 rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these
 vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the
 resolutions of man. these feelings are transitory; each day of
 expectation delayed fills them with fear, and i almost dread mutiny
 caused by this despair.
 
september 5th.
 

scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is
 highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet i cannot
 forbear recording it.
 
we are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger
 of being crushed in their conflict. the cold is excessive, and many of
 my unfortunate comrades have already found grave amidst this scene of
 desolation. frankenstein has daily declined in health; feverish fire
 still glimmers in his eyes, but is exhausted, and when suddenly
 roused to any exertion, speedily sinks again into apparent
 lifelessness.
 
i mentioned in my last letter the fears i entertained of mutiny.
 this morning, as i sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his
 eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—i was roused by half
 dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. they
 entered, and their leader addressed me. told that and his
 companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation
 to to make requisition which, in justice, i could not refuse.
 we were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they
 feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and free
 passage be opened, i should be rash enough to continue my voyage and
 lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
 this. they insisted, therefore, that i should engage with solemn
 promise that if the vessel should be freed i would instantly direct my
 course southwards.
 
this speech troubled me. i had not despaired, nor had i yet conceived
 the idea of returning if set free. yet could i, in justice, or even in
 possibility, refuse this demand? i hesitated before i answered, when
 frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly
 to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
 and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. turning towards the men,
 said,
 
“what do you mean? what do you demand of your captain? are you, then,
 so easily turned from your design? did you not call this glorious
 expedition? “and wherefore was it glorious? not because the way was
 smooth and placid as southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and
 terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth
 and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and
 these you were to brave and overcome. for this was it glorious, for this
 was it an honourable undertaking. you were hereafter to be hailed as the
 benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men
 who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. and now,
 behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first
 mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content
 to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
 peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
 firesides. why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come
 thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of defeat merely to prove
 yourselves cowards. oh! be men, or be more than men. be steady to your
 purposes and firm as rock. this ice is not made of such stuff as your
 hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
 shall not. do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
 marked on your brows. return as heroes who have fought and conquered and
 who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”
 
spoke this with voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed
 in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can
 you wonder that these men were moved? they looked at one another and were
 unable to reply. i spoke; i told them to retire and consider of what had
 been said, that i would not lead them farther north if they strenuously
 desired the contrary, but that i hoped that, with reflection, their courage
 would return.
 
they retired and i turned towards my friend, but was sunk in languor and
 almost deprived of life.
 
how all this will terminate, i know not, but i had rather die than
 return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. yet i fear such will be my
 fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
 willingly continue to endure their present hardships.
 
september 7th.
 

the die is cast; i have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
 thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; i come back
 ignorant and disappointed. it requires more philosophy than i possess
 to bear this injustice with patience.
 
september 12th.
 

it is past; i am returning to england. i have lost my hopes of utility
 and glory; i have lost my friend. but i will endeavour to detail these
 bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while i am wafted
 towards england and towards you, i will not despond.
 
september 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard
 at distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. we were
 in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief
 attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in
 such degree that was entirely confined to his bed. the ice cracked
 behind us and was driven with force towards the north; breeze sprang from
 the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
 free. when the sailors saw this and that their return to their native
 country was apparently assured, shout of tumultuous joy broke from them,
 loud and long-continued. frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
 cause of the tumult. “they shout,” i said, “because they
 will soon return to england.”
 
“do you, then, really return?”
 
“alas! yes; i cannot withstand their demands. i cannot lead them
 unwillingly to danger, and i must return.”
 
“do so, if you will; but i will not. you may give up your purpose, but
 mine is assigned to by heaven, and i dare not. i am weak, but
 surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow with
 sufficient strength.” saying this, endeavoured to spring from the
 bed, but the exertion was too great for him; fell back and fainted.
 
it was long before was restored, and i often thought that life was
 entirely extinct. at length opened his eyes; breathed with
 difficulty and was unable to speak. the surgeon gave him composing
 draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. in the meantime he
 told that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.
 
his sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient. i sat
 by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and i thought slept; but
 presently called to in feeble voice, and bidding come near,
 said, “alas! the strength i relied on is gone; i feel that i shall
 soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. think
 not, walton, that in the last moments of my existence i feel that burning
 hatred and ardent desire of revenge i once expressed; but i feel myself
 justified in desiring the death of my adversary. during these last days i
 have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do i find it blamable.
 in fit of enthusiastic madness i created rational creature and was
 bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and
 well-being. this was my duty, but there was another still paramount to
 that. my duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to
 my attention because they included greater proportion of happiness or
 misery. urged by this view, i refused, and i did right in refusing, to
 create companion for the first creature. showed unparalleled malignity
 and selfishness in evil; destroyed my friends; devoted to destruction
 beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do i
 know where this thirst for vengeance may end. miserable himself that may
 render other wretched, ought to die. the task of his destruction was
 mine, but i have failed. when actuated by selfish and vicious motives, i
 asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and i renew this request now,
 when i am only induced by reason and virtue.
 
“yet i cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil
 this task; and now that you are returning to england, you will have
 little chance of meeting with him. but the consideration of these
 points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, i
 leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
 approach of death. i dare not ask you to do what i think right, for i
 may still be misled by passion.
 
“that should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
 other respects, this hour, when i momentarily expect my release, is the
 only happy one which i have enjoyed for several years. the forms of
 the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms. farewell,
 walton! seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
 be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
 science and discoveries. yet why do i say this? i have myself been
 blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.”
 
his voice became fainter as spoke, and at length, exhausted by his
 effort, sank into silence. about half an hour afterwards he
 attempted again to speak but was unable; pressed my hand feebly, and
 his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of gentle smile passed
 away from his lips.
 
margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this
 glorious spirit? what can i say that will enable you to understand the
 depth of my sorrow? all that i should express would be inadequate and
 feeble. my tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by cloud of
 disappointment. but i journey towards england, and i may there find
 consolation.
 
i am interrupted. what do these sounds portend? it is midnight; the
 breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. again there
 is sound as of human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
 where the remains of frankenstein still lie. i must arise and examine.
 good night, my sister.
 
great god! what scene has just taken place! i am yet dizzy with the
 remembrance of it. i hardly know whether i shall have the power to detail
 it; yet the tale which i have recorded would be incomplete without this
 final and wonderful catastrophe.
 
i entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
 friend. over him hung form which i cannot find words to
 describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
 proportions. as hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long
 locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
 apparent texture like that of mummy. when heard the sound of my
 approach, ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung
 towards the window. never did i behold vision so horrible as his face, of
 such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. i shut my eyes involuntarily and
 endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
 i called on him to stay.
 
paused, looking on with wonder, and again turning towards the
 lifeless form of his creator, seemed to forget my presence, and
 every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
 uncontrollable passion.
 
“that is also my victim!” exclaimed. “in his murder my
 crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
 close! oh, frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does it
 avail that i now ask thee to pardon me? i, who irretrievably destroyed thee
 by destroying all thou lovedst. alas! is cold, cannot answer
 me.”
 
his voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to
 the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his
 enemy, were now suspended by mixture of curiosity and compassion. i
 approached this tremendous being; i dared not again raise my eyes to his
 face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. i
 attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. the monster
 continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. at length i
 gathered resolution to address him in pause of the tempest of his passion.
 
“your repentance,” i said, “is now superfluous. if you
 had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse
 before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity,
 frankenstein would yet have lived.”
 
“and do you dream?” said the dæmon. “do you think that i was then
 dead to agony and remorse? he,” continued, pointing to the corpse,
 “he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. oh! not the
 ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
 lingering detail of its execution. frightful selfishness hurried me
 on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. think you that the
 groans of clerval were music to my ears? my heart was fashioned to be
 susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
 and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without
 torture such as you cannot even imagine.
 
“after the murder of clerval i returned to switzerland, heart-broken
 and overcome. i pitied frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; i
 abhorred myself. but when i discovered that he, the author at once of
 my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
 happiness, that while accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
 sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
 indulgence of which i was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter
 indignation filled with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. i
 recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. i
 knew that i was preparing for myself deadly torture, but i was the
 slave, not the master, of an impulse which i detested yet could not
 disobey. yet when she died! nay, then i was not miserable. i had
 cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my
 despair. evil thenceforth became my good. urged thus far, i had no
 choice but to adapt my nature to an element which i had willingly
 chosen. the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable
 passion. and now it is ended; there is my last victim!”
 
i was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when i called
 to mind what frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and
 persuasion, and when i again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
 friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “wretch!” i said.
 “it is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
 have made. you throw torch into pile of buildings, and when they are
 consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. hypocritical fiend!
 if whom you mourn still lived, still would be the object, again would
 become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. it is not pity that you
 feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
 from your power.”
 
“oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being.
 “yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to
 be the purport of my actions. yet i seek not fellow feeling in my misery.
 sympathy may i ever find. when i first sought it, it was the love of
 virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
 overflowed, that i wished to be participated. but now that virtue has
 become to shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
 bitter and loathing despair, in what should i seek for sympathy? i am
 content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when i die, i am
 well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. once
 my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. once
 i falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would
 love for the excellent qualities which i was capable of unfolding. i was
 nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. but now crime has
 degraded beneath the meanest animal. guilt, mischief, no
 malignity, misery, can be found comparable to mine. when i run over the
 frightful catalogue of my sins, i cannot believe that i am the same
 creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
 visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. but it is even so; the
 fallen angel becomes malignant devil. yet even that enemy of god and man
 had friends and associates in his desolation; i am alone.
 
“you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have knowledge of my
 crimes and his misfortunes. but in the detail which gave you of them
 could not sum up the hours and months of misery which i endured
 wasting in impotent passions. for while i destroyed his hopes, i did
 not satisfy my own desires. they were for ever ardent and craving; still
 i desired love and fellowship, and i was still spurned. was there no
 injustice in this? am i to be thought the only criminal, when all
 humankind sinned against me? why do you not hate felix, who drove his
 friend from his door with contumely? why do you not execrate the rustic
 who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? nay, these are virtuous
 and immaculate beings! i, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
 abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. even now my
 blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.
 
“but it is true that i am wretch. i have murdered the lovely and
 the helpless; i have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to
 death his throat who never injured or any other living thing. i have
 devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and
 admiration among men, to misery; i have pursued him even to that
 irremediable ruin. there lies, white and cold in death. you hate me, but
 your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself. i look on the
 hands which executed the deed; i think on the heart in which the
 imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
 will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts more.
 
“fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief. my work
 is nearly complete. neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
 consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done,
 but it requires my own. do not think that i shall be slow to perform this
 sacrifice. i shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
 thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; i shall
 collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its
 remains may afford light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would
 create such another as i have been. i shall die. i shall longer feel the
 agonies which now consume or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet
 unquenched. is dead who called into being; and when i shall be no
 more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. i shall no
 longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. light,
 feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must i find my
 happiness. some years ago, when the images which this world affords first
 opened upon me, when i felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the
 rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to
 me, i should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. polluted by
 crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can i find rest but in
 death?
 
“farewell! i leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these
 eyes will ever behold. farewell, frankenstein! if thou wert yet alive
 and yet cherished desire of revenge against me, it would be better
 satiated in my life than in my destruction. but it was not so; thou
 didst seek my extinction, that i might not cause greater wretchedness;
 and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
 and feel, thou wouldst not desire against vengeance greater than
 that which i feel. blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to
 thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my
 wounds until death shall close them for ever.
 
“but soon,” cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “i
 shall die, and what i now feel be longer felt. soon these burning
 miseries will be extinct. i shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and
 exult in the agony of the torturing flames. the light of that conflagration
 will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the by the winds. my spirit
 will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
 farewell.”
 
sprang from the cabin-window as said this, upon the ice raft
 which lay close to the vessel. was soon borne away by the waves and
 lost in darkness and distance.
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 
the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
 
author: mary wollstonecraft shelley
 
release date: october 1, 1993 [ebook #84]
 most recently updated: december 2, 2022
 
language: english
 
credits: judith boss, christy phillips, lynn hanninen and david meltzer. html version by haines.
 further corrections by menno leeuw.
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***
 



frankenstein;
 
or, the modern prometheus
 
by mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley
 

contents
 
letter 1
 letter 2
 letter 3
 letter 4
 chapter 1
 chapter 2
 chapter 3
 chapter 4
 chapter 5
 chapter 6
 chapter 7
 chapter 8
 chapter 9
 chapter 10
 chapter 11
 chapter 12
 chapter 13
 chapter 14
 chapter 15
 chapter 16
 chapter 17
 chapter 18
 chapter 19
 chapter 20
 chapter 21
 chapter 22
 chapter 23
 chapter 24
 



letter 1
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 

st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17—.
 

you will rejoice to hear that disaster has accompanied the
 commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
 forebodings. i arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure
 my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success
 of my undertaking.
 
i am already far north of london, and as i walk in the streets of
 petersburgh, i feel cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
 braces my nerves and fills with delight. do you understand this
 feeling? this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards
 which i am advancing, gives foretaste of those icy climes.
 inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent
 and vivid. i try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of
 frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the
 region of beauty and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever
 visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a
 perpetual splendour. there—for with your leave, my sister, i will put
 some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished;
 and, sailing over calm sea, we may be wafted to land surpassing in
 wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable
 globe. its productions and features may be without example, as the
 phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
 solitudes. what may not be expected in country of eternal light? i
 may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may
 regulate thousand celestial observations that require only this
 voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. i
 shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of part of the world
 never before visited, and may tread land never before imprinted by
 the foot of man. these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to
 conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce to commence this
 laborious voyage with the joy child feels when embarks in little
 boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his
 native river. but supposing all these conjectures to be false, you
 cannot contest the inestimable benefit which i shall confer on all
 mankind, to the last generation, by discovering passage near the pole
 to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
 requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
 all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.
 
these reflections have dispelled the agitation with which i began my
 letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me
 to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as
 steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual
 eye. this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. i
 have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have
 been made in the prospect of arriving at the north pacific ocean
 through the seas which surround the pole. you may remember that a
 history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the
 whole of our good uncle thomas’ library. my education was neglected,
 yet i was passionately fond of reading. these volumes were my study
 day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which
 i had felt, as child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction
 had forbidden my uncle to allow to embark in seafaring life.
 
these visions faded when i perused, for the first time, those poets
 whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. i also
 became poet and for one year lived in paradise of my own creation;
 i imagined that i also might obtain niche in the temple where the
 names of homer and shakespeare are consecrated. you are well
 acquainted with my failure and how heavily i bore the disappointment.
 but just at that time i inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
 thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
 
six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking. i
 can, even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this
 great enterprise. i commenced by inuring my body to hardship. i
 accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the north sea;
 i voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often
 worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my
 nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those
 branches of physical science from which naval adventurer might derive
 the greatest practical advantage. twice i actually hired myself as an
 under-mate in greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. i
 must own i felt little proud when my captain offered the second
 dignity in the vessel and entreated to remain with the greatest
 earnestness, so valuable did consider my services.
 
and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
 my life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but i preferred glory to
 every enticement that wealth placed in my path. oh, that some encouraging
 voice would answer in the affirmative! my courage and my resolution is
 firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. i am
 about to proceed on long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which
 will demand all my fortitude: i am required not only to raise the spirits
 of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.
 
this is the most favourable period for travelling in russia. they fly
 quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
 my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stagecoach. the
 cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which i have
 already adopted, for there is great difference between walking the
 deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when exercise
 prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. i have no
 ambition to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and
 archangel.
 
i shall depart for the latter town in fortnight or three weeks; and my
 intention is to hire ship there, which can easily be done by paying the
 insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as i think necessary
 among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. i do not intend to
 sail until the month of june; and when shall i return? ah, dear sister, how
 can i answer this question? if i succeed, many, many months, perhaps years,
 will pass before you and i may meet. if i fail, you will see again soon,
 or never.
 
farewell, my dear, excellent margaret. heaven shower down blessings on you,
 and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for all your
 love and kindness.
 
your affectionate brother,
 
r. walton
 



letter 2
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 
archangel, 28th march, 17—.
 

how slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow!
 yet second step is taken towards my enterprise. i have hired a
 vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom i have
 already engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend and are certainly
 possessed of dauntless courage.
 
but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy, and the
 absence of the object of which i now feel as most severe evil, i have no
 friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there
 will be none to participate my joy; if i am assailed by disappointment, no
 one will endeavour to sustain in dejection. i shall commit my thoughts
 to paper, it is true; but that is poor medium for the communication of
 feeling. i desire the company of man who could sympathise with me, whose
 eyes would reply to mine. you may deem romantic, my dear sister, but i
 bitterly feel the want of friend. i have one near me, gentle yet
 courageous, possessed of cultivated as well as of capacious mind, whose
 tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. how would such a
 friend repair the faults of your poor brother! i am too ardent in execution
 and too impatient of difficulties. but it is still greater evil to me
 that i am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild
 on common and read nothing but our uncle thomas’ books of voyages.
 at that age i became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
 country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its
 most important benefits from such conviction that i perceived the
 necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
 country. now i am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
 schoolboys of fifteen. it is true that i have thought more and that my
 daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters
 call it) _keeping;_ and i greatly need friend who would have sense
 enough not to despise as romantic, and affection enough for to
 endeavour to regulate my mind.
 
well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find friend on the
 wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchants and seamen. yet
 some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these
 rugged bosoms. my lieutenant, for instance, is man of wonderful courage
 and enterprise; is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
 more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. is an
 englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
 unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
 humanity. i first became acquainted with him on board whale vessel;
 finding that was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to assist
 in my enterprise.
 
the master is person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the
 ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. this
 circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made
 very desirous to engage him. youth passed in solitude, my best years
 spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the
 groundwork of my character that i cannot overcome an intense distaste to
 the usual brutality exercised on board ship: i have never believed it to be
 necessary, and when i heard of mariner equally noted for his kindliness
 of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, i felt
 myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. i heard
 of him first in rather romantic manner, from lady who owes to him the
 happiness of her life. this, briefly, is his story. some years ago loved
 young russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed considerable
 sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. saw
 his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in
 tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her,
 confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that was poor,
 and that her father would never consent to the union. my generous friend
 reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover,
 instantly abandoned his pursuit. had already bought farm with his
 money, on which had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he
 bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his
 prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young
 woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. but the old
 man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who,
 when found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned
 until heard that his former mistress was married according to her
 inclinations. “what noble fellow!” you will exclaim. is
 so; but then is wholly uneducated: is as silent as turk, and kind
 of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
 the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
 otherwise would command.
 
yet do not suppose, because i complain little or because i can
 conceive consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am
 wavering in my resolutions. those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage
 is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the
 winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it
 is considered as remarkably early season, so that perhaps i may sail
 sooner than i expected. i shall do nothing rashly: you know me
 sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
 safety of others is committed to my care.
 
i cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
 undertaking. it is impossible to communicate to you conception of
 the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which
 i am preparing to depart. i am going to unexplored regions, to “the
 land of mist and snow,” but i shall kill albatross; therefore do not
 be alarmed for my safety or if i should come back to you as worn and
 woeful as the “ancient mariner.” you will smile at my allusion, but i
 will disclose secret. i have often attributed my attachment to, my
 passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that
 production of the most imaginative of modern poets. there is something
 at work in my soul which i do not understand. i am practically
 industrious—painstaking, workman to execute with perseverance and
 labour—but besides this there is love for the marvellous, belief
 in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries out
 of the common pathways of men, even to the wild and unvisited
 regions i am about to explore.
 
but to return to dearer considerations. shall i meet you again, after
 having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of
 africa or america? i dare not expect such success, yet i cannot bear to
 look on the reverse of the picture. continue for the present to write to
 by every opportunity: i may receive your letters on some occasions when
 i need them most to support my spirits. i love you very tenderly. 
remember with affection, should you never hear from again.
 
your affectionate brother,
 robert walton
 



letter 3
 
_to mrs. saville, england._
 
july 7th, 17—.
 

my dear sister,
 
i write few lines in haste to say that i am safe—and well advanced
 on my voyage. this letter will reach england by merchantman now on
 its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not
 see my native land, perhaps, for many years. i am, however, in good
 spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the
 floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
 of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. we
 have already reached very high latitude; but it is the height of
 summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales,
 which blow us speedily towards those shores which i so ardently desire
 to attain, breathe degree of renovating warmth which i had not
 expected.
 
incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make figure in a
 letter. one or two stiff gales and the springing of leak are
 accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and
 i shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.
 
adieu, my dear margaret. be assured that for my own sake, as well as
 yours, i will not rashly encounter danger. i will be cool,
 persevering, and prudent.
 
but success _shall_ crown my endeavours. wherefore not? thus far i
 have gone, tracing secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars
 themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. why not
 still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? what can stop the
 determined heart and resolved will of man?
 
my swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. but i must
 finish. heaven bless my beloved sister!
 
r.w.
 



letter 4
 

_to mrs. saville, england._
 
august 5th, 17—.
 
so strange an accident has happened to us that i cannot forbear
 recording it, although it is very probable that you will see before
 these papers can come into your possession.
 
last monday (july 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
 in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which
 she floated. our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we
 were compassed round by very thick fog. we accordingly lay to,
 hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
 
about two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out
 in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to
 have end. some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to
 grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when strange sight suddenly
 attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own
 situation. we perceived low carriage, fixed on sledge and drawn by
 dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half mile; a
 being which had the shape of man, but apparently of gigantic stature,
 sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. we watched the rapid progress
 of the traveller with our telescopes until was lost among the
 distant inequalities of the ice.
 
this appearance excited our unqualified wonder. we were, as we believed,
 many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that
 it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in, however, by
 ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the
 greatest attention.
 
about two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before
 night the ice broke and freed our ship. we, however, lay to until the
 morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which
 float about after the breaking up of the ice. i profited of this time to
 rest for few hours.
 
in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck and
 found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently
 talking to someone in the sea. it was, in fact, sledge, like that we
 had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on large
 fragment of ice. only one dog remained alive; but there was human
 being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
 was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, savage inhabitant of
 some undiscovered island, but european. when i appeared on deck the
 master said, “here is our captain, and will not allow you to perish
 on the open sea.”
 
on perceiving me, the stranger addressed in english, although with a
 foreign accent. “before i come on board your vessel,” said he,
 “will you have the kindness to inform whither you are bound?”
 
you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such question addressed
 to from man on the brink of destruction and to whom i should have
 supposed that my vessel would have been resource which would not
 have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. i
 replied, however, that we were on voyage of discovery towards the
 northern pole.
 
upon hearing this appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
 good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for
 his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. his limbs were
 nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and
 suffering. i never saw man in so wretched condition. we attempted
 to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as had quitted the fresh
 air fainted. we accordingly brought him back to the deck and
 restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to
 swallow small quantity. as soon as showed signs of life we
 wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the
 kitchen stove. by slow degrees recovered and ate little soup,
 which restored him wonderfully.
 
two days passed in this manner before was able to speak, and i often
 feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. when he
 had in some measure recovered, i removed him to my own cabin and
 attended on him as much as my duty would permit. i never saw more
 interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of
 wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone
 performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most
 trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with
 beam of benevolence and sweetness that i never saw equalled. but he
 is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes gnashes his
 teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.
 
when my guest was little recovered i had great trouble to keep off
 the men, who wished to ask him thousand questions; but i would not
 allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in state of body
 and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
 once, however, the lieutenant asked why had come so far upon the ice
 in so strange vehicle.
 
his countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and
 replied, “to seek one who fled from me.”
 
“and did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then i fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we
 saw some dogs drawing sledge, with man in it, across the ice.”
 
this aroused the stranger’s attention, and asked multitude of
 questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as called him, had
 pursued. soon after, when was alone with me, said, “i have,
 doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good
 people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.”
 
“certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in to
 trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”
 
“and yet you rescued from strange and perilous situation; you have
 benevolently restored to life.”
 
soon after this inquired if i thought that the breaking up of the
 ice had destroyed the other sledge. i replied that i could not answer
 with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near
 midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at place of safety
 before that time; but of this i could not judge.
 
from this time new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the
 stranger. manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for
 the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuaded him to remain in
 the cabin, for is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
 i have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant
 notice if any new object should appear in sight.
 
such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the
 present day. the stranger has gradually improved in health but is very
 silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
 yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all
 interested in him, although they have had very little communication
 with him. for my own part, i begin to love him as brother, and his
 constant and deep grief fills with sympathy and compassion. must
 have been noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck
 so attractive and amiable.
 
i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find friend
 on the wide ocean; yet i have found man who, before his spirit had been
 broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as the brother
 of my heart.
 
i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals,
 should i have any fresh incidents to record.
 



august 13th, 17—.
 

my affection for my guest increases every day. excites at once my
 admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. how can i see so
 noble creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant
 grief? is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and
 when speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art,
 yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
 
is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck,
 apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. yet, although
 unhappy, is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he
 interests himself deeply in the projects of others. has frequently
 conversed with on mine, which i have communicated to him without
 disguise. entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my
 eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures i had taken
 to secure it. i was easily led by the sympathy which evinced to use the
 language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul
 and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly i would
 sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my
 enterprise. one man’s life or death were but small price to pay for
 the acquirement of the knowledge which i sought, for the dominion i should
 acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. as i spoke, a
 dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. at first i
 perceived that tried to suppress his emotion; placed his hands before
 his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed as i beheld tears trickle
 fast from between his fingers; groan burst from his heaving breast. i
 paused; at length spoke, in broken accents: “unhappy man! do you
 share my madness? have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? hear me;
 let reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”
 
such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the
 paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened
 powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were
 necessary to restore his composure.
 
having conquered the violence of his feelings, appeared to despise
 himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of
 despair, led again to converse concerning myself personally. asked
 the history of my earlier years. the tale was quickly told, but it
 awakened various trains of reflection. i spoke of my desire of finding a
 friend, of my thirst for more intimate sympathy with fellow mind than
 had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that man could
 boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
 
“i agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are
 unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
 ourselves—such friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
 perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. i once had friend, the most
 noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting
 friendship. you have hope, and the world before you, and have cause for
 despair. but i—i have lost everything and cannot begin life
 anew.”
 
as said this his countenance became expressive of calm, settled
 grief that touched to the heart. but was silent and presently
 retired to his cabin.
 
even broken in spirit as is, one can feel more deeply than he
 does the beauties of nature. the starry sky, the sea, and every sight
 afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of
 elevating his soul from earth. such man has double existence: he
 may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he
 has retired into himself, will be like celestial spirit that has a
 halo around him, within whose circle grief or folly ventures.
 
will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine
 wanderer? you would not if you saw him. you have been tutored and
 refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore
 somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to
 appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. sometimes i
 have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which possesses that
 elevates him so immeasurably above any other person i ever knew. i
 believe it to be an intuitive discernment, quick but never-failing
 power of judgment, penetration into the causes of things, unequalled
 for clearness and precision; add to this facility of expression and a
 voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.
 



august 19th, 17—.
 

yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easily perceive, captain
 walton, that i have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. i had
 determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with
 me, but you have won to alter my determination. you seek for
 knowledge and wisdom, as i once did; and i ardently hope that the
 gratification of your wishes may not be serpent to sting you, as mine
 has been. i do not know that the relation of my disasters will be
 useful to you; yet, when i reflect that you are pursuing the same
 course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me
 what i am, i imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one
 that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you
 in case of failure. prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually
 deemed marvellous. were we among the tamer scenes of nature i might
 fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things
 will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would
 provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers
 of nature; nor can i doubt but that my tale conveys in its series
 internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”
 
you may easily imagine that i was much gratified by the offered
 communication, yet i could not endure that should renew his grief by
 recital of his misfortunes. i felt the greatest eagerness to hear
 the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from strong
 desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. i expressed
 these feelings in my answer.
 
“i thank you,” replied, “for your sympathy, but it is
 useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. i wait but for one event, and then i
 shall repose in peace. i understand your feeling,” continued he,
 perceiving that i wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my
 friend, if thus you will allow to name you; nothing can alter my
 destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is
 determined.”
 
then told that would commence his narrative the next day when i
 should be at leisure. this promise drew from the warmest thanks. i have
 resolved every night, when i am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to
 record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what has related during
 the day. if i should be engaged, i will at least make notes. this
 manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who
 know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and
 sympathy shall i read it in some future day! even now, as i commence my
 task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me
 with all their melancholy sweetness; i see his thin hand raised in
 animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul
 within. strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which
 embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!
 



chapter 1
 

i am by birth genevese, and my family is one of the most
 distinguished of that republic. my ancestors had been for many years
 counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public
 situations with honour and reputation. was respected by all who
 knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public
 business. passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the
 affairs of his country; variety of circumstances had prevented his
 marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that became a
 husband and the father of family.
 
as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot
 refrain from relating them. one of his most intimate friends was a
 merchant who, from flourishing state, fell, through numerous
 mischances, into poverty. this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a
 proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty
 and oblivion in the same country where had formerly been
 distinguished for his rank and magnificence. having paid his debts,
 therefore, in the most honourable manner, retreated with his
 daughter to the town of lucerne, where lived unknown and in
 wretchedness. my father loved beaufort with the truest friendship and
 was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
 bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to conduct
 so little worthy of the affection that united them. lost time in
 endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin
 the world again through his credit and assistance.
 
beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten
 months before my father discovered his abode. overjoyed at this discovery,
 hastened to the house, which was situated in mean street near the
 reuss. but when entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. beaufort
 had saved but very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but
 it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in
 the meantime hoped to procure some respectable employment in a
 merchant’s house. the interval was, consequently, spent in inaction;
 his grief only became more deep and rankling when had leisure for
 reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end
 of three months lay on bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
 
his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw
 with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that
 there was other prospect of support. but caroline beaufort
 possessed mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support
 her in her adversity. she procured plain work; she plaited straw and
 by various means contrived to earn pittance scarcely sufficient to
 support life.
 
several months passed in this manner. her father grew worse; her time
 was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
 decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
 her an orphan and beggar. this last blow overcame her, and she knelt
 by beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
 chamber. came like protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
 committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he
 conducted her to geneva and placed her under the protection of a
 relation. two years after this event caroline became his wife.
 
there was considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but
 this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted
 affection. there was sense of justice in my father’s upright mind
 which rendered it necessary that should approve highly to love
 strongly. perhaps during former years had suffered from the
 late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set
 greater value on tried worth. there was show of gratitude and
 worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the
 doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her
 virtues and desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing
 her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace
 to his behaviour to her. everything was made to yield to her wishes
 and her convenience. strove to shelter her, as fair exotic is
 sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her
 with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and
 benevolent mind. her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto
 constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. during
 the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had
 gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after
 their union they sought the pleasant climate of italy, and the change
 of scene and interest attendant on tour through that land of wonders,
 as restorative for her weakened frame.
 
from italy they visited germany and france. i, their eldest child, was born
 at naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. i remained
 for several years their only child. much as they were attached to each
 other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from very
 mine of love to bestow them upon me. my mother’s tender caresses and
 my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding are my
 first recollections. i was their plaything and their idol, and something
 better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on
 them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in
 their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled
 their duties towards me. with this deep consciousness of what they owed
 towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit
 of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during
 every hour of my infant life i received lesson of patience, of charity,
 and of self-control, i was so guided by silken cord that all seemed but
 one train of enjoyment to me.
 
for long time i was their only care. my mother had much desired to have a
 daughter, but i continued their single offspring. when i was about five
 years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of italy, they
 passed week on the shores of the lake of como. their benevolent
 disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. this, to my
 mother, was more than duty; it was necessity, a
 passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been
 relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the
 afflicted. during one of their walks poor cot in the foldings of vale
 attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number
 of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst
 shape. one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother,
 accompanied by me, visited this abode. she found peasant and his wife,
 hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing scanty meal to
 five hungry babes. among these there was one which attracted my mother far
 above all the rest. she appeared of different stock. the four others were
 dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. her
 hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her
 clothing, seemed to set crown of distinction on her head. her brow was
 clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of
 her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold
 her without looking on her as of distinct species, being heaven-sent,
 and bearing celestial stamp in all her features.
 
the peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and
 admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. she was
 not her child, but the daughter of milanese nobleman. her mother was a
 german and had died on giving her birth. the infant had been placed with
 these good people to nurse: they were better off then. they had not been
 long married, and their eldest child was but just born. the father of their
 charge was one of those italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory
 of italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted
 himself to obtain the liberty of his country. became the victim of its
 weakness. whether had died or still lingered in the dungeons of austria
 was not known. his property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and
 beggar. she continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude
 abode, fairer than garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.
 
when my father returned from milan, found playing with in the hall of
 our villa child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed
 to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter
 than the chamois of the hills. the apparition was soon explained. with his
 permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their
 charge to her. they were fond of the sweet orphan. her presence had seemed
 blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty
 and want when providence afforded her such powerful protection. they
 consulted their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza
 became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than
 sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and
 my pleasures.
 
everyone loved elizabeth. the passionate and almost reverential
 attachment with which all regarded her became, while i shared it, my
 pride and my delight. on the evening previous to her being brought to
 my home, my mother had said playfully, “i have pretty present for my
 victor—tomorrow shall have it.” and when, on the morrow, she
 presented elizabeth to as her promised gift, i, with childish
 seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon elizabeth
 as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. all praises bestowed on
 her i received as made to possession of my own. we called each other
 familiarly by the name of cousin. word, expression could body
 forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than
 sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
 



chapter 2
 

we were brought up together; there was not quite year difference in
 our ages. i need not say that we were strangers to any species of
 disunion or dispute. harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
 the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
 nearer together. elizabeth was of calmer and more concentrated
 disposition; but, with all my ardour, i was capable of more intense
 application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
 she busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
 and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our swiss
 home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
 tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of
 our alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
 while my companion contemplated with serious and satisfied spirit the
 magnificent appearances of things, i delighted in investigating their
 causes. the world was to secret which i desired to divine.
 curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature,
 gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the
 earliest sensations i can remember.
 
on the birth of second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave
 up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native
 country. we possessed house in geneva, and _campagne_ on belrive,
 the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a
 league from the city. we resided principally in the latter, and the
 lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. it was my
 temper to avoid crowd and to attach myself fervently to few. i was
 indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but i united
 myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. henry
 clerval was the of merchant of geneva. was boy of singular
 talent and fancy. loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for
 its own sake. was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. he
 composed heroic songs and began to write many tale of enchantment and
 knightly adventure. tried to make us act plays and to enter into
 masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
 roncesvalles, of the round table of king arthur, and the chivalrous
 train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands
 of the infidels.
 
human being could have passed happier childhood than myself. my
 parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
 we felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to
 their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights
 which we enjoyed. when i mingled with other families i distinctly
 discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted
 the development of filial love.
 
my temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some
 law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits
 but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
 indiscriminately. i confess that neither the structure of languages,
 nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states
 possessed attractions for me. it was the secrets of heaven and earth
 that i desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
 things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
 that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical,
 or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
 
meanwhile clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
 relations of things. the busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
 and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
 to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the
 gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. the saintly soul
 of elizabeth shone like shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
 her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
 her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. she was
 the living spirit of love to soften and attract; i might have become
 sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that
 she was there to subdue to semblance of her own gentleness. and
 clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval? yet
 might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his
 generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for
 adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of
 beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring
 ambition.
 
i feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood,
 before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of
 extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. besides,
 in drawing the picture of my early days, i also record those events which
 led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when i would
 account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my
 destiny i find it arise, like mountain river, from ignoble and almost
 forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent
 which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
 
natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; i desire,
 therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
 predilection for that science. when i was thirteen years of age we all went
 on party of pleasure to the baths near thonon; the inclemency of the
 weather obliged us to remain day confined to the inn. in this house i
 chanced to find volume of the works of cornelius agrippa. i opened it
 with apathy; the theory which attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful
 facts which relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. new
 light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, i communicated my
 discovery to my father. my father looked carelessly at the title page of my
 book and said, “ah! cornelius agrippa! my dear victor, do not waste
 your time upon this; it is sad trash.”
 
if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me
 that the principles of agrippa had been entirely exploded and that modern
 system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers
 than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
 those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances i
 should certainly have thrown agrippa aside and have contented my
 imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my
 former studies. it is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
 have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. but the cursory glance
 my father had taken of my volume by means assured that was
 acquainted with its contents, and i continued to read with the greatest
 avidity.
 
when i returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this
 author, and afterwards of paracelsus and albertus magnus. i read and
 studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me
 treasures known to few besides myself. i have described myself as always
 having been imbued with fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of
 nature. in spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern
 philosophers, i always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
 sir isaac newton is said to have avowed that felt like child picking
 up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. those of his
 successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom i was acquainted
 appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same
 pursuit.
 
the untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted
 with their practical uses. the most learned philosopher knew little
 more. had partially unveiled the face of nature, but her immortal
 lineaments were still wonder and mystery. might dissect,
 anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of final cause, causes
 in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. i
 had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep
 human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and
 ignorantly i had repined.
 
but here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew
 more. i took their word for all that they averred, and i became their
 disciple. it may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth
 century; but while i followed the routine of education in the schools of
 geneva, i was, to great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite
 studies. my father was not scientific, and i was left to struggle with a
 child’s blindness, added to student’s thirst for knowledge.
 under the guidance of my new preceptors i entered with the greatest
 diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir
 of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. wealth was an
 inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if i could
 banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but
 violent death!
 
nor were these my only visions. the raising of ghosts or devils was a
 promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
 i most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, i
 attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
 want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. and thus for time i was
 occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, thousand
 contradictory theories and floundering desperately in very slough of
 multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish
 reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
 
when i was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near
 belrive, when we witnessed most violent and terrible thunderstorm. it
 advanced from behind the mountains of jura, and the thunder burst at once
 with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. i remained,
 while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
 as i stood at the door, on sudden i beheld stream of fire issue from an
 old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
 soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing
 remained but blasted stump. when we visited it the next morning, we found
 the tree shattered in singular manner. it was not splintered by the
 shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. i never beheld
 anything so utterly destroyed.
 
before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
 electricity. on this occasion man of great research in natural
 philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, entered on
 the explanation of theory which had formed on the subject of
 electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
 all that said threw greatly into the shade cornelius agrippa,
 albertus magnus, and paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
 some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined to pursue my
 accustomed studies. it seemed to as if nothing would or could ever
 be known. all that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
 despicable. by one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps
 most subject to in early youth, i at once gave up my former
 occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as deformed
 and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a
 would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of
 real knowledge. in this mood of mind i betook myself to the
 mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as
 being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
 
thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments
 are we bound to prosperity or ruin. when i look back, it seems to me
 as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the
 immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort
 made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even
 then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. her victory was
 announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which
 followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting
 studies. it was thus that i was to be taught to associate evil with
 their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
 
it was strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
 destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and
 terrible destruction.
 



chapter 3
 

when i had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that i
 should become student at the university of ingolstadt. i had
 hitherto attended the schools of geneva, but my father thought it
 necessary for the completion of my education that i should be made
 acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. my
 departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day
 resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
 occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
 
elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was
 in the greatest danger. during her illness many arguments had been urged to
 persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. she had at first
 yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her
 favourite was menaced, she could longer control her anxiety. she
 attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity
 of the distemper—elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this
 imprudence were fatal to her preserver. on the third day my mother
 sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the
 looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. on her
 deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert
 her. she joined the hands of elizabeth and myself. “my
 children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were
 placed on the prospect of your union. this expectation will now be the
 consolation of your father. elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to
 my younger children. alas! i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy
 and beloved as i have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are
 not thoughts befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to
 death and will indulge hope of meeting you in another world.”
 
she died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
 i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent
 by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the
 soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. it is so
 long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day
 and whose very existence appeared part of our own can have departed
 for ever—that the brightness of beloved eye can have been
 extinguished and the sound of voice so familiar and dear to the ear
 can be hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflections of
 the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the
 evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. yet from whom has
 not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? and why should i
 describe sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at
 length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than necessity; and
 the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a
 sacrilege, is not banished. my mother was dead, but we had still
 duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the
 rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the
 spoiler has not seized.
 
my departure for ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events,
 was now again determined upon. i obtained from my father respite of
 some weeks. it appeared to sacrilege so soon to leave the repose,
 akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of
 life. i was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. i was
 unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above
 all, i desired to see my sweet elizabeth in some degree consoled.
 
she indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
 she looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and
 zeal. she devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call
 her uncle and cousins. never was she so enchanting as at this time,
 when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
 she forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
 
the day of my departure at length arrived. clerval spent the last
 evening with us. had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit
 him to accompany and to become my fellow student, but in vain. his
 father was narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the
 aspirations and ambition of his son. henry deeply felt the misfortune
 of being debarred from liberal education. said little, but when
 spoke i read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a
 restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details
 of commerce.
 
we sat late. we could not tear ourselves away from each other nor
 persuade ourselves to say the word “farewell!” it was said, and we
 retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the
 other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn i descended to the
 carriage which was to convey away, they were all there—my father
 again to bless me, clerval to press my hand once more, my elizabeth to
 renew her entreaties that i would write often and to bestow the last
 feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.
 
i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey away and indulged in
 the most melancholy reflections. i, who had ever been surrounded by
 amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual
 pleasure—i was now alone. in the university whither i was going i
 must form my own friends and be my own protector. my life had hitherto
 been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given invincible
 repugnance to new countenances. i loved my brothers, elizabeth, and
 clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but i believed myself
 totally unfitted for the company of strangers. such were my reflections as
 i commenced my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. i
 ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. i had often, when at home,
 thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had
 longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to
 repent.
 
i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
 journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. at length the
 high white steeple of the town met my eyes. i alighted and was
 conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased.
 
the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction and paid visit to
 some of the principal professors. chance—or rather the evil
 influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me
 from the moment i turned my reluctant steps from my father’s
 door—led first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy. he
 was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. he
 asked several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
 of science appertaining to natural philosophy. i replied carelessly, and
 partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal
 authors i had studied. the professor stared. “have you,” he
 said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?”
 
i replied in the affirmative. “every minute,” continued m. krempe with
 warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
 and entirely lost. you have burdened your memory with exploded systems
 and useless names. good god! in what desert land have you lived,
 where one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you
 have so greedily imbibed are thousand years old and as musty as they
 are ancient? i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
 age, to find disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus. my dear
 sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”
 
so saying, stepped aside and wrote down list of several books
 treating of natural philosophy which desired to procure, and
 dismissed after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
 week intended to commence course of lectures upon natural
 philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, fellow
 professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
 omitted.
 
i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long
 considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i
 returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
 shape. m. krempe was little squat man with gruff voice and a
 repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess in
 favour of his pursuits. in rather too philosophical and connected a
 strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusions i had come
 to concerning them in my early years. as child i had not been
 content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural
 science. with confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my
 extreme youth and my want of guide on such matters, i had retrod the
 steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the
 discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
 besides, i had contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
 it was very different when the masters of the science sought
 immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now
 the scene was changed. the ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit
 itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in
 science was chiefly founded. i was required to exchange chimeras of
 boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
 
such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my
 residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
 acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new
 abode. but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information
 which m. krempe had given concerning the lectures. and although i
 could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
 sentences out of pulpit, i recollected what had said of m.
 waldman, whom i had never seen, as had hitherto been out of town.
 
partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the lecturing
 room, which m. waldman entered shortly after. this professor was very
 unlike his colleague. appeared about fifty years of age, but with an
 aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; few grey hairs covered his
 temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. his person
 was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest i had ever heard.
 began his lecture by recapitulation of the history of chemistry and
 the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
 with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. then took
 cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of
 its elementary terms. after having made few preparatory experiments, he
 concluded with panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i
 shall never forget:
 
“the ancient teachers of this science,” said he,
 “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. the modern masters
 promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that
 the elixir of life is chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem
 only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or
 crucible, have indeed performed miracles. they penetrate into the recesses
 of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. they ascend into the
 heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of
 the air we breathe. they have acquired new and almost unlimited powers;
 they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even
 mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”
 
such were the professor’s words—rather let say such the words of
 the fate—enounced to destroy me. as went on i felt as if my soul
 were grappling with palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were
 touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was
 sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception,
 one purpose. so much has been done, exclaimed the soul of
 frankenstein—more, far more, will i achieve; treading in the steps
 already marked, i will pioneer new way, explore unknown powers, and
 unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
 
i closed not my eyes that night. my internal being was in state of
 insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i
 had power to produce it. by degrees, after the morning’s dawn,
 sleep came. i awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as dream.
 there only remained resolution to return to my ancient studies and to
 devote myself to science for which i believed myself to possess a
 natural talent. on the same day i paid m. waldman visit. his
 manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
 for there was certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
 his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. i
 gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had
 given to his fellow professor. heard with attention the little
 narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius
 agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had
 exhibited. said that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal
 modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
 knowledge. they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
 and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a
 great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. the
 labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever
 fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” i
 listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption
 or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my
 prejudices against modern chemists; i expressed myself in measured
 terms, with the modesty and deference due from youth to his
 instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
 made ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
 labours. i requested his advice concerning the books i ought to
 procure.
 
“i am happy,” said m. waldman, “to have gained a
 disciple; and if your application equals your ability, i have doubt of
 your success. chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the
 greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that
 i have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not
 neglected the other branches of science. man would make but very sorry
 chemist if attended to that department of human knowledge alone. if your
 wish is to become really man of science and not merely petty
 experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of natural
 philosophy, including mathematics.”
 
then took into his laboratory and explained to the uses of his
 various machines, instructing as to what i ought to procure and
 promising the use of his own when i should have advanced far enough in
 the science not to derange their mechanism. also gave the list of
 books which i had requested, and i took my leave.
 
thus ended day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
 



chapter 4
 

from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
 most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
 i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
 which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. i attended the
 lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
 university, and i found even in m. krempe great deal of sound sense
 and real information, combined, it is true, with repulsive
 physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. in
 m. waldman i found true friend. his gentleness was never tinged by
 dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
 good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. in thousand ways
 smoothed for the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
 inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. my application was at
 first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as i proceeded and
 soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
 light of morning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory.
 
as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress
 was rapid. my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and
 my proficiency that of the masters. professor krempe often asked me,
 with sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman
 expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. two years
 passed in this manner, during which i paid visit to geneva, but was
 engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which i
 hoped to make. none but those who have experienced them can conceive
 of the enticements of science. in other studies you go as far as
 others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in
 scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
 mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must
 infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and i, who
 continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was
 solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two
 years i made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical
 instruments, which procured great esteem and admiration at the
 university. when i had arrived at this point and had become as well
 acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as
 depended on the lessons of any of the professors at ingolstadt, my
 residence there being longer conducive to my improvements, i thought
 of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident
 happened that protracted my stay.
 
one of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was
 the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with
 life. whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
 it was bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a
 mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
 acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our
 inquiries. i revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined
 thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of
 natural philosophy which relate to physiology. unless i had been
 animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this
 study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. to examine the
 causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. i became
 acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; i
 must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
 in my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my
 mind should be impressed with supernatural horrors. i do not ever
 remember to have trembled at tale of superstition or to have feared
 the apparition of spirit. darkness had effect upon my fancy, and
 churchyard was to merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of
 life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become
 food for the worm. now i was led to examine the cause and progress of
 this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and
 charnel-houses. my attention was fixed upon every object the most
 insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. i saw how the
 fine form of man was degraded and wasted; i beheld the corruption of
 death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i saw how the worm
 inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. i paused, examining and
 analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change
 from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
 darkness sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and
 wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the immensity
 of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprised that among so
 many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same
 science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a
 secret.
 
remember, i am not recording the vision of madman. the sun does not
 more certainly shine in the heavens than that which i now affirm is
 true. some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
 discovery were distinct and probable. after days and nights of
 incredible labour and fatigue, i succeeded in discovering the cause of
 generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestowing
 animation upon lifeless matter.
 
the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery
 soon gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in
 painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the
 most gratifying consummation of my toils. but this discovery was so
 great and overwhelming that all the steps by which i had been
 progressively led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result.
 what had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation
 of the world was now within my grasp. not that, like magic scene, it
 all opened upon at once: the information i had obtained was of a
 nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as i should point them
 towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
 accomplished. i was like the arabian who had been buried with the dead
 and found passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly
 ineffectual light.
 
i see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes
 express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
 which i am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end
 of my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that
 subject. i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was,
 to your destruction and infallible misery. learn from me, if not by my
 precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
 knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
 to be the world, than who aspires to become greater than his nature
 will allow.
 
when i found so astonishing power placed within my hands, i hesitated
 long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it.
 although i possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to
 prepare frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of
 fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained work of inconceivable
 difficulty and labour. i doubted at first whether i should attempt the
 creation of being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my
 imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit to
 doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful
 as man. the materials at present within my command hardly appeared
 adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but i doubted not that i should
 ultimately succeed. i prepared myself for multitude of reverses; my
 operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be
 imperfect, yet when i considered the improvement which every day takes
 place in science and mechanics, i was encouraged to hope my present
 attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. nor
 could i consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any
 argument of its impracticability. it was with these feelings that i
 began the creation of human being. as the minuteness of the parts
 formed great hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first
 intention, to make the being of gigantic stature, that is to say,
 about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. after having
 formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully
 collecting and arranging my materials, i began.
 
one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore onwards, like
 hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death
 appeared to ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and
 pour torrent of light into our dark world. new species would bless
 as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would
 owe their being to me. father could claim the gratitude of his
 child so completely as i should deserve theirs. pursuing these
 reflections, i thought that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless
 matter, i might in process of time (although i now found it impossible)
 renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
 
these thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking
 with unremitting ardour. my cheek had grown pale with study, and my
 person had become emaciated with confinement. sometimes, on the very
 brink of certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the
 next day or the next hour might realise. one secret which i alone
 possessed was the hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon
 gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless
 eagerness, i pursued nature to her hiding-places. who shall conceive
 the horrors of my secret toil as i dabbled among the unhallowed damps
 of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless
 clay? my limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but
 then resistless and almost frantic impulse urged forward; i seemed
 to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. it was
 indeed but passing trance, that only made feel with renewed
 acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, i had
 returned to my old habits. i collected bones from charnel-houses and
 disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human
 frame. in solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
 and separated from all the other apartments by gallery and staircase,
 i kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from
 their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. the
 dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials;
 and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation,
 whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, i
 brought my work near to conclusion.
 
the summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
 one pursuit. it was most beautiful season; never did the fields
 bestow more plentiful harvest or the vines yield more luxuriant
 vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. and the
 same feelings which made neglect the scenes around caused also
 to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom i had
 not seen for so long time. i knew my silence disquieted them, and i
 well remembered the words of my father: “i know that while you are
 pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall
 hear regularly from you. you must pardon if i regard any
 interruption in your correspondence as proof that your other duties
 are equally neglected.”
 
i knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but i could
 not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
 had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. i wished, as it
 were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection
 until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature,
 should be completed.
 
i then thought that my father would be unjust if ascribed my neglect
 to vice or faultiness on my part, but i am now convinced that was
 justified in conceiving that i should not be altogether free from
 blame. human being in perfection ought always to preserve calm and
 peaceful mind and never to allow passion or transitory desire to
 disturb his tranquillity. i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge
 is an exception to this rule. if the study to which you apply yourself
 has tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for
 those simple pleasures in which alloy can possibly mix, then that
 study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human
 mind. if this rule were always observed; if man allowed any pursuit
 whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
 affections, greece had not been enslaved, cæsar would have spared his
 country, america would have been discovered more gradually, and the
 empires of mexico and peru had not been destroyed.
 
but i forget that i am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
 tale, and your looks remind to proceed.
 
my father made reproach in his letters and only took notice of my
 silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
 winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but i did not
 watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always
 yielded supreme delight—so deeply was i engrossed in my
 occupation. the leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near
 to close, and now every day showed more plainly how well i had
 succeeded. but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appeared
 rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
 unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
 every night i was oppressed by slow fever, and i became nervous to most
 painful degree; the fall of leaf startled me, and i shunned my fellow
 creatures as if i had been guilty of crime. sometimes i grew alarmed at
 the wreck i perceived that i had become; the energy of my purpose alone
 sustained me: my labours would soon end, and i believed that exercise and
 amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and i promised myself
 both of these when my creation should be complete.
 



chapter 5
 

it was on dreary night of november that i beheld the accomplishment
 of my toils. with an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, i
 collected the instruments of life around me, that i might infuse a
 spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. it was
 already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the
 panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the
 half-extinguished light, i saw the dull yellow eye of the creature
 open; it breathed hard, and convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
 
how can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate
 the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavoured to
 form? his limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as
 beautiful. beautiful! great god! his yellow skin scarcely covered
 the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of lustrous
 black, and flowing; his teeth of pearly whiteness; but these
 luxuriances only formed more horrid contrast with his watery eyes,
 that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which
 they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.
 
the different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings
 of human nature. i had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
 purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. for this i had
 deprived myself of rest and health. i had desired it with an ardour
 that far exceeded moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty
 of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my
 heart. unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i
 rushed out of the room and continued long time traversing my
 bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. at length lassitude
 succeeded to the tumult i had before endured, and i threw myself on the
 bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek few moments of forgetfulness.
 but it was in vain; i slept, indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest
 dreams. i thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in
 the streets of ingolstadt. delighted and surprised, i embraced her,
 but as i imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with
 the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i
 held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; shroud enveloped her
 form, and i saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
 i started from my sleep with horror; cold dew covered my forehead, my
 teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and
 yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window
 shutters, i beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom i had
 created. held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
 may be called, were fixed on me. his jaws opened, and muttered some
 inarticulate sounds, while grin wrinkled his cheeks. might have
 spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to
 detain me, but i escaped and rushed downstairs. i took refuge in the
 courtyard belonging to the house which i inhabited, where i remained
 during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest
 agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if
 it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which i
 had so miserably given life.
 
oh! mortal could support the horror of that countenance. mummy
 again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. i
 had gazed on him while unfinished; was ugly then, but when those
 muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became thing
 such as even dante could not have conceived.
 
i passed the night wretchedly. sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
 hardly that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly
 sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. mingled with
 this horror, i felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had
 been my food and pleasant rest for so long space were now become a
 hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!
 
morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my
 sleepless and aching eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple
 and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. the porter opened the gates
 of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issued into
 the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the
 wretch whom i feared every turning of the street would present to my
 view. i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but
 felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured
 from black and comfortless sky.
 
i continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by
 bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. i
 traversed the streets without any clear conception of where i was or
 what i was doing. my heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and i
 hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
 
like one who, on lonely road,
 doth walk in fear and dread,
 and, having once turned round, walks on,
 and turns more his head;
 because knows frightful fiend
 doth close behind him tread.
 
[coleridge’s “ancient mariner.”]
 


continuing thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the various
 diligences and carriages usually stopped. here i paused, i knew not why;
 but i remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on coach that was coming
 towards from the other end of the street. as it drew nearer i observed
 that it was the swiss diligence; it stopped just where i was standing, and
 on the door being opened, i perceived henry clerval, who, on seeing me,
 instantly sprung out. “my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed he,
 “how glad i am to see you! how fortunate that you should be here at
 the very moment of my alighting!”
 
nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought back
 to my thoughts my father, elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear
 to my recollection. i grasped his hand, and in moment forgot my horror
 and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months,
 calm and serene joy. i welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial
 manner, and we walked towards my college. clerval continued talking for
 some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being
 permitted to come to ingolstadt. “you may easily believe,” said
 he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all
 necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping;
 and, indeed, i believe i left him incredulous to the last, for his constant
 answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the dutch
 schoolmaster in the vicar of wakefield: ‘i have ten thousand florins
 year without greek, i eat heartily without greek.’ but his
 affection for at length overcame his dislike of learning, and has
 permitted to undertake voyage of discovery to the land of
 knowledge.”
 
“it gives the greatest delight to see you; but tell how you left
 my father, brothers, and elizabeth.”
 
“very well, and very happy, only little uneasy that they hear from
 you so seldom. by the by, i mean to lecture you little upon their
 account myself. but, my dear frankenstein,” continued he, stopping
 short and gazing full in my face, “i did not before remark how very ill
 you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
 several nights.”
 
“you have guessed right; i have lately been so deeply engaged in one
 occupation that i have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see;
 but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
 end and that i am at length free.”
 
i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to
 allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. i walked with a
 quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. i then reflected, and
 the thought made shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my
 apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. i dreaded to
 behold this monster, but i feared still more that henry should see him.
 entreating him, therefore, to remain few minutes at the bottom of the
 stairs, i darted up towards my own room. my hand was already on the
 lock of the door before i recollected myself. i then paused, and a
 cold shivering came over me. i threw the door forcibly open, as
 children are accustomed to do when they expect spectre to stand in
 waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. i stepped
 fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed
 from its hideous guest. i could hardly believe that so great good
 fortune could have befallen me, but when i became assured that my enemy
 had indeed fled, i clapped my hands for joy and ran down to clerval.
 
we ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
 but i was unable to contain myself. it was not joy only that possessed
 me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
 beat rapidly. i was unable to remain for single instant in the same
 place; i jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
 clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival,
 but when observed more attentively, saw wildness in my eyes
 for which could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
 laughter frightened and astonished him.
 
“my dear victor,” cried he, “what, for god’s sake,
 is the matter? do not laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the
 cause of all this?”
 
“do not ask me,” cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i
 thought i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can
 tell. oh, save me! save me!” i imagined that the monster seized me;
 i struggled furiously and fell down in fit.
 
poor clerval! what must have been his feelings? meeting, which he
 anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. but i
 was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not
 recover my senses for long, long time.
 
this was the commencement of nervous fever which confined for
 several months. during all that time henry was my only nurse. i
 afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness
 for so long journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
 elizabeth, spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
 disorder. knew that i could not have more kind and attentive
 nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope felt of my recovery, he
 did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, performed the kindest
 action that could towards them.
 
but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and
 unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored to life.
 the form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was for ever
 before my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him. doubtless my
 words surprised henry; at first believed them to be the wanderings
 of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which i
 continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder
 indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
 
by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and
 grieved my friend, i recovered. i remember the first time i became
 capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, i
 perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young
 buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. it was
 divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my
 convalescence. i felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in
 my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in short time i became as
 cheerful as before i was attacked by the fatal passion.
 
“dearest clerval,” exclaimed i, “how kind, how very good
 you are to me. this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you
 promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. how shall i ever
 repay you? i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i
 have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.”
 
“you will repay entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get
 well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i
 may speak to you on one subject, may i not?”
 
i trembled. one subject! what could it be? could allude to an object on
 whom i dared not even think?
 
“compose yourself,” said clerval, who observed my change of
 colour, “i will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father
 and cousin would be very happy if they received letter from you in your
 own handwriting. they hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at
 your long silence.”
 
“is that all, my dear henry? how could you suppose that my first
 thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love and
 who are so deserving of my love?”
 
“if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad
 to see letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from
 your cousin, i believe.”
 



chapter 6
 

clerval then put the following letter into my hands. it was from my
 own elizabeth:
 
“my dearest cousin,
 
“you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear
 kind henry are not sufficient to reassure on your account. you are
 forbidden to write—to hold pen; yet one word from you, dear victor,
 is necessary to calm our apprehensions. for long time i have thought
 that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have
 restrained my uncle from undertaking journey to ingolstadt. i have
 prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so
 long journey, yet how often have i regretted not being able to
 perform it myself! i figure to myself that the task of attending on
 your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never
 guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of
 your poor cousin. yet that is over now: clerval writes that indeed
 you are getting better. i eagerly hope that you will confirm this
 intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
 
“get well—and return to us. you will find happy, cheerful home and
 friends who love you dearly. your father’s health is vigorous, and he
 asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a
 care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. how pleased you would
 be to remark the improvement of our ernest! is now sixteen and full
 of activity and spirit. is desirous to be true swiss and to enter
 into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his
 elder brother returns to us. my uncle is not pleased with the idea of
 military career in distant country, but ernest never had your
 powers of application. looks upon study as an odious fetter; his
 time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the
 lake. i fear that will become an idler unless we yield the point
 and permit him to enter on the profession which has selected.
 
“little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken
 place since you left us. the blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they
 never change; and i think our placid home and our contented hearts are
 regulated by the same immutable laws. my trifling occupations take up
 my time and amuse me, and i am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
 none but happy, kind faces around me. since you left us, but one
 change has taken place in our little household. do you remember on
 what occasion justine moritz entered our family? probably you do not;
 i will relate her history, therefore in few words. madame moritz,
 her mother, was widow with four children, of whom justine was the
 third. this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but
 through strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and
 after the death of m. moritz, treated her very ill. my aunt observed
 this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother
 to allow her to live at our house. the republican institutions of our
 country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which
 prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. hence there is less
 distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the
 lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are
 more refined and moral. servant in geneva does not mean the same
 thing as servant in france and england. justine, thus received in
 our family, learned the duties of servant, condition which, in our
 fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a
 sacrifice of the dignity of human being.
 
“justine, you may remember, was great favourite of yours; and i
 recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one
 glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that
 ariosto gives concerning the beauty of angelica—she looked so
 frank-hearted and happy. my aunt conceived great attachment for her,
 by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that
 which she had at first intended. this benefit was fully repaid;
 justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: i do not
 mean that she made any professions i never heard one pass her lips, but
 you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
 although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate,
 yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. she
 thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her
 phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds of her.
 
“when my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own
 grief to notice poor justine, who had attended her during her illness
 with the most anxious affection. poor justine was very ill; but other
 trials were reserved for her.
 
“one by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
 exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. the
 conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the
 deaths of her favourites was judgement from heaven to chastise her
 partiality. she was roman catholic; and i believe her confessor
 confirmed the idea which she had conceived. accordingly, few months
 after your departure for ingolstadt, justine was called home by her
 repentant mother. poor girl! she wept when she quitted our house; she
 was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness
 and winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable
 for vivacity. nor was her residence at her mother’s house of nature
 to restore her gaiety. the poor woman was very vacillating in her
 repentance. she sometimes begged justine to forgive her unkindness,
 but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her
 brothers and sister. perpetual fretting at length threw madame moritz
 into decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is
 now at peace for ever. she died on the first approach of cold weather,
 at the beginning of this last winter. justine has just returned to us;
 and i assure you i love her tenderly. she is very clever and gentle,
 and extremely pretty; as i mentioned before, her mien and her
 expression continually remind of my dear aunt.
 
“i must say also few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
 william. i wish you could see him; is very tall of his age, with
 sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. when he
 smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
 health. has already had one or two little _wives,_ but louisa biron
 is his favourite, pretty little girl of five years of age.
 
“now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulged in little
 gossip concerning the good people of geneva. the pretty miss mansfield
 has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching
 marriage with young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugly
 sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your
 favourite schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffered several misfortunes
 since the departure of clerval from geneva. but has already
 recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a
 lively pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier. she is widow, and much
 older than manoir; but she is very much admired, and favourite with
 everybody.
 
“i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety
 returns upon as i conclude. write, dearest victor,—one line—one
 word will be blessing to us. ten thousand thanks to henry for his
 kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely
 grateful. adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, i entreat
 you, write!
 
“elizabeth lavenza.
 

“geneva, march 18th, 17—.”
 


“dear, dear elizabeth!” i exclaimed, when i had read her
 letter: “i will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety
 they must feel.” i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but
 my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. in another
 fortnight i was able to leave my chamber.
 
one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the
 several professors of the university. in doing this, i underwent a
 kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had
 sustained. ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the
 beginning of my misfortunes, i had conceived violent antipathy even
 to the name of natural philosophy. when i was otherwise quite restored
 to health, the sight of chemical instrument would renew all the agony
 of my nervous symptoms. henry saw this, and had removed all my
 apparatus from my view. had also changed my apartment; for he
 perceived that i had acquired dislike for the room which had
 previously been my laboratory. but these cares of clerval were made of
 avail when i visited the professors. m. waldman inflicted torture
 when praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress i
 had made in the sciences. soon perceived that i disliked the
 subject; but not guessing the real cause, attributed my feelings to
 modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science
 itself, with desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing out. what
 could i do? meant to please, and tormented me. i felt as if he
 had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which
 were to be afterwards used in putting to slow and cruel death. i
 writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
 clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
 sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
 total ignorance; and the conversation took more general turn. i
 thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak. i saw plainly
 that was surprised, but never attempted to draw my secret from
 me; and although i loved him with mixture of affection and reverence
 that knew bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in
 him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
 i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
 
m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
 almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave even
 more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman. “d—n
 the fellow!” cried he; “why, m. clerval, i assure you has
 outstript us all. ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. a
 youngster who, but few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as firmly
 as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if
 is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—ay,
 ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering,
 “m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in young man.
 young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval: i was
 myself when young; but that wears out in very short time.”
 
m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
 the conversation from subject that was so annoying to me.
 
clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his
 literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me. he
 came to the university with the design of making himself complete
 master of the oriental languages, and thus should open field for
 the plan of life had marked out for himself. resolved to pursue no
 inglorious career, turned his eyes toward the east, as affording
 scope for his spirit of enterprise. the persian, arabic, and sanskrit
 languages engaged his attention, and i was easily induced to enter on
 the same studies. idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that i
 wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, i felt
 great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not
 only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. i
 did not, like him, attempt critical knowledge of their dialects, for
 i did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary
 amusement. i read merely to understand their meaning, and they well
 repaid my labours. their melancholy is soothing, and their joy
 elevating, to degree i never experienced in studying the authors of
 any other country. when you read their writings, life appears to
 consist in warm sun and garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns
 of fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. how
 different from the manly and heroical poetry of greece and rome!
 
summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was
 fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
 accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
 and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. i felt this
 delay very bitterly; for i longed to see my native town and my beloved
 friends. my return had only been delayed so long, from an
 unwillingness to leave clerval in strange place, before had become
 acquainted with any of its inhabitants. the winter, however, was spent
 cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came
 its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.
 
the month of may had already commenced, and i expected the letter daily
 which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry proposed a
 pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt, that i might bid a
 personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited. i acceded
 with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval
 had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature
 that i had taken among the scenes of my native country.
 
we passed fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits
 had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
 salubrious air i breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
 the conversation of my friend. study had before secluded from the
 intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered unsocial; but
 clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; again taught
 to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
 excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to
 elevate my mind until it was on level with your own. selfish
 pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and
 affection warmed and opened my senses; i became the same happy creature
 who, few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had sorrow or care.
 when happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on the most
 delightful sensations. serene sky and verdant fields filled with
 ecstasy. the present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring
 bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. i
 was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed
 upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an
 invincible burden.
 
henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he
 exerted himself to amuse me, while expressed the sensations that filled
 his soul. the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
 astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in
 imitation of the persian and arabic writers, invented tales of wonderful
 fancy and passion. at other times repeated my favourite poems, or drew
 out into arguments, which supported with great ingenuity.
 
we returned to our college on sunday afternoon: the peasants were
 dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. my own spirits were
 high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
 



chapter 7
 

on my return, i found the following letter from my father:—
 
“my dear victor,
 
“you have probably waited impatiently for letter to fix the date of
 your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only few
 lines, merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you. but
 that would be cruel kindness, and i dare not do it. what would be
 your surprise, my son, when you expected happy and glad welcome, to
 behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness? and how, victor, can
 i relate our misfortune? absence cannot have rendered you callous to
 our joys and griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on my long absent
 son? i wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is
 impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words
 which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.
 
“william is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
 my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! victor, is murdered!
 
“i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
 circumstances of the transaction.
 
“last thursday (may 7th), i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
 walk in plainpalais. the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
 our walk farther than usual. it was already dusk before we thought of
 returning; and then we discovered that william and ernest, who had gone
 on before, were not to be found. we accordingly rested on seat until
 they should return. presently ernest came, and enquired if we had seen
 his brother; said, that had been playing with him, that william
 had run away to hide himself, and that vainly sought for him, and
 afterwards waited for long time, but that did not return.
 
“this account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
 until night fell, when elizabeth conjectured that might have
 returned to the house. was not there. we returned again, with
 torches; for i could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had
 lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night;
 elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. about five in the morning i
 discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before i had seen blooming and
 active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the
 print of the murder’s finger was on his neck.
 
“he was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
 countenance betrayed the secret to elizabeth. she was very earnest to
 see the corpse. at first i attempted to prevent her but she persisted,
 and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
 victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘o god! i have murdered my
 darling child!’
 
“she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. when she again
 lived, it was only to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same
 evening william had teased her to let him wear very valuable
 miniature that she possessed of your mother. this picture is gone, and
 was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. we
 have trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him
 are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved william!
 
“come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth. she weeps
 continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death;
 her words pierce my heart. we are all unhappy; but will not that be an
 additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
 your dear mother! alas, victor! i now say, thank god she did not live
 to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
 
“come, victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
 but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
 festering, the wounds of our minds. enter the house of mourning, my
 friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
 with hatred for your enemies.
 
“your affectionate and afflicted father,
 
“alphonse frankenstein.
 


“geneva, may 12th, 17—.”
 


clerval, who had watched my countenance as i read this letter, was
 surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy i at first
 expressed on receiving new from my friends. i threw the letter on the
 table, and covered my face with my hands.
 
“my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed henry, when perceived me
 weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? my dear friend,
 what has happened?”
 
i motioned him to take up the letter, while i walked up and down the
 room in the extremest agitation. tears also gushed from the eyes of
 clerval, as read the account of my misfortune.
 
“i can offer you consolation, my friend,” said he;
 “your disaster is irreparable. what do you intend to do?”
 
“to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.”
 
during our walk, clerval endeavoured to say few words of consolation;
 could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “poor william!” said he,
 “dear lovely child, now sleeps with his angel mother! who that had
 seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
 untimely loss! to die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! how
 much more murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! poor little
 fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
 is at rest. the pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
 sod covers his gentle form, and knows pain. can longer
 be subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable
 survivors.”
 
clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
 impressed themselves on my mind and i remembered them afterwards in
 solitude. but now, as soon as the horses arrived, i hurried into a
 cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.
 
my journey was very melancholy. at first i wished to hurry on, for i longed
 to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when i
 drew near my native town, i slackened my progress. i could hardly sustain
 the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. i passed through
 scenes familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for nearly six years.
 how altered every thing might be during that time! one sudden and
 desolating change had taken place; but thousand little circumstances
 might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were
 done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. fear overcame me; i
 dared advance, dreading thousand nameless evils that made tremble,
 although i was unable to define them.
 
i remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind. i
 contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the
 snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. by
 degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and i continued my journey
 towards geneva.
 
the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as i
 approached my native town. i discovered more distinctly the black
 sides of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc. i wept like a
 child. “dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
 wanderer? your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
 placid. is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?”
 
i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
 these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
 happiness, and i think of them with pleasure. my country, my beloved
 country! who but native can tell the delight i took in again
 beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely
 lake!
 
yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. night also
 closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt still
 more gloomily. the picture appeared vast and dim scene of evil, and i
 foresaw obscurely that i was destined to become the most wretched of human
 beings. alas! i prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
 circumstance, that in all the misery i imagined and dreaded, i did not
 conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure.
 
it was completely dark when i arrived in the environs of geneva; the gates
 of the town were already shut; and i was obliged to pass the night at
 secheron, village at the distance of half league from the city. the sky
 was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolved to visit the spot
 where my poor william had been murdered. as i could not pass through the
 town, i was obliged to cross the lake in boat to arrive at plainpalais.
 during this short voyage i saw the lightning playing on the summit of mont
 blanc in the most beautiful figures. the storm appeared to approach
 rapidly, and, on landing, i ascended low hill, that i might observe its
 progress. it advanced; the heavens were clouded, and i soon felt the rain
 coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.
 
i quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
 increased every minute, and the thunder burst with terrific crash
 over my head. it was echoed from salêve, the juras, and the alps of
 savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
 lake, making it appear like vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
 every thing seemed of pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
 from the preceding flash. the storm, as is often the case in
 switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. the
 most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the
 lake which lies between the promontory of belrive and the village of
 copêt. another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another
 darkened and sometimes disclosed the môle, peaked mountain to the
 east of the lake.
 
while i watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, i wandered on with
 hasty step. this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasped my
 hands, and exclaimed aloud, “william, dear angel! this is thy
 funeral, this thy dirge!” as i said these words, i perceived in the
 gloom figure which stole from behind clump of trees near me; i stood
 fixed, gazing intently: i could not be mistaken. flash of lightning
 illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
 gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs
 to humanity, instantly informed that it was the wretch, the filthy
 dæmon, to whom i had given life. what did there? could be (i
 shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? sooner did that
 idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my teeth
 chattered, and i was forced to lean against tree for support. the figure
 passed quickly, and i lost it in the gloom. nothing in human shape could
 have destroyed the fair child. _he_ was the murderer! i could not
 doubt it. the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the
 fact. i thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
 another flash discovered him to hanging among the rocks of the nearly
 perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, hill that bounds plainpalais on the
 south. soon reached the summit, and disappeared.
 
i remained motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still
 continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. i
 revolved in my mind the events which i had until now sought to forget:
 the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of
 the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. two years had
 now nearly elapsed since the night on which first received life; and
 was this his first crime? alas! i had turned loose into the world a
 depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had not
 murdered my brother?
 
one can conceive the anguish i suffered during the remainder of the
 night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but i did not
 feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
 scenes of evil and despair. i considered the being whom i had cast
 among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes
 of horror, such as the deed which had now done, nearly in the light
 of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
 to destroy all that was dear to me.
 
day dawned; and i directed my steps towards the town. the gates were
 open, and i hastened to my father’s house. my first thought was to
 discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
 made. but i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell. a
 being whom i myself had formed, and endued with life, had met at
 midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. i
 remembered also the nervous fever with which i had been seized just at
 the time that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of
 delirium to tale otherwise so utterly improbable. i well knew that
 if any other had communicated such relation to me, i should have
 looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. besides, the strange nature
 of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credited
 as to persuade my relatives to commence it. and then of what use would
 be pursuit? who could arrest creature capable of scaling the
 overhanging sides of mont salêve? these reflections determined me, and
 i resolved to remain silent.
 
it was about five in the morning when i entered my father’s house. i
 told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
 to attend their usual hour of rising.
 
six years had elapsed, passed in dream but for one indelible trace, and i
 stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father before my
 departure for ingolstadt. beloved and venerable parent! still remained
 to me. i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the
 mantel-piece. it was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
 desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
 by the coffin of her dead father. her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale;
 but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the
 sentiment of pity. below this picture was miniature of william; and my
 tears flowed when i looked upon it. while i was thus engaged, ernest
 entered: had heard arrive, and hastened to welcome me:
 “welcome, my dearest victor,” said he. “ah! i wish you
 had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and
 delighted. you come to us now to share misery which nothing can
 alleviate; yet your presence will, i hope, revive our father, who seems
 sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor
 elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—poor
 william! was our darling and our pride!”
 
tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; sense of mortal
 agony crept over my frame. before, i had only imagined the
 wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on as new, and
 not less terrible, disaster. i tried to calm ernest; i enquired more
 minutely concerning my father, and here i named my cousin.
 
“she most of all,” said ernest, “requires consolation; she accused
 herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her
 very wretched. but since the murderer has been discovered—”
 
“the murderer discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt
 to pursue him? it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
 winds, or confine mountain-stream with straw. i saw him too; he
 was free last night!”
 
“i do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of
 wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. no
 one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be
 convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. indeed, who would credit
 that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
 could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling crime?”
 
“justine moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is
 wrongfully; every one knows that; one believes it, surely, ernest?”
 
“no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
 almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
 confused, as to add to the evidence of facts weight that, i fear,
 leaves hope for doubt. but she will be tried today, and you will
 then hear all.”
 
then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william
 had been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
 bed for several days. during this interval, one of the servants,
 happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
 murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
 had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. the servant
 instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying word to
 any of the family, went to magistrate; and, upon their deposition,
 justine was apprehended. on being charged with the fact, the poor girl
 confirmed the suspicion in great measure by her extreme confusion of
 manner.
 
this was strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i replied
 earnestly, “you are all mistaken; i know the murderer. justine, poor,
 good justine, is innocent.”
 
at that instant my father entered. i saw unhappiness deeply impressed
 on his countenance, but endeavoured to welcome cheerfully; and,
 after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced
 some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed,
 “good god, papa! victor says that knows who was the murderer of
 poor william.”
 
“we do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed i had
 rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
 depravity and ungratitude in one i valued so highly.”
 
“my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.”
 
“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be
 tried today, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.”
 
this speech calmed me. i was firmly convinced in my own mind that
 justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. i
 had fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
 brought forward strong enough to convict her. my tale was not one to
 announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
 madness by the vulgar. did any one indeed exist, except i, the
 creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
 existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
 which i had let loose upon the world?
 
we were soon joined by elizabeth. time had altered her since i last
 beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of
 her childish years. there was the same candour, the same vivacity, but
 it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
 she welcomed with the greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear
 cousin,” said she, “fills with hope. you perhaps will find some
 means to justify my poor guiltless justine. alas! who is safe, if she
 be convicted of crime? i rely on her innocence as certainly as i do
 upon my own. our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
 lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom i sincerely
 love, is to be torn away by even worse fate. if she is condemned, i
 never shall know joy more. but she will not, i am sure she will not;
 and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
 william.”
 
“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said i, “and that shall
 be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance
 of her acquittal.”
 
“how kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt,
 and that made wretched, for i knew that it was impossible: and to
 see every one else prejudiced in so deadly manner rendered me
 hopeless and despairing.” she wept.
 
“dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. if she
 is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
 activity with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of
 partiality.”
 



chapter 8
 

we passed few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to
 commence. my father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
 as witnesses, i accompanied them to the court. during the whole of
 this wretched mockery of justice i suffered living torture. it was to
 be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
 cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one smiling babe full of
 innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
 aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
 justine also was girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
 to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an
 ignominious grave, and i the cause! thousand times rather would i
 have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to justine, but i
 was absent when it was committed, and such declaration would have
 been considered as the ravings of madman and would not have
 exculpated her who suffered through me.
 
the appearance of justine was calm. she was dressed in mourning, and
 her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
 feelings, exquisitely beautiful. yet she appeared confident in
 innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
 thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
 excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
 imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. she
 was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
 her confusion had before been adduced as proof of her guilt, she
 worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. when she entered the
 court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were
 seated. tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
 recovered herself, and look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest
 her utter guiltlessness.
 
the trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the
 charge, several witnesses were called. several strange facts combined
 against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof
 of her innocence as i had. she had been out the whole of the night on
 which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been
 perceived by market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
 murdered child had been afterwards found. the woman asked her what she
 did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned confused
 and unintelligible answer. she returned to the house about eight
 o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
 replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly
 if anything had been heard concerning him. when shown the body, she
 fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. the
 picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
 and when elizabeth, in faltering voice, proved that it was the same
 which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round
 his neck, murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.
 
justine was called on for her defence. as the trial had proceeded, her
 countenance had altered. surprise, horror, and misery were strongly
 expressed. sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was
 desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible
 although variable voice.
 
“god knows,” she said, “how entirely i am innocent. but i
 do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; i rest my innocence
 on plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
 against me, and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my
 judges to favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
 doubtful or suspicious.”
 
she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had passed
 the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the
 house of an aunt at chêne, village situated at about league from
 geneva. on her return, at about nine o’clock, she met man who asked
 her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. she was
 alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him,
 when the gates of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain
 several hours of the night in barn belonging to cottage, being
 unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. most
 of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that
 she slept for few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
 it was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour
 to find my brother. if she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
 it was without her knowledge. that she had been bewildered when
 questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed
 sleepless night and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain.
 concerning the picture she could give account.
 
“i know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and
 fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but i have power of
 explaining it; and when i have expressed my utter ignorance, i am only left
 to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
 placed in my pocket. but here also i am checked. i believe that i have no
 enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me
 wantonly. did the murderer place it there? i know of opportunity
 afforded him for so doing; or, if i had, why should have stolen the
 jewel, to part with it again so soon?
 
“i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see room for
 hope. i beg permission to have few witnesses examined concerning my
 character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed
 guilt, i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my
 innocence.”
 
several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and
 they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
 supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come
 forward. elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
 dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
 when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
 the court.
 
“i am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who
 was murdered, or rather his sister, for i was educated by and have lived
 with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. it may
 therefore be judged indecent in to come forward on this occasion, but
 when i see fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her
 pretended friends, i wish to be allowed to speak, that i may say what i
 know of her character. i am well acquainted with the accused. i have lived
 in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly
 two years. during all that period she appeared to the most amiable and
 benevolent of human creatures. she nursed madame frankenstein, my aunt, in
 her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards
 attended her own mother during tedious illness, in manner that excited
 the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my
 uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. she was
 warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a
 most affectionate mother. for my own part, i do not hesitate to say that,
 notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, i believe and rely
 on her perfect innocence. she had temptation for such an action; as to
 the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it,
 i should have willingly given it to her, so much do i esteem and value
 her.”
 
murmur of approbation followed elizabeth’s simple and powerful
 appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
 favour of poor justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
 renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. she
 herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. my own
 agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. i believed
 in her innocence; i knew it. could the dæmon who had (i did not for a
 minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
 betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? i could not sustain the
 horror of my situation, and when i perceived that the popular voice and
 the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
 i rushed out of the court in agony. the tortures of the accused did
 not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
 remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.
 
i passed night of unmingled wretchedness. in the morning i went to
 the court; my lips and throat were parched. i dared not ask the fatal
 question, but i was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
 visit. the ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and justine
 was condemned.
 
i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt. i had before
 experienced sensations of horror, and i have endeavoured to bestow upon
 them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
 heart-sickening despair that i then endured. the person to whom i
 addressed myself added that justine had already confessed her guilt.
 “that evidence,” observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a
 case, but i am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
 condemn criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
 decisive.”
 
this was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? had
 my eyes deceived me? and was i really as mad as the whole world would
 believe to be if i disclosed the object of my suspicions? i
 hastened to return home, and elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
 
“my cousin,” replied i, “it is decided as you may have expected; all
 judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
 should escape. but she has confessed.”
 
this was dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon
 justine’s innocence. “alas!” said she. “how shall i
 ever again believe in human goodness? justine, whom i loved and esteemed as
 my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
 her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has
 committed murder.”
 
soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed desire to see my
 cousin. my father wished her not to go but said that left it to her own
 judgment and feelings to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth,
 “i will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany
 me; i cannot go alone.” the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet
 i could not refuse.
 
we entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld justine sitting on some
 straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on
 her knees. she rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with
 her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly. my
 cousin wept also.
 
“oh, justine!” said she. “why did you rob of my last consolation?
 i relied on your innocence, and although i was then very wretched, i
 was not so miserable as i am now.”
 
“and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked? do you also
 join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn as murderer?” her
 voice was suffocated with sobs.
 
“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth; “why do you kneel,
 if you are innocent? i am not one of your enemies, i believed you
 guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had
 yourself declared your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be
 assured, dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a
 moment, but your own confession.”
 
“i did confess, but i confessed lie. i confessed, that i might
 obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
 all my other sins. the god of heaven forgive me! ever since i was
 condemned, my confessor has besieged me; threatened and menaced,
 until i almost began to think that i was the monster that said i
 was. threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
 i continued obdurate. dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked
 on as wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. what could i do?
 in an evil hour i subscribed to lie; and now only am i truly
 miserable.”
 
she paused, weeping, and then continued, “i thought with horror, my
 sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed
 aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was creature capable
 of crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
 dear william! dearest blessed child! i soon shall see you again in
 heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as i
 am to suffer ignominy and death.”
 
“oh, justine! forgive for having for one moment distrusted you.
 why did you confess? but do not mourn, dear girl. do not fear. i
 will proclaim, i will prove your innocence. i will melt the stony
 hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. you shall not die!
 you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
 no! no! i never could survive so horrible misfortune.”
 
justine shook her head mournfully. “i do not fear to die,” she said;
 “that pang is past. god raises my weakness and gives courage to
 endure the worst. i leave sad and bitter world; and if you remember
 and think of as of one unjustly condemned, i am resigned to the
 fate awaiting me. learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
 the will of heaven!”
 
during this conversation i had retired to corner of the prison room,
 where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. despair!
 who dared talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
 the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as i did, such
 deep and bitter agony. i gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
 uttering groan that came from my inmost soul. justine started. when
 she saw who it was, she approached and said, “dear sir, you are very
 kind to visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty?”
 
i could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more
 convinced of your innocence than i was, for even when heard that you
 had confessed, did not credit it.”
 
“i truly thank him. in these last moments i feel the sincerest
 gratitude towards those who think of with kindness. how sweet is
 the affection of others to such wretch as i am! it removes more than
 half my misfortune, and i feel as if i could die in peace now that my
 innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”
 
thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. she indeed
 gained the resignation she desired. but i, the true murderer, felt the
 never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of hope or
 consolation. elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
 the misery of innocence, which, like cloud that passes over the fair
 moon, for while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. anguish and
 despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; i bore hell within
 which nothing could extinguish. we stayed several hours with
 justine, and it was with great difficulty that elizabeth could tear
 herself away. “i wish,” cried she, “that i were to die with you; i
 cannot live in this world of misery.”
 
justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
 repressed her bitter tears. she embraced elizabeth and said in voice
 of half-suppressed emotion, “farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth,
 my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
 preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
 suffer! live, and be happy, and make others so.”
 
and on the morrow justine died. elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence
 failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
 criminality of the saintly sufferer. my passionate and indignant
 appeals were lost upon them. and when i received their cold answers
 and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
 avowal died away on my lips. thus i might proclaim myself madman,
 but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. she
 perished on the scaffold as murderess!
 
from the tortures of my own heart, i turned to contemplate the deep and
 voiceless grief of my elizabeth. this also was my doing! and my
 father’s woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
 the work of my thrice-accursed hands! ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
 are not your last tears! again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
 the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
 frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
 who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
 thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
 countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
 in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
 his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
 pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!
 
thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
 i beheld those i loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of william and
 justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.
 



chapter 9
 

nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
 been worked up by quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
 inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
 and fear. justine died, she rested, and i was alive. the blood flowed
 freely in my veins, but weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
 heart which nothing could remove. sleep fled from my eyes; i wandered
 like an evil spirit, for i had committed deeds of mischief beyond
 description horrible, and more, much more (i persuaded myself) was yet
 behind. yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
 i had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
 when i should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
 beings. now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
 which allowed to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
 from thence to gather promise of new hopes, i was seized by remorse and
 the sense of guilt, which hurried away to hell of intense tortures
 such as language can describe.
 
this state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
 entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. i shunned
 the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
 solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude.
 
my father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition
 and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
 serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire with fortitude and
 awaken in the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
 “do you think, victor,” said he, “that i do not suffer
 also? one could love child more than i loved your
 brother”—tears came into his eyes as spoke—“but
 is it not duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting
 their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? it is also duty
 owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment,
 or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which man is fit for
 society.”
 
this advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; i
 should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
 remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
 other sensations. now i could only answer my father with look of
 despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.
 
about this time we retired to our house at belrive. this change was
 particularly agreeable to me. the shutting of the gates regularly at
 ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
 hour had rendered our residence within the walls of geneva very irksome
 to me. i was now free. often, after the rest of the family had
 retired for the night, i took the boat and passed many hours upon the
 water. sometimes, with my sails set, i was carried by the wind; and
 sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, i left the boat to
 pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. i
 was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and i the only
 unquiet thing that wandered restless in scene so beautiful and
 heavenly—if i except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
 interrupted croaking was heard only when i approached the shore—often,
 i say, i was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
 might close over and my calamities for ever. but i was restrained,
 when i thought of the heroic and suffering elizabeth, whom i tenderly
 loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. i thought also of my
 father and surviving brother; should i by my base desertion leave them
 exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose
 among them?
 
at these moments i wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
 mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness. but that
 could not be. remorse extinguished every hope. i had been the author of
 unalterable evils, and i lived in daily fear lest the monster whom i had
 created should perpetrate some new wickedness. i had an obscure feeling
 that all was not over and that would still commit some signal crime,
 which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
 there was always scope for fear so long as anything i loved remained
 behind. my abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. when i thought of
 him i gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and i ardently wished to
 extinguish that life which i had so thoughtlessly bestowed. when i
 reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds
 of moderation. i would have made pilgrimage to the highest peak of the
 andes, could i, when there, have precipitated him to their base. i wished
 to see him again, that i might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
 head and avenge the deaths of william and justine.
 
our house was the house of mourning. my father’s health was deeply
 shaken by the horror of the recent events. elizabeth was sad and
 desponding; she longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
 pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
 then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
 and destroyed. she was longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
 wandered with on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our
 future prospects. the first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from
 the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
 smiles.
 
“when i reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of
 justine moritz, i longer see the world and its works as they before
 appeared to me. before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and
 injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
 days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
 reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
 appear to as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. yet i am
 certainly unjust. everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
 if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
 she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. for the sake
 of few jewels, to have murdered the of her benefactor and friend,
 child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
 it had been her own! i could not consent to the death of any human
 being, but certainly i should have thought such creature unfit to
 remain in the society of men. but she was innocent. i know, i feel
 she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
 alas! victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
 assure themselves of certain happiness? i feel as if i were walking on
 the edge of precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
 endeavouring to plunge into the abyss. william and justine were
 assassinated, and the murderer escapes; walks about the world free,
 and perhaps respected. but even if i were condemned to suffer on the
 scaffold for the same crimes, i would not change places with such a
 wretch.”
 
i listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. i, not in deed,
 but in effect, was the true murderer. elizabeth read my anguish in my
 countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “my dearest friend, you
 must calm yourself. these events have affected me, god knows how
 deeply; but i am not so wretched as you are. there is an expression of
 despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
 tremble. dear victor, banish these dark passions. remember the
 friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. have we lost
 the power of rendering you happy? ah! while we love, while we are
 true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
 country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our
 peace?”
 
and could not such words from her whom i fondly prized before every
 other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
 heart? even as she spoke i drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
 that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob of her.
 
thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
 heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
 ineffectual. i was encompassed by cloud which beneficial
 influence could penetrate. the wounded deer dragging its fainting
 limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
 pierced it, and to die, was but type of me.
 
sometimes i could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
 sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove to seek, by bodily
 exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
 sensations. it was during an access of this kind that i suddenly left
 my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys, sought
 in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
 my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. my wanderings were directed
 towards the valley of chamounix. i had visited it frequently during my
 boyhood. six years had passed since then: _i_ was wreck, but nought
 had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
 
i performed the first part of my journey on horseback. i afterwards
 hired mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
 injury on these rugged roads. the weather was fine; it was about the
 middle of the month of august, nearly two months after the death of
 justine, that miserable epoch from which i dated all my woe. the
 weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as i plunged yet deeper in
 the ravine of arve. the immense mountains and precipices that overhung
 on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
 the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of power mighty as
 omnipotence—and i ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
 almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
 displayed in their most terrific guise. still, as i ascended higher,
 the valley assumed more magnificent and astonishing character.
 ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
 impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
 among the trees formed scene of singular beauty. but it was
 augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty alps, whose white and
 shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
 earth, the habitations of another race of beings.
 
i passed the bridge of pélissier, where the ravine, which the river
 forms, opened before me, and i began to ascend the mountain that
 overhangs it. soon after, i entered the valley of chamounix. this
 valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
 picturesque as that of servox, through which i had just passed. the
 high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but i saw no
 more ruined castles and fertile fields. immense glaciers approached
 the road; i heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
 marked the smoke of its passage. mont blanc, the supreme and
 magnificent mont blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_,
 and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.
 
tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across during this
 journey. some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
 recognised, reminded of days gone by, and were associated with the
 lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. the very winds whispered in soothing
 accents, and maternal nature bade weep more. then again the
 kindly influence ceased to act—i found myself fettered again to grief
 and indulging in all the misery of reflection. then i spurred on my
 animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
 myself—or, in more desperate fashion, i alighted and threw myself on
 the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
 
at length i arrived at the village of chamounix. exhaustion succeeded
 to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which i had endured.
 for short space of time i remained at the window watching the pallid
 lightnings that played above mont blanc and listening to the rushing of
 the arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. the same lulling sounds
 acted as lullaby to my too keen sensations; when i placed my head
 upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; i felt it as it came and blessed
 the giver of oblivion.
 



chapter 10
 

i spent the following day roaming through the valley. i stood beside
 the sources of the arveiron, which take their rise in glacier, that
 with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
 barricade the valley. the abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
 me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; few shattered pines were
 scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
 presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling
 waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
 avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
 accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
 was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but plaything in
 their hands. these sublime and magnificent scenes afforded the
 greatest consolation that i was capable of receiving. they elevated me
 from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
 grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. in some degree, also, they
 diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
 last month. i retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
 waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which i
 had contemplated during the day. they congregated round me; the
 unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
 and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all
 gathered round and bade be at peace.
 
where had they fled when the next morning i awoke? all of
 soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
 thought. the rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
 summits of the mountains, so that i even saw not the faces of those
 mighty friends. still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
 in their cloudy retreats. what were rain and storm to me? my mule was
 brought to the door, and i resolved to ascend to the summit of
 montanvert. i remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
 and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when i first saw it.
 it had then filled with sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
 soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
 the sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
 effect of solemnising my mind and causing to forget the passing
 cares of life. i determined to go without guide, for i was well
 acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
 solitary grandeur of the scene.
 
the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
 windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
 mountain. it is scene terrifically desolate. in thousand spots
 the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
 broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
 leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
 other trees. the path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
 of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
 particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
 in loud voice, produces concussion of air sufficient to draw
 destruction upon the head of the speaker. the pines are not tall or
 luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
 i looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
 which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
 mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
 poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression i
 received from the objects around me. alas! why does man boast of
 sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
 them more necessary beings. if our impulses were confined to hunger,
 thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
 every wind that blows and chance word or scene that that word may
 convey to us.
 
we rest; dream has power to poison sleep.
 we rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
 we feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
 embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
 it is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
 the path of its departure still is free.
 man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
 nought may endure but mutability!
 

it was nearly noon when i arrived at the top of the ascent. for some
 time i sat upon the rock that overlooks the of ice. mist covered
 both that and the surrounding mountains. presently breeze dissipated
 the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier. the surface is very
 uneven, rising like the waves of troubled sea, descending low, and
 interspersed by rifts that sink deep. the field of ice is almost a
 league in width, but i spent nearly two hours in crossing it. the
 opposite mountain is bare perpendicular rock. from the side where i
 now stood montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of league;
 and above it rose mont blanc, in awful majesty. i remained in recess
 of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. the sea,
 or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
 whose aerial summits hung over its recesses. their icy and glittering
 peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. my heart, which was
 before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; i exclaimed,
 “wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
 beds, allow this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
 away from the joys of life.”
 
as i said this i suddenly beheld the figure of man, at some distance,
 advancing towards with superhuman speed. bounded over the
 crevices in the ice, among which i had walked with caution; his
 stature, also, as approached, seemed to exceed that of man. i was
 troubled; mist came over my eyes, and i felt faintness seize me,
 but i was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. i
 perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
 that it was the wretch whom i had created. i trembled with rage and
 horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
 mortal combat. approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
 combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
 rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. but i scarcely
 observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived of utterance,
 and i recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
 detestation and contempt.
 
“devil,” i exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do
 not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
 begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust! and,
 oh! that i could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore
 those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”
 
“i expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “all men hate the
 wretched; how, then, must i be hated, who am miserable beyond all
 living things! yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
 to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
 one of us. you purpose to kill me. how dare you sport thus with life?
 do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of
 mankind. if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and
 you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it
 be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”
 
“abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too
 mild vengeance for thy crimes. wretched devil! you reproach with
 your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i
 so negligently bestowed.”
 
my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impelled by all the
 feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
 
easily eluded and said,
 
“be calm! i entreat you to hear before you give vent to your hatred
 on my devoted head. have i not suffered enough, that you seek to
 increase my misery? life, although it may only be an accumulation of
 anguish, is dear to me, and i will defend it. remember, thou hast made
 more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
 joints more supple. but i will not be tempted to set myself in
 opposition to thee. i am thy creature, and i will be even mild and
 docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
 the which thou owest me. oh, frankenstein, be not equitable to every
 other and trample upon alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
 clemency and affection, is most due. remember that i am thy creature;
 i ought to be thy adam, but i am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
 drivest from joy for misdeed. everywhere i see bliss, from which i
 alone am irrevocably excluded. i was benevolent and good; misery made
 fiend. make happy, and i shall again be virtuous.”
 
“begone! i will not hear you. there can be community between you
 and me; we are enemies. begone, or let us try our strength in fight,
 in which one must fall.”
 
“how can i move thee? will entreaties cause thee to turn a
 favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
 compassion? believe me, frankenstein, i was benevolent; my soul glowed
 with love and humanity; but am i not alone, miserably alone? you, my
 creator, abhor me; what hope can i gather from your fellow creatures,
 who owe nothing? they spurn and hate me. the desert mountains and
 dreary glaciers are my refuge. i have wandered here many days; the
 caves of ice, which i only do not fear, are dwelling to me, and the
 only one which man does not grudge. these bleak skies i hail, for they
 are kinder to than your fellow beings. if the multitude of mankind
 knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
 my destruction. shall i not then hate them who abhor me? i will keep
 terms with my enemies. i am miserable, and they shall share my
 wretchedness. yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
 them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
 not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
 swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. let your compassion be
 moved, and do not disdain me. listen to my tale; when you have heard
 that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that i deserve.
 but hear me. the guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
 are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. listen
 to me, frankenstein. you accuse of murder, and yet you would, with
 satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. oh, praise the
 eternal justice of man! yet i ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
 and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”
 
“why do you call to my remembrance,” i rejoined, “circumstances of
 which i shudder to reflect, that i have been the miserable origin and
 author? cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
 light! cursed (although i curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
 you have made wretched beyond expression. you have left power
 to consider whether i am just to you or not. begone! relieve from
 the sight of your detested form.”
 
“thus i relieve thee, my creator,” said, and placed his hated hands
 before my eyes, which i flung from with violence; “thus i take from
 thee sight which you abhor. still thou canst listen to and grant
 thy compassion. by the virtues that i once possessed, i demand this
 from you. hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
 this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
 the mountain. the sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
 to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
 world, you will have heard my story and can decide. on you it rests,
 whether i quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead harmless
 life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
 your own speedy ruin.”
 
as said this led the way across the ice; i followed. my heart
 was full, and i did not answer him, but as i proceeded, i weighed the
 various arguments that had used and determined at least to listen to
 his tale. i was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
 resolution. i had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
 brother, and i eagerly sought confirmation or denial of this opinion.
 for the first time, also, i felt what the duties of creator towards
 his creature were, and that i ought to render him happy before i
 complained of his wickedness. these motives urged to comply with
 his demand. we crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
 rock. the air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
 entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, i with heavy
 heart and depressed spirits. but i consented to listen, and seating
 myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, thus began
 his tale.
 



chapter 11
 

“it is with considerable difficulty that i remember the original of
 my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
 strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and i saw, felt, heard,
 and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, long time before i
 learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. by
 degrees, i remember, stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that i
 was obliged to shut my eyes. darkness then came over and troubled
 me, but hardly had i felt this when, by opening my eyes, as i now
 suppose, the light poured in upon again. i walked and, i believe,
 descended, but i presently found great alteration in my sensations.
 before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my
 touch or sight; but i now found that i could wander on at liberty, with
 obstacles which i could not either surmount or avoid. the light
 became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying as i
 walked, i sought place where i could receive shade. this was the
 forest near ingolstadt; and here i lay by the side of brook resting
 from my fatigue, until i felt tormented by hunger and thirst. this
 roused from my nearly dormant state, and i ate some berries which i
 found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. i slaked my thirst
 at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
 
“it was dark when i awoke; i felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
 were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. before i had quitted
 your apartment, on sensation of cold, i had covered myself with some
 clothes, but these were insufficient to secure from the dews of
 night. i was poor, helpless, miserable wretch; i knew, and could
 distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade on all sides, i sat
 down and wept.
 
“soon gentle light stole over the heavens and gave sensation of
 pleasure. i started up and beheld radiant form rise from among the
 trees. [the moon] i gazed with kind of wonder. it moved slowly,
 but it enlightened my path, and i again went out in search of berries.
 i was still cold when under one of the trees i found huge cloak, with
 which i covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. distinct
 ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. i felt light, and hunger,
 and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on
 all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that i could
 distinguish was the bright moon, and i fixed my eyes on that with
 pleasure.
 
“several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
 greatly lessened, when i began to distinguish my sensations from each
 other. i gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied with
 drink and the trees that shaded with their foliage. i was delighted
 when i first discovered that pleasant sound, which often saluted my
 ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
 often intercepted the light from my eyes. i began also to observe,
 with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded and to perceive the
 boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. sometimes i
 tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
 sometimes i wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
 uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from frightened into
 silence again.
 
“the moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with lessened
 form, showed itself, while i still remained in the forest. my
 sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every
 day additional ideas. my eyes became accustomed to the light and to
 perceive objects in their right forms; i distinguished the insect from
 the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. i found that the
 sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
 thrush were sweet and enticing.
 
“one day, when i was oppressed by cold, i found fire which had been
 left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
 warmth i experienced from it. in my joy i thrust my hand into the live
 embers, but quickly drew it out again with cry of pain. how strange,
 i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! i
 examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
 composed of wood. i quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
 and would not burn. i was pained at this and sat still watching the
 operation of the fire. the wet wood which i had placed near the heat
 dried and itself became inflamed. i reflected on this, and by touching
 the various branches, i discovered the cause and busied myself in
 collecting great quantity of wood, that i might dry it and have a
 plentiful supply of fire. when night came on and brought sleep with
 it, i was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. i
 covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
 upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, i lay on the ground and sank
 into sleep.
 
“it was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
 i uncovered it, and gentle breeze quickly fanned it into flame. i
 observed this also and contrived fan of branches, which roused the
 embers when they were nearly extinguished. when night came again i
 found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
 the discovery of this element was useful to in my food, for i found
 some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
 tasted much more savoury than the berries i gathered from the trees. i
 tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on
 the live embers. i found that the berries were spoiled by this
 operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
 
“food, however, became scarce, and i often spent the whole day
 searching in vain for few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. when
 i found this, i resolved to quit the place that i had hitherto
 inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants i experienced would be
 more easily satisfied. in this emigration i exceedingly lamented the
 loss of the fire which i had obtained through accident and knew not how
 to reproduce it. i gave several hours to the serious consideration of
 this difficulty, but i was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
 it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, i struck across the wood
 towards the setting sun. i passed three days in these rambles and at
 length discovered the open country. great fall of snow had taken
 place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
 appearance was disconsolate, and i found my feet chilled by the cold
 damp substance that covered the ground.
 
“it was about seven in the morning, and i longed to obtain food and
 shelter; at length i perceived small hut, on rising ground, which
 had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. this
 was new sight to me, and i examined the structure with great
 curiosity. finding the door open, i entered. an old man sat in it,
 near fire, over which was preparing his breakfast. turned on
 hearing noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
 hut, ran across the fields with speed of which his debilitated form
 hardly appeared capable. his appearance, different from any i had ever
 before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. but i was enchanted
 by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
 penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to then as exquisite
 and divine retreat as pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell
 after their sufferings in the lake of fire. i greedily devoured the
 remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese,
 milk, and wine; the latter, however, i did not like. then, overcome by
 fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
 
“it was noon when i awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which
 shone brightly on the white ground, i determined to recommence my
 travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a
 wallet i found, i proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
 at sunset i arrived at village. how miraculous did this appear! the
 huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by
 turns. the vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that i saw
 placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. one
 of the best of these i entered, but i had hardly placed my foot within
 the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
 the whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
 grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, i
 escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in low hovel,
 quite bare, and making wretched appearance after the palaces i had
 beheld in the village. this hovel however, joined cottage of neat
 and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, i
 dared not enter it. my place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
 low that i could with difficulty sit upright in it. wood, however,
 was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
 although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, i found it an
 agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.
 
“here, then, i retreated and lay down happy to have found shelter,
 however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
 from the barbarity of man. as soon as morning dawned i crept from my
 kennel, that i might view the adjacent cottage and discover if i could
 remain in the habitation i had found. it was situated against the back
 of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by pig
 sty and clear pool of water. one part was open, and by that i had
 crept in; but now i covered every crevice by which i might be perceived
 with stones and wood, yet in such manner that i might move them on
 occasion to pass out; all the light i enjoyed came through the sty, and
 that was sufficient for me.
 
“having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, i
 retired, for i saw the figure of man at distance, and i remembered
 too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. i
 had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by loaf
 of coarse bread, which i purloined, and cup with which i could drink
 more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by
 my retreat. the floor was little raised, so that it was kept
 perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was
 tolerably warm.
 
“being thus provided, i resolved to reside in this hovel until
 something should occur which might alter my determination. it was
 indeed paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
 the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. i ate my breakfast with
 pleasure and was about to remove plank to procure myself little
 water when i heard step, and looking through small chink, i beheld
 young creature, with pail on her head, passing before my hovel. the
 girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what i have since found
 cottagers and farmhouse servants to be. yet she was meanly dressed, a
 coarse blue petticoat and linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
 hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. i lost
 sight of her, and in about quarter of an hour she returned bearing
 the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. as she walked along,
 seemingly incommoded by the burden, young man met her, whose
 countenance expressed deeper despondence. uttering few sounds with
 an air of melancholy, took the pail from her head and bore it to the
 cottage himself. she followed, and they disappeared. presently i saw
 the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
 behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the
 house and sometimes in the yard.
 
“on examining my dwelling, i found that one of the windows of the
 cottage had formerly occupied part of it, but the panes had been
 filled up with wood. in one of these was small and almost
 imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
 through this crevice small room was visible, whitewashed and clean
 but very bare of furniture. in one corner, near small fire, sat an
 old man, leaning his head on his hands in disconsolate attitude. the
 young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she
 took something out of drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat
 down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play
 and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
 nightingale. it was lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
 never beheld aught beautiful before. the silver hair and benevolent
 countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle
 manners of the girl enticed my love. played sweet mournful air
 which i perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of
 which the old man took notice, until she sobbed audibly; then
 pronounced few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
 at his feet. raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection
 that i felt sensations of peculiar and overpowering nature; they were
 mixture of pain and pleasure, such as i had never before experienced,
 either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and i withdrew from the
 window, unable to bear these emotions.
 
“soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a
 load of wood. the girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of
 his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on
 the fire; then she and the youth went apart into nook of the cottage,
 and showed her large loaf and piece of cheese. she seemed
 pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
 placed in water, and then upon the fire. she afterwards continued her
 work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
 employed in digging and pulling up roots. after had been employed
 thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
 cottage together.
 
“the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance
 of his companions assumed more cheerful air, and they sat down to
 eat. the meal was quickly dispatched. the young woman was again
 occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the
 cottage in the sun for few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
 nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent
 creatures. one was old, with silver hairs and countenance beaming
 with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his
 figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his
 eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. the
 old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different
 from those had used in the morning, directed his steps across the
 fields.
 
“night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, i found that the
 cottagers had means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was
 delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
 pleasure i experienced in watching my human neighbours. in the evening
 the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
 which i did not understand; and the old man again took up the
 instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted in
 the morning. so soon as had finished, the youth began, not to play,
 but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
 harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; i since
 found that read aloud, but at that time i knew nothing of the
 science of words or letters.
 
“the family, after having been thus occupied for short time,
 extinguished their lights and retired, as i conjectured, to rest.”
 



chapter 12
 

“i lay on my straw, but i could not sleep. i thought of the
 occurrences of the day. what chiefly struck was the gentle manners
 of these people, and i longed to join them, but dared not. i
 remembered too well the treatment i had suffered the night before from
 the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct i
 might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present i would
 remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the
 motives which influenced their actions.
 
“the cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. the young woman
 arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed
 after the first meal.
 
“this day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
 the young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in
 various laborious occupations within. the old man, whom i soon
 perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
 in contemplation. nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
 younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. they
 performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
 gentleness, and rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
 
“they were not entirely happy. the young man and his companion often
 went apart and appeared to weep. i saw cause for their unhappiness,
 but i was deeply affected by it. if such lovely creatures were
 miserable, it was less strange that i, an imperfect and solitary being,
 should be wretched. yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? they
 possessed delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
 luxury; they had fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands
 when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
 they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
 looks of affection and kindness. what did their tears imply? did they
 really express pain? i was at first unable to solve these questions,
 but perpetual attention and time explained to many appearances which
 were at first enigmatic.
 
“a considerable period elapsed before i discovered one of the causes of
 the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they
 suffered that evil in very distressing degree. their nourishment
 consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of
 one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters
 could scarcely procure food to support it. they often, i believe,
 suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two
 younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old
 man when they reserved none for themselves.
 
“this trait of kindness moved sensibly. i had been accustomed,
 during the night, to steal part of their store for my own
 consumption, but when i found that in doing this i inflicted pain on
 the cottagers, i abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and
 roots which i gathered from neighbouring wood.
 
“i discovered also another means through which i was enabled to assist
 their labours. i found that the youth spent great part of each day
 in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night i often
 took his tools, the use of which i quickly discovered, and brought home
 firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.
 
“i remember, the first time that i did this, the young woman, when she
 opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing great
 pile of wood on the outside. she uttered some words in loud voice, and the
 youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. i observed, with pleasure,
 that did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the
 cottage and cultivating the garden.
 
“by degrees i made discovery of still greater moment. i found that
 these people possessed method of communicating their experience and
 feelings to one another by articulate sounds. i perceived that the words
 they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the
 minds and countenances of the hearers. this was indeed godlike science,
 and i ardently desired to become acquainted with it. but i was baffled in
 every attempt i made for this purpose. their pronunciation was quick, and
 the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible
 objects, i was unable to discover any clue by which i could unravel the
 mystery of their reference. by great application, however, and after having
 remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, i
 discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of
 discourse; i learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and
 _wood._ i learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. the youth
 and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only
 one, which was _father._ the girl was called _sister_ or
 _agatha,_ and the youth _felix, brother,_ or _son_. i cannot
 describe the delight i felt when i learned the ideas appropriated to each of
 these sounds and was able to pronounce them. i distinguished several other
 words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good,
 dearest, unhappy._
 
“i spent the winter in this manner. the gentle manners and beauty of
 the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, i
 felt depressed; when they rejoiced, i sympathised in their joys. i saw
 few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the
 cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to the
 superior accomplishments of my friends. the old man, i could perceive,
 often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes i found that
 called them, to cast off their melancholy. would talk in a
 cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
 even upon me. agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
 with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but i
 generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after
 having listened to the exhortations of her father. it was not thus
 with felix. was always the saddest of the group, and even to my
 unpractised senses, appeared to have suffered more deeply than his
 friends. but if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more
 cheerful than that of his sister, especially when addressed the old
 man.
 
“i could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked
 the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. in the midst of poverty
 and want, felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little
 white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. early in
 the morning, before she had risen, cleared away the snow that
 obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and
 brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual
 astonishment, found his store always replenished by an invisible
 hand. in the day, i believe, worked sometimes for neighbouring
 farmer, because often went forth and did not return until dinner,
 yet brought wood with him. at other times worked in the garden,
 but as there was little to do in the frosty season, read to the old
 man and agatha.
 
“this reading had puzzled extremely at first, but by degrees i
 discovered that uttered many of the same sounds when read as when
 talked. i conjectured, therefore, that found on the paper signs
 for speech which understood, and i ardently longed to comprehend
 these also; but how was that possible when i did not even understand
 the sounds for which they stood as signs? i improved, however,
 sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of
 conversation, although i applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for i
 easily perceived that, although i eagerly longed to discover myself to
 the cottagers, i ought not to make the attempt until i had first become
 master of their language, which knowledge might enable to make them
 overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast
 perpetually presented to my eyes had made acquainted.
 
“i had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty,
 and delicate complexions; but how was i terrified when i viewed myself
 in transparent pool! at first i started back, unable to believe that
 it was indeed i who was reflected in the mirror; and when i became
 fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was
 filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
 alas! i did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
 deformity.
 
“as the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
 vanished, and i beheld the bare trees and the black earth. from this
 time felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of
 impending famine disappeared. their food, as i afterwards found, was
 coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured sufficiency of it.
 several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
 dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season
 advanced.
 
“the old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
 not rain, as i found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
 waters. this frequently took place, but high wind quickly dried the
 earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.
 
“my mode of life in my hovel was uniform. during the morning i
 attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in
 various occupations, i slept; the remainder of the day was spent in
 observing my friends. when they had retired to rest, if there was any
 moon or the night was star-light, i went into the woods and collected
 my own food and fuel for the cottage. when i returned, as often as it
 was necessary, i cleared their path from the snow and performed those
 offices that i had seen done by felix. i afterwards found that these
 labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and
 once or twice i heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good
 spirit, wonderful_; but i did not then understand the signification
 of these terms.
 
“my thoughts now became more active, and i longed to discover the
 motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; i was inquisitive to
 know why felix appeared so miserable and agatha so sad. i thought
 (foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to
 these deserving people. when i slept or was absent, the forms of the
 venerable blind father, the gentle agatha, and the excellent felix
 flitted before me. i looked upon them as superior beings who would be
 the arbiters of my future destiny. i formed in my imagination a
 thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of
 me. i imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle
 demeanour and conciliating words, i should first win their favour and
 afterwards their love.
 
“these thoughts exhilarated and led to apply with fresh ardour to
 the acquiring the art of language. my organs were indeed harsh, but
 supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their
 tones, yet i pronounced such words as i understood with tolerable ease.
 it was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose
 intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved
 better treatment than blows and execration.
 
“the pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
 aspect of the earth. men who before this change seemed to have been
 hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of
 cultivation. the birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves
 began to bud forth on the trees. happy, happy earth! fit habitation
 for gods, which, so short time before, was bleak, damp, and
 unwholesome. my spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of
 nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
 and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.”
 



chapter 13
 

“i now hasten to the more moving part of my story. i shall relate
 events that impressed with feelings which, from what i had been,
 have made what i am.
 
“spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies
 cloudless. it surprised that what before was desert and gloomy
 should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. my
 senses were gratified and refreshed by thousand scents of delight and
 thousand sights of beauty.
 
“it was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested
 from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children
 listened to him—that i observed the countenance of felix was
 melancholy beyond expression; sighed frequently, and once his father
 paused in his music, and i conjectured by his manner that inquired
 the cause of his son’s sorrow. felix replied in cheerful accent, and
 the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.
 
“it was lady on horseback, accompanied by country-man as guide.
 the lady was dressed in dark suit and covered with thick black
 veil. agatha asked question, to which the stranger only replied by
 pronouncing, in sweet accent, the name of felix. her voice was
 musical but unlike that of either of my friends. on hearing this word,
 felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her
 veil, and i beheld countenance of angelic beauty and expression. her
 hair of shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were
 dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of regular
 proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with
 lovely pink.
 
“felix seemed ravished with delight when saw her, every trait of
 sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed degree of
 ecstatic joy, of which i could hardly have believed it capable; his
 eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment i
 thought him as beautiful as the stranger. she appeared affected by
 different feelings; wiping few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
 out her hand to felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as
 well as i could distinguish, his sweet arabian. she did not appear to
 understand him, but smiled. assisted her to dismount, and
 dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. some
 conversation took place between him and his father, and the young
 stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand,
 but raised her and embraced her affectionately.
 
“i soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds
 and appeared to have language of her own, she was neither understood
 by nor herself understood the cottagers. they made many signs which i
 did not comprehend, but i saw that her presence diffused gladness
 through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
 morning mists. felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of
 delight welcomed his arabian. agatha, the ever-gentle agatha, kissed
 the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made
 signs which appeared to to mean that had been sorrowful until she
 came. some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances,
 expressed joy, the cause of which i did not comprehend. presently i
 found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger
 repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language;
 and the idea instantly occurred to that i should make use of the
 same instructions to the same end. the stranger learned about twenty
 words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which i had
 before understood, but i profited by the others.
 
“as night came on, agatha and the arabian retired early. when they
 separated felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘good night
 sweet safie.’ sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and
 by the frequent repetition of her name i conjectured that their lovely
 guest was the subject of their conversation. i ardently desired to
 understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found
 it utterly impossible.
 
“the next morning felix went out to his work, and after the usual
 occupations of agatha were finished, the arabian sat at the feet of the
 old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly
 beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my
 eyes. she sang, and her voice flowed in rich cadence, swelling or
 dying away like nightingale of the woods.
 
“when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first
 declined it. she played simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
 sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. the old
 man appeared enraptured and said some words which agatha endeavoured to
 explain to safie, and by which appeared to wish to express that she
 bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.
 
“the days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration
 that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
 safie was always gay and happy; she and i improved rapidly in the
 knowledge of language, so that in two months i began to comprehend most
 of the words uttered by my protectors.
 
“in the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and
 the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
 scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
 the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal
 rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably
 shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for i never
 ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same
 treatment i had formerly endured in the first village which i entered.
 
“my days were spent in close attention, that i might more speedily
 master the language; and i may boast that i improved more rapidly than
 the arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken
 accents, whilst i comprehended and could imitate almost every word that
 was spoken.
 
“while i improved in speech, i also learned the science of letters as
 it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before wide field
 for wonder and delight.
 
“the book from which felix instructed safie was volney’s _ruins
 of empires_. i should not have understood the purport of this book had not
 felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. had chosen this
 work, said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the
 eastern authors. through this work i obtained cursory knowledge of history
 and view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave
 an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different
 nations of the earth. i heard of the slothful asiatics, of the stupendous
 genius and mental activity of the grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue
 of the early romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the
 decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings. i heard
 of the discovery of the american hemisphere and wept with safie over the
 hapless fate of its original inhabitants.
 
“these wonderful narrations inspired with strange feelings. was
 man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so
 vicious and base? appeared at one time mere scion of the evil
 principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and
 godlike. to be great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour
 that can befall sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
 record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, condition more
 abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. for long time i
 could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or
 even why there were laws and governments; but when i heard details of
 vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and i turned away with disgust and
 loathing.
 
“every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
 while i listened to the instructions which felix bestowed upon the
 arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. i
 heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid
 poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.
 
“the words induced to turn towards myself. i learned that the
 possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and
 unsullied descent united with riches. man might be respected with
 only one of these advantages, but without either was considered,
 except in very rare instances, as vagabond and slave, doomed to
 waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! and what was i? of
 my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i
 possessed money, friends, kind of property. i was, besides,
 endued with figure hideously deformed and loathsome; i was not even
 of the same nature as man. i was more agile than they and could
 subsist upon coarser diet; i bore the extremes of heat and cold with
 less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. when i looked
 around i saw and heard of none like me. was i, then, monster, blot
 upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
 
“i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
 upon me; i tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
 knowledge. oh, that i had for ever remained in my native wood, nor
 known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!
 
“of what strange nature is knowledge! it clings to the mind when it
 has once seized on it like lichen on the rock. i wished sometimes to
 shake off all thought and feeling, but i learned that there was but one
 means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state
 which i feared yet did not understand. i admired virtue and good
 feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
 cottagers, but i was shut out from intercourse with them, except
 through means which i obtained by stealth, when i was unseen and
 unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire i had of
 becoming one among my fellows. the gentle words of agatha and the
 animated smiles of the charming arabian were not for me. the mild
 exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved
 felix were not for me. miserable, unhappy wretch!
 
“other lessons were impressed upon even more deeply. i heard of the
 difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the
 father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the
 older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up
 in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained
 knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which
 bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.
 
“but where were my friends and relations? father had watched my
 infant days, mother had blessed with smiles and caresses; or if
 they had, all my past life was now blot, blind vacancy in which i
 distinguished nothing. from my earliest remembrance i had been as i
 then was in height and proportion. i had never yet seen being
 resembling or who claimed any intercourse with me. what was i? the
 question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.
 
“i will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow now to
 return to the cottagers, whose story excited in such various
 feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated
 in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so i loved, in
 an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).”
 



chapter 14
 

“some time elapsed before i learned the history of my friends. it was
 one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
 as it did number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to
 one so utterly inexperienced as i was.
 
“the name of the old man was lacey. was descended from good
 family in france, where had lived for many years in affluence,
 respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. his was bred
 in the service of his country, and agatha had ranked with ladies of the
 highest distinction. few months before my arrival they had lived in
 large and luxurious city called paris, surrounded by friends and
 possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
 taste, accompanied by moderate fortune, could afford.
 
“the father of safie had been the cause of their ruin. was a
 turkish merchant and had inhabited paris for many years, when, for some
 reason which i could not learn, became obnoxious to the government.
 was seized and cast into prison the very day that safie arrived from
 constantinople to join him. was tried and condemned to death. the
 injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all paris was indignant;
 and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime
 alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.
 
“felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and
 indignation were uncontrollable when heard the decision of the
 court. made, at that moment, solemn vow to deliver him and then
 looked around for the means. after many fruitless attempts to gain
 admittance to the prison, found strongly grated window in an
 unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the
 unfortunate muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the
 execution of the barbarous sentence. felix visited the grate at night
 and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. the turk,
 amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer
 by promises of reward and wealth. felix rejected his offers with
 contempt, yet when saw the lovely safie, who was allowed to visit
 her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the
 youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed
 treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
 
“the turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made
 on the heart of felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in
 his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he
 should be conveyed to place of safety. felix was too delicate to
 accept this offer, yet looked forward to the probability of the
 event as to the consummation of his happiness.
 
“during the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for
 the escape of the merchant, the zeal of felix was warmed by several
 letters that received from this lovely girl, who found means to
 express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old
 man, servant of her father who understood french. she thanked him in
 the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and
 at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
 
“i have copies of these letters, for i found means, during my residence
 in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters
 were often in the hands of felix or agatha. before i depart i will
 give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present,
 as the sun is already far declined, i shall only have time to repeat
 the substance of them to you.
 
“safie related that her mother was christian arab, seized and made a
 slave by the turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of
 the father of safie, who married her. the young girl spoke in high and
 enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the
 bondage to which she was now reduced. she instructed her daughter in
 the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of
 intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female
 followers of muhammad. this lady died, but her lessons were indelibly
 impressed on the mind of safie, who sickened at the prospect of again
 returning to asia and being immured within the walls of harem,
 allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to
 the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and noble
 emulation for virtue. the prospect of marrying christian and
 remaining in country where women were allowed to take rank in
 society was enchanting to her.
 
“the day for the execution of the turk was fixed, but on the night
 previous to it quitted his prison and before morning was distant
 many leagues from paris. felix had procured passports in the name of
 his father, sister, and himself. had previously communicated his
 plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under
 the pretence of journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in
 an obscure part of paris.
 
“felix conducted the fugitives through france to lyons and across mont
 cenis to leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait favourable
 opportunity of passing into some part of the turkish dominions.
 
“safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his
 departure, before which time the turk renewed his promise that she
 should be united to his deliverer; and felix remained with them in
 expectation of that event; and in the meantime enjoyed the society
 of the arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest
 affection. they conversed with one another through the means of an
 interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and safie
 sang to him the divine airs of her native country.
 
“the turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes
 of the youthful lovers, while in his heart had formed far other
 plans. loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
 christian, but feared the resentment of felix if should appear
 lukewarm, for knew that was still in the power of his deliverer
 if should choose to betray him to the italian state which they
 inhabited. revolved thousand plans by which should be enabled
 to prolong the deceit until it might be longer necessary, and
 secretly to take his daughter with him when departed. his plans
 were facilitated by the news which arrived from paris.
 
“the government of france were greatly enraged at the escape of their
 victim and spared pains to detect and punish his deliverer. the
 plot of felix was quickly discovered, and lacey and agatha were
 thrown into prison. the news reached felix and roused him from his
 dream of pleasure. his blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay
 in noisome dungeon while enjoyed the free air and the society of
 her whom loved. this idea was torture to him. quickly arranged
 with the turk that if the latter should find favourable opportunity
 for escape before felix could return to italy, safie should remain as a
 boarder at convent at leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely arabian,
 hastened to paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the
 law, hoping to free lacey and agatha by this proceeding.
 
“he did not succeed. they remained confined for five months before the
 trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune
 and condemned them to perpetual exile from their native country.
 
“they found miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i
 discovered them. felix soon learned that the treacherous turk, for
 whom and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
 discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
 became traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted italy with
 his daughter, insultingly sending felix pittance of money to aid him,
 as said, in some plan of future maintenance.
 
“such were the events that preyed on the heart of felix and rendered
 him, when i first saw him, the most miserable of his family. could
 have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his
 virtue, gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the turk and the loss
 of his beloved safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. the
 arrival of the arabian now infused new life into his soul.
 
“when the news reached leghorn that felix was deprived of his wealth
 and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think more of her
 lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. the generous
 nature of safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
 expostulate with her father, but left her angrily, reiterating his
 tyrannical mandate.
 
“a few days after, the turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told
 her hastily that had reason to believe that his residence at leghorn
 had been divulged and that should speedily be delivered up to the
 french government; had consequently hired vessel to convey him to
 constantinople, for which city should sail in few hours. he
 intended to leave his daughter under the care of confidential
 servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his
 property, which had not yet arrived at leghorn.
 
“when alone, safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
 would become her to pursue in this emergency. residence in turkey
 was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse
 to it. by some papers of her father which fell into her hands she
 heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
 then resided. she hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
 determination. taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a
 sum of money, she quitted italy with an attendant, native of leghorn,
 but who understood the common language of turkey, and departed for
 germany.
 
“she arrived in safety at town about twenty leagues from the cottage
 of lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. safie nursed her
 with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the
 arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country
 and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. she fell, however,
 into good hands. the italian had mentioned the name of the spot for
 which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in
 which they had lived took care that safie should arrive in safety at
 the cottage of her lover.”
 



chapter 15
 

“such was the history of my beloved cottagers. it impressed deeply.
 i learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
 their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.
 
“as yet i looked upon crime as distant evil, benevolence and
 generosity were ever present before me, inciting within desire to
 become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
 were called forth and displayed. but in giving an account of the
 progress of my intellect, i must not omit circumstance which occurred
 in the beginning of the month of august of the same year.
 
“one night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where i
 collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, i found on
 the ground leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and
 some books. i eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel. 
fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which i
 had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of _paradise lost_, volume
 of _plutarch’s lives_, and the _sorrows of werter_. the
 possession of these treasures gave extreme delight; i now continually
 studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were
 employed in their ordinary occupations.
 
“i can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. they produced
 in an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
 to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk into the lowest dejection. in
 the _sorrows of werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
 story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
 what had hitherto been to obscure subjects that i found in it a
 never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. the gentle and
 domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
 feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
 well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
 were for ever alive in my own bosom. but i thought werter himself a
 more divine being than i had ever beheld or imagined; his character
 contained pretension, but it sank deep. the disquisitions upon
 death and suicide were calculated to fill with wonder. i did not
 pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet i inclined towards
 the opinions of the hero, whose extinction i wept, without precisely
 understanding it.
 
“as i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and
 condition. i found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
 unlike to the beings concerning whom i read and to whose conversation i
 was listener. i sympathised with and partly understood them, but i
 was unformed in mind; i was dependent on none and related to none.
 ‘the path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my
 annihilation. my person was hideous and my stature gigantic. what did
 this mean? who was i? what was i? whence did i come? what was my
 destination? these questions continually recurred, but i was unable to
 solve them.
 
“the volume of _plutarch’s lives_ which i possessed contained the
 histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. this book
 had far different effect upon from the _sorrows of werter_. i
 learned from werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but plutarch
 taught high thoughts; elevated above the wretched sphere of my
 own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. many
 things i read surpassed my understanding and experience. i had very
 confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
 and boundless seas. but i was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
 large assemblages of men. the cottage of my protectors had been the
 only school in which i had studied human nature, but this book
 developed new and mightier scenes of action. i read of men concerned
 in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. i felt the
 greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
 far as i understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
 were, as i applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. induced by these
 feelings, i was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, numa,
 solon, and lycurgus, in preference to romulus and theseus. the
 patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
 firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
 been made by young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, i should
 have been imbued with different sensations.
 
“but _paradise lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. i read
 it, as i had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
 true history. it moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
 picture of an omnipotent god warring with his creatures was capable of
 exciting. i often referred the several situations, as their similarity
 struck me, to my own. like adam, i was apparently united by link to
 any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
 in every other respect. had come forth from the hands of god a
 perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
 his creator; was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
 beings of superior nature, but i was wretched, helpless, and alone.
 many times i considered satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
 often, like him, when i viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
 gall of envy rose within me.
 
“another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. soon
 after my arrival in the hovel i discovered some papers in the pocket of
 the dress which i had taken from your laboratory. at first i had
 neglected them, but now that i was able to decipher the characters in
 which they were written, i began to study them with diligence. it was
 your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. you
 minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
 of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
 occurrences. you doubtless recollect these papers. here they are.
 everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
 origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
 which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
 and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
 horrors and rendered mine indelible. i sickened as i read. ‘hateful
 day when i received life!’ i exclaimed in agony. ‘accursed creator!
 why did you form monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from in
 disgust? god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
 image; but my form is filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
 very resemblance. satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
 and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.’
 
“these were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
 but when i contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
 benevolent dispositions, i persuaded myself that when they should
 become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would
 compassionate and overlook my personal deformity. could they turn
 from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
 and friendship? i resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
 to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. i
 postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
 attached to its success inspired with dread lest i should fail.
 besides, i found that my understanding improved so much with every
 day’s experience that i was unwilling to commence this undertaking
 until few more months should have added to my sagacity.
 
“several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. the
 presence of safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and i also
 found that greater degree of plenty reigned there. felix and agatha
 spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
 their labours by servants. they did not appear rich, but they were
 contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
 mine became every day more tumultuous. increase of knowledge only
 discovered to more clearly what wretched outcast i was. i
 cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when i beheld my person
 reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
 image and that inconstant shade.
 
“i endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
 which in few months i resolved to undergo; and sometimes i allowed my
 thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of paradise, and
 dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my
 feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
 smiles of consolation. but it was all dream; eve soothed my
 sorrows nor shared my thoughts; i was alone. i remembered adam’s
 supplication to his creator. but where was mine? had abandoned me,
 and in the bitterness of my heart i cursed him.
 
“autumn passed thus. i saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
 and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
 had worn when i first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. yet i did
 not heed the bleakness of the weather; i was better fitted by my
 conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. but my chief
 delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
 apparel of summer; when those deserted me, i turned with more attention
 towards the cottagers. their happiness was not decreased by the
 absence of summer. they loved and sympathised with one another; and
 their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
 casualties that took place around them. the more i saw of them, the
 greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
 heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
 their sweet looks directed towards with affection was the utmost
 limit of my ambition. i dared not think that they would turn them from
 with disdain and horror. the poor that stopped at their door were
 never driven away. i asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
 little food or rest: i required kindness and sympathy; but i did not
 believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
 
“the winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
 place since i awoke into life. my attention at this time was solely
 directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
 protectors. i revolved many projects, but that on which i finally
 fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
 i had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
 person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
 beheld me. my voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; i
 thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children i could gain
 the good will and mediation of the old lacey, i might by his means
 be tolerated by my younger protectors.
 
“one day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
 and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, safie, agatha,
 and felix departed on long country walk, and the old man, at his own
 desire, was left alone in the cottage. when his children had departed,
 took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
 sweet and mournful than i had ever heard him play before. at first his
 countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as continued,
 thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
 instrument, sat absorbed in reflection.
 
“my heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
 would decide my hopes or realise my fears. the servants were gone to a
 neighbouring fair. all was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
 excellent opportunity; yet, when i proceeded to execute my plan, my
 limbs failed and i sank to the ground. again i rose, and exerting
 all the firmness of which i was master, removed the planks which i had
 placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. the fresh air revived
 me, and with renewed determination i approached the door of their
 cottage.
 
“i knocked. ‘who is there?’ said the old man. ‘come in.’
 
“i entered. ‘pardon this intrusion,’ said i; ‘i am
 traveller in want of little rest; you would greatly oblige if you
 would allow to remain few minutes before the fire.’
 
“‘enter,’ said lacey, ‘and i will try in what
 manner i can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are
 from home, and as i am blind, i am afraid i shall find it difficult to
 procure food for you.’
 
“‘do not trouble yourself, my kind host; i have food; it is
 warmth and rest only that i need.’
 
“i sat down, and silence ensued. i knew that every minute was
 precious to me, yet i remained irresolute in what manner to commence
 the interview, when the old man addressed me.
 
‘by your language, stranger, i suppose you are my countryman; are you
 french?’
 
“‘no; but i was educated by french family and understand that
 language only. i am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
 whom i sincerely love, and of whose favour i have some hopes.’
 
“‘are they germans?’
 
“‘no, they are french. but let us change the subject. i am an
 unfortunate and deserted creature, i look around and i have relation
 or friend upon earth. these amiable people to whom i go have never
 seen and know little of me. i am full of fears, for if i fail
 there, i am an outcast in the world for ever.’
 
“‘do not despair. to be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
 the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
 full of brotherly love and charity. rely, therefore, on your hopes;
 and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’
 
“‘they are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
 but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. i have good
 dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
 beneficial; but fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
 ought to see feeling and kind friend, they behold only detestable
 monster.’
 
“‘that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
 you undeceive them?’
 
“‘i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i
 feel so many overwhelming terrors. i tenderly love these friends; i
 have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
 kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and
 it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.’
 
“‘where do these friends reside?’
 
“‘near this spot.’
 
“the old man paused and then continued, ‘if you will unreservedly
 confide to the particulars of your tale, i perhaps may be of use in
 undeceiving them. i am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
 there is something in your words which persuades that you are
 sincere. i am poor and an exile, but it will afford true pleasure
 to be in any way serviceable to human creature.’
 
“‘excellent man! i thank you and accept your generous offer. you
 raise from the dust by this kindness; and i trust that, by your aid,
 i shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
 creatures.’
 
“‘heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal, for that can only
 drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. i also am
 unfortunate; i and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
 judge, therefore, if i do not feel for your misfortunes.’
 
“‘how can i thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lips
 first have i heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; i shall
 be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures of success
 with those friends whom i am on the point of meeting.’
 
“‘may i know the names and residence of those friends?’
 
“i paused. this, i thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
 rob of or bestow happiness on for ever. i struggled vainly for
 firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
 remaining strength; i sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. at that
 moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors. i had not moment
 to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, i cried, ‘now is the
 time! save and protect me! you and your family are the friends whom i
 seek. do not you desert in the hour of trial!’
 
“‘great god!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘who are you?’
 
“at that instant the cottage door was opened, and felix, safie, and
 agatha entered. who can describe their horror and consternation on
 beholding me? agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her
 friend, rushed out of the cottage. felix darted forward, and with
 supernatural force tore from his father, to whose knees i clung, in
 transport of fury, dashed to the ground and struck violently
 with stick. i could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
 the antelope. but my heart sank within as with bitter sickness, and
 i refrained. i saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
 overcome by pain and anguish, i quitted the cottage, and in the general
 tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”
 



chapter 16
 

“cursed, cursed creator! why did i live? why, in that instant, did i
 not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
 bestowed? i know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
 feelings were those of rage and revenge. i could with pleasure have
 destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
 their shrieks and misery.
 
“when night came i quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
 now, longer restrained by the fear of discovery, i gave vent to my
 anguish in fearful howlings. i was like wild beast that had broken
 the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed and ranging
 through the wood with stag-like swiftness. oh! what miserable
 night i passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
 waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of bird
 burst forth amidst the universal stillness. all, save i, were at rest
 or in enjoyment; i, like the arch-fiend, bore hell within me, and
 finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
 havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
 the ruin.
 
“but this was luxury of sensation that could not endure; i became
 fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
 the sick impotence of despair. there was none among the myriads of men
 that existed who would pity or assist me; and should i feel kindness
 towards my enemies? no; from that moment i declared everlasting war
 against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
 and sent forth to this insupportable misery.
 
“the sun rose; i heard the voices of men and knew that it was
 impossible to return to my retreat during that day. accordingly i hid
 myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
 to reflection on my situation.
 
“the pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored to some
 degree of tranquillity; and when i considered what had passed at the
 cottage, i could not help believing that i had been too hasty in my
 conclusions. i had certainly acted imprudently. it was apparent that
 my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and i was a
 fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. i
 ought to have familiarised the old lacey to me, and by degrees to
 have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
 been prepared for my approach. but i did not believe my errors to be
 irretrievable, and after much consideration i resolved to return to the
 cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
 party.
 
“these thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon i sank into profound
 sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow to be visited by
 peaceful dreams. the horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
 acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged felix
 tearing from his father’s feet. i awoke exhausted, and finding that
 it was already night, i crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
 search of food.
 
“when my hunger was appeased, i directed my steps towards the
 well-known path that conducted to the cottage. all there was at peace.
 i crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
 accustomed hour when the family arose. that hour passed, the sun
 mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. i
 trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. the inside
 of the cottage was dark, and i heard motion; i cannot describe the
 agony of this suspense.
 
“presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
 entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but i did not
 understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
 which differed from that of my protectors. soon after, however, felix
 approached with another man; i was surprised, as i knew that had not
 quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
 his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.
 
“‘do you consider,’ said his companion to him,
 ‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
 the produce of your garden? i do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and
 i beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
 determination.’
 
“‘it is utterly useless,’ replied felix; ‘we can
 never again inhabit your cottage. the life of my father is in the greatest
 danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that i have related. my wife and
 my sister will never recover from their horror. i entreat you not to reason
 with any more. take possession of your tenement and let fly from this
 place.’
 
“felix trembled violently as said this. and his companion
 entered the cottage, in which they remained for few minutes, and then
 departed. i never saw any of the family of lacey more.
 
“i continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in state of
 utter and stupid despair. my protectors had departed and had broken
 the only link that held to the world. for the first time the
 feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and i did not strive to
 control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, i
 bent my mind towards injury and death. when i thought of my friends,
 of the mild voice of lacey, the gentle eyes of agatha, and the
 exquisite beauty of the arabian, these thoughts vanished and gush of
 tears somewhat soothed me. but again when i reflected that they had
 spurned and deserted me, anger returned, rage of anger, and unable to
 injure anything human, i turned my fury towards inanimate objects. as
 night advanced, i placed variety of combustibles around the cottage,
 and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
 i waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
 operations.
 
“as the night advanced, fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
 dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
 along like mighty avalanche and produced kind of insanity in my
 spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. i lighted the
 dry branch of tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
 my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
 nearly touched. part of its orb was at length hid, and i waved my
 brand; it sank, and with loud scream i fired the straw, and heath,
 and bushes, which i had collected. the wind fanned the fire, and the
 cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
 licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
 
“as soon as i was convinced that assistance could save any part of
 the habitation, i quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.
 
“and now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps? i
 resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
 and despised, every country must be equally horrible. at length the
 thought of you crossed my mind. i learned from your papers that you
 were my father, my creator; and to whom could i apply with more fitness
 than to him who had given life? among the lessons that felix had
 bestowed upon safie, geography had not been omitted; i had learned from
 these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
 you had mentioned geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
 this place i resolved to proceed.
 
“but how was i to direct myself? i knew that i must travel in a
 southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
 only guide. i did not know the names of the towns that i was to pass
 through, nor could i ask information from single human being; but i
 did not despair. from you only could i hope for succour, although
 towards you i felt sentiment but that of hatred. unfeeling,
 heartless creator! you had endowed with perceptions and passions
 and then cast abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
 but on you only had i any claim for pity and redress, and from you i
 determined to seek that justice which i vainly attempted to gain from
 any other being that wore the human form.
 
“my travels were long and the sufferings i endured intense. it was
 late in autumn when i quitted the district where i had so long resided.
 i travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
 human being. nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
 rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
 of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and i found shelter. oh,
 earth! how often did i imprecate curses on the cause of my being! the
 mildness of my nature had fled, and all within was turned to gall
 and bitterness. the nearer i approached to your habitation, the more
 deeply did i feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. snow
 fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rested not. few incidents
 now and then directed me, and i possessed map of the country; but i
 often wandered wide from my path. the agony of my feelings allowed me
 respite; incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
 not extract its food; but circumstance that happened when i arrived
 on the confines of switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
 and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
 manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.
 
“i generally rested during the day and travelled only when i was
 secured by night from the view of man. one morning, however, finding
 that my path lay through deep wood, i ventured to continue my journey
 after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
 cheered even by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
 the air. i felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
 appeared dead, revive within me. half surprised by the novelty of
 these sensations, i allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
 forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. soft tears
 again bedewed my cheeks, and i even raised my humid eyes with
 thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.
 
“i continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until i came to its
 boundary, which was skirted by deep and rapid river, into which many
 of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
 here i paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when i heard
 the sound of voices, that induced to conceal myself under the shade
 of cypress. i was scarcely hid when young girl came running
 towards the spot where i was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
 someone in sport. she continued her course along the precipitous sides
 of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
 rapid stream. i rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
 from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. she
 was senseless, and i endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
 animation, when i was suddenly interrupted by the approach of rustic,
 who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. on
 seeing me, darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
 hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. i followed speedily, i
 hardly knew why; but when the man saw draw near, aimed gun,
 which carried, at my body and fired. i sank to the ground, and my
 injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.
 
“this was then the reward of my benevolence! i had saved human being
 from destruction, and as recompense i now writhed under the miserable
 pain of wound which shattered the flesh and bone. the feelings of
 kindness and gentleness which i had entertained but few moments
 before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. inflamed by
 pain, i vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. but the
 agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and i fainted.
 
“for some weeks i led miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
 cure the wound which i had received. the ball had entered my shoulder,
 and i knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
 rate i had means of extracting it. my sufferings were augmented
 also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
 infliction. my daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge,
 such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish i had
 endured.
 
“after some weeks my wound healed, and i continued my journey. the
 labours i endured were longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
 gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but mockery which insulted my
 desolate state and made feel more painfully that i was not made for
 the enjoyment of pleasure.
 
“but my toils now drew near close, and in two months from this time i
 reached the environs of geneva.
 
“it was evening when i arrived, and i retired to hiding-place among
 the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner i should apply
 to you. i was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
 enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
 behind the stupendous mountains of jura.
 
“at this time slight sleep relieved from the pain of reflection,
 which was disturbed by the approach of beautiful child, who came
 running into the recess i had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
 infancy. suddenly, as i gazed on him, an idea seized that this
 little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short time to have
 imbibed horror of deformity. if, therefore, i could seize him and
 educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in
 this peopled earth.
 
“urged by this impulse, i seized on the boy as passed and drew him
 towards me. as soon as beheld my form, placed his hands before
 his eyes and uttered shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his
 face and said, ‘child, what is the meaning of this? i do not intend to
 hurt you; listen to me.’
 
“he struggled violently. ‘let go,’ cried;
 ‘monster! ugly wretch! you wish to eat and tear to pieces. you
 are an ogre. let go, or i will tell my papa.’
 
“‘boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’
 
“‘hideous monster! let go. my papa is syndic—he is m.
 frankenstein—he will punish you. you dare not keep me.’
 
“‘frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom i have
 sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’
 
“the child still struggled and loaded with epithets which carried
 despair to my heart; i grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
 moment lay dead at my feet.
 
“i gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
 triumph; clapping my hands, i exclaimed, ‘i too can create desolation;
 my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
 thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’
 
“as i fixed my eyes on the child, i saw something glittering on his
 breast. i took it; it was portrait of most lovely woman. in spite
 of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. for few moments i
 gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
 lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; i remembered that i was
 for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
 bestow and that she whose resemblance i contemplated would, in
 regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
 expressive of disgust and affright.
 
“can you wonder that such thoughts transported with rage? i only
 wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
 exclamations and agony, i did not rush among mankind and perish in the
 attempt to destroy them.
 
“while i was overcome by these feelings, i left the spot where i had
 committed the murder, and seeking more secluded hiding-place, i
 entered barn which had appeared to to be empty. woman was
 sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
 whose portrait i held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
 loveliness of youth and health. here, i thought, is one of those whose
 joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. and then i bent over
 her and whispered, ‘awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
 give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
 beloved, awake!’
 
“the sleeper stirred; thrill of terror ran through me. should she
 indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? thus
 would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
 the thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not i, but
 she, shall suffer; the murder i have committed because i am for ever
 robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. the crime had
 its source in her; be hers the punishment! thanks to the lessons of
 felix and the sanguinary laws of man, i had learned now to work
 mischief. i bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
 the folds of her dress. she moved again, and i fled.
 
“for some days i haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
 sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
 its miseries for ever. at length i wandered towards these mountains,
 and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by burning
 passion which you alone can gratify. we may not part until you have
 promised to comply with my requisition. i am alone and miserable; man
 will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
 would not deny herself to me. my companion must be of the same species
 and have the same defects. this being you must create.”
 



chapter 17
 

the being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon in the
 expectation of reply. but i was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
 arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
 proposition. continued,
 
“you must create female for with whom i can live in the
 interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. this you alone
 can do, and i demand it of you as right which you must not refuse to
 concede.”
 
the latter part of his tale had kindled anew in the anger that had
 died away while narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
 as said this i could longer suppress the rage that burned within
 me.
 
“i do refuse it,” i replied; “and torture shall ever extort a
 consent from me. you may render the most miserable of men, but you
 shall never make base in my own eyes. shall i create another like
 yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. begone! i
 have answered you; you may torture me, but i will never consent.”
 
“you are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead
 of threatening, i am content to reason with you. i am malicious because i
 am miserable. am i not shunned and hated by all mankind? you, my creator,
 would tear to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell why i
 should pity man more than pities me? you would not call it murder if you
 could precipitate into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
 work of your own hands. shall i respect man when condemns me? let him
 live with in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury i would
 bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
 but that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
 union. yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. i will
 revenge my injuries; if i cannot inspire love, i will cause fear, and
 chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do i swear
 inextinguishable hatred. have care; i will work at your destruction, nor
 finish until i desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
 your birth.”
 
fiendish rage animated him as said this; his face was wrinkled
 into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
 calmed himself and proceeded—
 
“i intended to reason. this passion is detrimental to me, for you do
 not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. if any being felt
 emotions of benevolence towards me, i should return them hundred and a
 hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake i would make peace with the
 whole kind! but i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
 what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand creature of
 another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
 is all that i can receive, and it shall content me. it is true, we shall be
 monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
 attached to one another. our lives will not be happy, but they will be
 harmless and free from the misery i now feel. oh! my creator, make me
 happy; let feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! let see that i
 excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny my
 request!”
 
i was moved. i shuddered when i thought of the possible consequences
 of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his argument.
 his tale and the feelings now expressed proved him to be creature
 of fine sensations, and did i not as his maker owe him all the portion
 of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? saw my change of
 feeling and continued,
 
“if you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
 us again; i will go to the vast wilds of south america. my food is not
 that of man; i do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
 acorns and berries afford sufficient nourishment. my companion will
 be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
 we shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
 man and will ripen our food. the picture i present to you is peaceful
 and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
 wantonness of power and cruelty. pitiless as you have been towards me,
 i now see compassion in your eyes; let seize the favourable moment
 and persuade you to promise what i so ardently desire.”
 
“you propose,” replied i, “to fly from the habitations of
 man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
 only companions. how can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
 persevere in this exile? you will return and again seek their kindness, and
 you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
 and you will then have companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
 this may not be; cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.”
 
“how inconstant are your feelings! but moment ago you were moved by
 my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
 i swear to you, by the earth which i inhabit, and by you that made me, that
 with the companion you bestow, i will quit the neighbourhood of man and
 dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. my evil passions
 will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy! my life will flow quietly
 away, and in my dying moments i shall not curse my maker.”
 
his words had strange effect upon me. i compassionated him and
 sometimes felt wish to console him, but when i looked upon him, when
 i saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
 feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. i tried to stifle
 these sensations; i thought that as i could not sympathise with him, i
 had right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
 was yet in my power to bestow.
 
“you swear,” i said, “to be harmless; but have you not
 already shown degree of malice that should reasonably make distrust
 you? may not even this be feint that will increase your triumph by
 affording wider scope for your revenge?”
 
“how is this? i must not be trifled with, and i demand an answer. if
 i have ties and affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
 the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and i shall
 become thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. my vices
 are the children of forced solitude that i abhor, and my virtues will
 necessarily arise when i live in communion with an equal. i shall feel
 the affections of sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
 existence and events from which i am now excluded.”
 
i paused some time to reflect on all had related and the various
 arguments which had employed. i thought of the promise of virtues which
 had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
 of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
 manifested towards him. his power and threats were not omitted in my
 calculations; creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
 and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
 was being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. after a
 long pause of reflection i concluded that the justice due both to him and
 my fellow creatures demanded of that i should comply with his request.
 turning to him, therefore, i said,
 
“i consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europe for ever,
 and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as i shall
 deliver into your hands female who will accompany you in your exile.”
 
“i swear,” cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
 heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
 prayer, while they exist you shall never behold again. depart to your
 home and commence your labours; i shall watch their progress with
 unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready i shall
 appear.”
 
saying this, suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
 my sentiments. i saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
 the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
 of ice.
 
his tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
 the horizon when departed. i knew that i ought to hasten my descent
 towards the valley, as i should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
 heart was heavy, and my steps slow. the labour of winding among the
 little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as i advanced
 perplexed me, occupied as i was by the emotions which the occurrences
 of the day had produced. night was far advanced when i came to the
 halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. the stars
 shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
 rose before me, and every here and there broken tree lay on the
 ground; it was scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
 thoughts within me. i wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, i
 exclaimed, “oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
 me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let become as
 nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave in darkness.”
 
these were wild and miserable thoughts, but i cannot describe to you
 how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon and how i
 listened to every blast of wind as if it were dull ugly siroc on its
 way to consume me.
 
morning dawned before i arrived at the village of chamounix; i took no
 rest, but returned immediately to geneva. even in my own heart i could
 give expression to my sensations—they weighed on with a
 mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
 thus i returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
 family. my haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but i
 answered question, scarcely did i speak. i felt as if i were placed
 under ban—as if i had right to claim their sympathies—as if
 never more might i enjoy companionship with them. yet even thus i
 loved them to adoration; and to save them, i resolved to dedicate
 myself to my most abhorred task. the prospect of such an occupation
 made every other circumstance of existence pass before like dream,
 and that thought only had to the reality of life.
 



chapter 18
 

day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to geneva; and
 i could not collect the courage to recommence my work. i feared the
 vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet i was unable to overcome my
 repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. i found that i could not
 compose female without again devoting several months to profound
 study and laborious disquisition. i had heard of some discoveries
 having been made by an english philosopher, the knowledge of which was
 material to my success, and i sometimes thought of obtaining my
 father’s consent to visit england for this purpose; but i clung to
 every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
 undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
 me. change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
 hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
 unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. my
 father saw this change with pleasure, and turned his thoughts
 towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
 which every now and then would return by fits, and with devouring
 blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. at these moments i took
 refuge in the most perfect solitude. i passed whole days on the lake
 alone in little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
 rippling of the waves, silent and listless. but the fresh air and
 bright sun seldom failed to restore to some degree of composure, and
 on my return i met the salutations of my friends with readier smile
 and more cheerful heart.
 
it was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
 calling aside, thus addressed me,
 
“i am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
 pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. and yet you are still
 unhappy and still avoid our society. for some time i was lost in
 conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
 and if it is well founded, i conjure you to avow it. reserve on such a
 point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.”
 
i trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued—
 
“i confess, my son, that i have always looked forward to your
 marriage with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the
 stay of my declining years. you were attached to each other from your
 earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and
 tastes, entirely suited to one another. but so blind is the experience of
 man that what i conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
 entirely destroyed it. you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any
 wish that she might become your wife. nay, you may have met with another
 whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to
 elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear
 to feel.”
 
“my dear father, reassure yourself. i love my cousin tenderly and
 sincerely. i never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my
 warmest admiration and affection. my future hopes and prospects are
 entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.”
 
“the expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear victor,
 gives more pleasure than i have for some time experienced. if you
 feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
 gloom over us. but it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
 strong hold of your mind that i wish to dissipate. tell me,
 therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the
 marriage. we have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
 from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. you
 are younger; yet i do not suppose, possessed as you are of competent
 fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
 plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. do not suppose,
 however, that i wish to dictate happiness to you or that delay on
 your part would cause any serious uneasiness. interpret my words
 with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and
 sincerity.”
 
i listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
 of offering any reply. i revolved rapidly in my mind multitude of
 thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. alas! to me
 the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and
 dismay. i was bound by solemn promise which i had not yet fulfilled
 and dared not break, or if i did, what manifold miseries might not
 impend over and my devoted family! could i enter into festival
 with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing to the
 ground? i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
 his mate before i allowed myself to enjoy the delight of union from
 which i expected peace.
 
i remembered also the necessity imposed upon of either journeying to
 england or entering into long correspondence with those philosophers
 of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
 use to in my present undertaking. the latter method of obtaining
 the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i
 had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
 loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar
 intercourse with those i loved. i knew that thousand fearful
 accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose tale to
 thrill all connected with with horror. i was aware also that i
 should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
 harrowing sensations that would possess during the progress of my
 unearthly occupation. i must absent myself from all i loved while thus
 employed. once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and i might be
 restored to my family in peace and happiness. my promise fulfilled,
 the monster would depart for ever. or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
 accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
 slavery for ever.
 
these feelings dictated my answer to my father. i expressed wish to
 visit england, but concealing the true reasons of this request, i
 clothed my desires under guise which excited suspicion, while i
 urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
 comply. after so long period of an absorbing melancholy that
 resembled madness in its intensity and effects, was glad to find
 that i was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such journey,
 and hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
 return, have restored entirely to myself.
 
the duration of my absence was left to my own choice; few months, or
 at most year, was the period contemplated. one paternal kind
 precaution had taken to ensure my having companion. without
 previously communicating with me, had, in concert with elizabeth,
 arranged that clerval should join at strasburgh. this interfered
 with the solitude i coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
 commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in way be
 an impediment, and truly i rejoiced that thus i should be saved many
 hours of lonely, maddening reflection. nay, henry might stand between
 and the intrusion of my foe. if i were alone, would not at times
 force his abhorred presence on to remind of my task or to
 contemplate its progress?
 
to england, therefore, i was bound, and it was understood that my union
 with elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. my father’s
 age rendered him extremely averse to delay. for myself, there was one
 reward i promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my
 unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
 enfranchised from my miserable slavery, i might claim elizabeth and
 forget the past in my union with her.
 
i now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
 which filled with fear and agitation. during my absence i should
 leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
 unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as might be by my
 departure. but had promised to follow wherever i might go, and
 would not accompany to england? this imagination was dreadful in
 itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
 i was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
 this might happen. but through the whole period during which i was the
 slave of my creature i allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
 the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
 would follow and exempt my family from the danger of his
 machinations.
 
it was in the latter end of september that i again quitted my native
 country. my journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth
 therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
 my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. it had
 been her care which provided companion in clerval—and yet man
 is blind to thousand minute circumstances which call forth woman’s
 sedulous attention. she longed to bid hasten my return; thousand
 conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade tearful, silent
 farewell.
 
i threw myself into the carriage that was to convey away, hardly
 knowing whither i was going, and careless of what was passing around.
 i remembered only, and it was with bitter anguish that i reflected on
 it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
 me. filled with dreary imaginations, i passed through many beautiful
 and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. i could
 only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
 whilst they endured.
 
after some days spent in listless indolence, during which i traversed
 many leagues, i arrived at strasburgh, where i waited two days for
 clerval. came. alas, how great was the contrast between us! he
 was alive to every new scene, joyful when saw the beauties of the
 setting sun, and more happy when beheld it rise and recommence new
 day. pointed out to the shifting colours of the landscape and
 the appearances of the sky. “this is what it is to live,” cried;
 “now i enjoy existence! but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are
 you desponding and sorrowful!” in truth, i was occupied by gloomy
 thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
 sunrise reflected in the rhine. and you, my friend, would be far more
 amused with the journal of clerval, who observed the scenery with an
 eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. i, a
 miserable wretch, haunted by curse that shut up every avenue to
 enjoyment.
 
we had agreed to descend the rhine in boat from strasburgh to
 rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for london. during this
 voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
 we stayed day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
 strasburgh, arrived at mainz. the course of the rhine below mainz
 becomes much more picturesque. the river descends rapidly and winds
 between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. we saw
 many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
 black woods, high and inaccessible. this part of the rhine, indeed,
 presents singularly variegated landscape. in one spot you view
 rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
 the dark rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of promontory,
 flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and meandering river
 and populous towns occupy the scene.
 
we travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers
 as we glided down the stream. even i, depressed in mind, and my spirits
 continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even i was pleased. i lay at the
 bottom of the boat, and as i gazed on the cloudless blue sky, i seemed to
 drink in tranquillity to which i had long been stranger. and if these
 were my sensations, who can describe those of henry? felt as if had
 been transported to fairy-land and enjoyed happiness seldom tasted by
 man. “i have seen,” said, “the most beautiful scenes
 of my own country; i have visited the lakes of lucerne and uri, where the
 snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black
 and impenetrable shades, which would cause gloomy and mournful appearance
 were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay
 appearance; i have seen this lake agitated by tempest, when the wind tore
 up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be
 on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
 where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and
 where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
 nightly wind; i have seen the mountains of valais, and the pays vaud;
 but this country, victor, pleases more than all those wonders. the
 mountains of switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a
 charm in the banks of this divine river that i never before saw equalled.
 look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
 island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now
 that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
 half hid in the recess of the mountain. oh, surely the spirit that inhabits
 and guards this place has soul more in harmony with man than those who
 pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of
 our own country.”
 
clerval! beloved friend! even now it delights to record your words and
 to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. was a
 being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” his wild and
 enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. his
 soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that
 devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
 in the imagination. but even human sympathies were not sufficient to
 satisfy his eager mind. the scenery of external nature, which others regard
 only with admiration, loved with ardour:—
 
——the sounding cataract
 haunted him like passion: the tall rock,
 the mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
 their colours and their forms, were then to him
 an appetite; feeling, and love,
 that had need of remoter charm,
 by thought supplied, or any interest
 unborrow’d from the eye.
 
[wordsworth’s “tintern abbey”.]
 
and where does now exist? is this gentle and lovely being lost
 for ever? has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
 and magnificent, which formed world, whose existence depended on the
 life of its creator;—has this mind perished? does it now only exist
 in my memory? no, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
 beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
 consoles your unhappy friend.
 
pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but slight
 tribute to the unexampled worth of henry, but they soothe my heart,
 overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. i will
 proceed with my tale.
 
beyond cologne we descended to the plains of holland; and we resolved to
 post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of
 the river was too gentle to aid us.
 
our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we
 arrived in few days at rotterdam, whence we proceeded by to england.
 it was on clear morning, in the latter days of december, that i first saw
 the white cliffs of britain. the banks of the thames presented new scene;
 they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the
 remembrance of some story. we saw tilbury fort and remembered the spanish
 armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwich—places which i had heard
 of even in my country.
 
at length we saw the numerous steeples of london, st. paul’s towering
 above all, and the tower famed in english history.
 



chapter 19
 

london was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
 months in this wonderful and celebrated city. clerval desired the
 intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
 time, but this was with secondary object; i was principally
 occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
 completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
 introduction that i had brought with me, addressed to the most
 distinguished natural philosophers.
 
if this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
 it would have afforded inexpressible pleasure. but blight had
 come over my existence, and i only visited these people for the sake of
 the information they might give on the subject in which my interest
 was so terribly profound. company was irksome to me; when alone, i
 could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
 henry soothed me, and i could thus cheat myself into transitory
 peace. but busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
 my heart. i saw an insurmountable barrier placed between and my
 fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of william and
 justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
 my soul with anguish.
 
but in clerval i saw the image of my former self; was inquisitive
 and anxious to gain experience and instruction. the difference of
 manners which observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
 instruction and amusement. was also pursuing an object had long
 had in view. his design was to visit india, in the belief that had
 in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views had
 taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
 european colonization and trade. in britain only could further the
 execution of his plan. was for ever busy, and the only check to his
 enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. i tried to conceal this
 as much as possible, that i might not debar him from the pleasures
 natural to one who was entering on new scene of life, undisturbed by
 any care or bitter recollection. i often refused to accompany him,
 alleging another engagement, that i might remain alone. i now also
 began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
 was to like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
 on the head. every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
 anguish, and every word that i spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
 to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.
 
after passing some months in london, we received letter from person in
 scotland who had formerly been our visitor at geneva. mentioned the
 beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient
 allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as perth,
 where resided. clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and i,
 although i abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and
 all the wondrous works with which nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.
 
we had arrived in england at the beginning of october, and it was now
 february. we accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
 north at the expiration of another month. in this expedition we did not
 intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford,
 matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of
 this tour about the end of july. i packed up my chemical instruments and
 the materials i had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
 obscure nook in the northern highlands of scotland.
 
we quitted london on the 27th of march and remained few days at
 windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. this was new scene to us
 mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
 stately deer were all novelties to us.
 
from thence we proceeded to oxford. as we entered this city, our minds
 were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
 there more than century and half before. it was here that charles
 i. had collected his forces. this city had remained faithful to him,
 after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
 parliament and liberty. the memory of that unfortunate king and his
 companions, the amiable falkland, the insolent goring, his queen, and
 son, gave peculiar interest to every part of the city which they
 might be supposed to have inhabited. the spirit of elder days found a
 dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. if these
 feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of
 the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
 the colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
 magnificent; and the lovely isis, which flows beside it through meadows
 of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into placid expanse of waters,
 which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and
 domes, embosomed among aged trees.
 
i enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
 memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. i was formed
 for peaceful happiness. during my youthful days discontent never
 visited my mind, and if i was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what
 is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
 the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate
 elasticity to my spirits. but i am blasted tree; the bolt has
 entered my soul; and i felt then that i should survive to exhibit what
 i shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
 pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
 
we passed considerable period at oxford, rambling among its environs
 and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
 animating epoch of english history. our little voyages of discovery
 were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented
 themselves. we visited the tomb of the illustrious hampden and the
 field on which that patriot fell. for moment my soul was elevated
 from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas
 of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments
 and the remembrancers. for an instant i dared to shake off my chains
 and look around with free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
 into my flesh, and i sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
 miserable self.
 
we left oxford with regret and proceeded to matlock, which was our next
 place of rest. the country in the neighbourhood of this village
 resembled, to greater degree, the scenery of switzerland; but
 everything is on lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
 distant white alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my
 native country. we visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
 of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same
 manner as in the collections at servox and chamounix. the latter name
 made tremble when pronounced by henry, and i hastened to quit
 matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
 
from derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in
 cumberland and westmorland. i could now almost fancy myself among the
 swiss mountains. the little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
 northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the
 rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. here also we
 made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat into
 happiness. the delight of clerval was proportionably greater than
 mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and found
 in his own nature greater capacities and resources than could have
 imagined himself to have possessed while associated with his
 inferiors. “i could pass my life here,” said to me; “and among
 these mountains i should scarcely regret switzerland and the rhine.”
 
but found that traveller’s life is one that includes much pain
 amidst its enjoyments. his feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
 when begins to sink into repose, finds himself obliged to quit
 that on which rests in pleasure for something new, which again
 engages his attention, and which also forsakes for other novelties.
 
we had scarcely visited the various lakes of cumberland and westmorland
 and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period
 of our appointment with our scotch friend approached, and we left them
 to travel on. for my own part i was not sorry. i had now neglected my
 promise for some time, and i feared the effects of the dæmon’s
 disappointment. might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance
 on my relatives. this idea pursued and tormented at every moment
 from which i might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. i waited
 for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed i was
 miserable and overcome by thousand fears; and when they arrived and i
 saw the superscription of elizabeth or my father, i hardly dared to
 read and ascertain my fate. sometimes i thought that the fiend
 followed and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
 when these thoughts possessed me, i would not quit henry for moment,
 but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
 his destroyer. i felt as if i had committed some great crime, the
 consciousness of which haunted me. i was guiltless, but i had indeed
 drawn down horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.
 
i visited edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
 have interested the most unfortunate being. clerval did not like it so well
 as oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
 but the beauty and regularity of the new town of edinburgh, its romantic
 castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, arthur’s
 seat, st. bernard’s well, and the pentland hills, compensated him for
 the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. but i was
 impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
 
we left edinburgh in week, passing through coupar, st. andrew’s, and
 along the banks of the tay, to perth, where our friend expected us.
 but i was in mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
 their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from guest; and
 accordingly i told clerval that i wished to make the tour of scotland
 alone. “do you,” said i, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our
 rendezvous. i may be absent month or two; but do not interfere with
 my motions, i entreat you; leave to peace and solitude for short
 time; and when i return, i hope it will be with lighter heart, more
 congenial to your own temper.”
 
henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing bent on this plan, ceased to
 remonstrate. entreated to write often. “i had rather be with
 you,” said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch
 people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return,
 that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in
 your absence.”
 
having parted from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of
 scotland and finish my work in solitude. i did not doubt but that the
 monster followed and would discover himself to when i should have
 finished, that might receive his companion.
 
with this resolution i traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of
 the remotest of the orkneys as the scene of my labours. it was place
 fitted for such work, being hardly more than rock whose high sides were
 continually beaten upon by the waves. the soil was barren, scarcely
 affording pasture for few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
 inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
 gave tokens of their miserable fare. vegetables and bread, when they
 indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from
 the mainland, which was about five miles distant.
 
on the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
 these was vacant when i arrived. this i hired. it contained but two
 rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
 penury. the thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
 door was off its hinges. i ordered it to be repaired, bought some
 furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
 occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been
 benumbed by want and squalid poverty. as it was, i lived ungazed at
 and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes
 which i gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations
 of men.
 
in this retreat i devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
 when the weather permitted, i walked on the stony beach of the to
 listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. it was a
 monotonous yet ever-changing scene. i thought of switzerland; it was
 far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. its hills
 are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
 plains. its fair lakes reflect blue and gentle sky, and when
 troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of lively
 infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
 
in this manner i distributed my occupations when i first arrived, but
 as i proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
 irksome to me. sometimes i could not prevail on myself to enter my
 laboratory for several days, and at other times i toiled day and night
 in order to complete my work. it was, indeed, filthy process in
 which i was engaged. during my first experiment, kind of
 enthusiastic frenzy had blinded to the horror of my employment; my
 mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes
 were shut to the horror of my proceedings. but now i went to it in
 cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
 
thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in
 solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from
 the actual scene in which i was engaged, my spirits became unequal; i
 grew restless and nervous. every moment i feared to meet my
 persecutor. sometimes i sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
 to raise them lest they should encounter the object which i so much
 dreaded to behold. i feared to wander from the sight of my fellow
 creatures lest when alone should come to claim his companion.
 
in the mean time i worked on, and my labour was already considerably
 advanced. i looked towards its completion with tremulous and eager
 hope, which i dared not trust myself to question but which was
 intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
 in my bosom.
 



chapter 20
 

i sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
 rising from the sea; i had not sufficient light for my employment, and i
 remained idle, in pause of consideration of whether i should leave my
 labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
 to it. as i sat, train of reflection occurred to which led to
 consider the effects of what i was now doing. three years before, i was
 engaged in the same manner and had created fiend whose unparalleled
 barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
 remorse. i was now about to form another being of whose dispositions i was
 alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her
 mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. had
 sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she
 had not; and she, who in all probability was to become thinking and
 reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with compact made before her
 creation. they might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
 loathed his own deformity, and might not conceive greater abhorrence
 for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? she also might turn
 with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him,
 and be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
 deserted by one of his own species.
 
even if they were to leave europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world,
 yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon
 thirsted would be children, and race of devils would be propagated upon
 the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a
 condition precarious and full of terror. had i right, for my own benefit,
 to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? i had before been moved
 by the sophisms of the being i had created; i had been struck senseless by
 his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my
 promise burst upon me; i shuddered to think that future ages might curse me
 as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
 the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.
 
i trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, i saw by
 the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. ghastly grin
 wrinkled his lips as gazed on me, where i sat fulfilling the task
 which had allotted to me. yes, had followed in my travels; he
 had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
 and desert heaths; and now came to mark my progress and claim the
 fulfilment of my promise.
 
as i looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
 malice and treachery. i thought with sensation of madness on my
 promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
 tore to pieces the thing on which i was engaged. the wretch saw me
 destroy the creature on whose future existence depended for
 happiness, and with howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
 
i left the room, and locking the door, made solemn vow in my own
 heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, i
 sought my own apartment. i was alone; none were near to dissipate
 the gloom and relieve from the sickening oppression of the most
 terrible reveries.
 
several hours passed, and i remained near my window gazing on the sea;
 it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
 reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. few fishing vessels alone
 specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
 of voices as the fishermen called to one another. i felt the silence,
 although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
 was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
 person landed close to my house.
 
in few minutes after, i heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
 endeavoured to open it softly. i trembled from head to foot; i felt a
 presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
 dwelt in cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the sensation
 of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain
 endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.
 
presently i heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
 opened, and the wretch whom i dreaded appeared. shutting the door, he
 approached and said in smothered voice,
 
“you have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
 intend? do you dare to break your promise? i have endured toil and misery;
 i left switzerland with you; i crept along the shores of the rhine, among
 its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. i have dwelt many
 months in the heaths of england and among the deserts of scotland. i have
 endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my
 hopes?”
 
“begone! i do break my promise; never will i create another like
 yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.”
 
“slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
 unworthy of my condescension. remember that i have power; you believe
 yourself miserable, but i can make you so wretched that the light of
 day will be hateful to you. you are my creator, but i am your master;
 obey!”
 
“the hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
 arrived. your threats cannot move to do an act of wickedness; but
 they confirm in determination of not creating you companion in
 vice. shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth dæmon whose
 delight is in death and wretchedness? begone! i am firm, and your
 words will only exasperate my rage.”
 
the monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
 impotence of anger. “shall each man,” cried he, “find a
 wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone? i had
 feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
 man! you may hate, but beware! your hours will pass in dread and misery,
 and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for
 ever. are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my
 wretchedness? you can blast my other passions, but revenge
 remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! i may die, but
 first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
 misery. beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful. i will watch with
 the wiliness of snake, that i may sting with its venom. man, you shall
 repent of the injuries you inflict.”
 
“devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
 i have declared my resolution to you, and i am coward to bend
 beneath words. leave me; i am inexorable.”
 
“it is well. i go; but remember, i shall be with you on your
 wedding-night.”
 
i started forward and exclaimed, “villain! before you sign my
 death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.”
 
i would have seized him, but eluded and quitted the house with
 precipitation. in few moments i saw him in his boat, which shot
 across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
 waves.
 
all was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. i burned with rage to
 pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. i
 walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
 conjured up thousand images to torment and sting me. why had i not
 followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? but i had suffered him
 to depart, and had directed his course towards the mainland. i shuddered
 to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
 and then i thought again of his words—“_i will be with you on
 your wedding-night._” that, then, was the period fixed for the
 fulfilment of my destiny. in that hour i should die and at once satisfy and
 extinguish his malice. the prospect did not move to fear; yet when i
 thought of my beloved elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she
 should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first i
 had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and i resolved not to fall
 before my enemy without bitter struggle.
 
the night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became
 calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into
 the depths of despair. i left the house, the horrid scene of the last
 night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which i
 almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between and my fellow
 creatures; nay, wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. i
 desired that i might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true,
 but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. if i returned, it was to
 be sacrificed or to see those whom i most loved die under the grasp of a
 dæmon whom i had myself created.
 
i walked about the isle like restless spectre, separated from all it
 loved and miserable in the separation. when it became noon, and the
 sun rose higher, i lay down on the grass and was overpowered by deep
 sleep. i had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
 were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. the sleep
 into which i now sank refreshed me; and when i awoke, i again felt as
 if i belonged to race of human beings like myself, and i began to
 reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
 words of the fiend rang in my ears like death-knell; they appeared
 like dream, yet distinct and oppressive as reality.
 
the sun had far descended, and i still sat on the shore, satisfying my
 appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when i saw a
 fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought packet;
 it contained letters from geneva, and one from clerval entreating to
 join him. said that was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
 was, that letters from the friends had formed in london desired
 his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
 indian enterprise. could not any longer delay his departure; but as
 his journey to london might be followed, even sooner than now
 conjectured, by his longer voyage, entreated to bestow as much of
 my society on him as i could spare. besought me, therefore, to
 leave my solitary isle and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed
 southwards together. this letter in degree recalled to life, and
 i determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.
 
yet, before i departed, there was task to perform, on which i shuddered
 to reflect; i must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose i
 must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and i must
 handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. the next
 morning, at daybreak, i summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door
 of my laboratory. the remains of the half-finished creature, whom i had
 destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as if i had
 mangled the living flesh of human being. i paused to collect myself and
 then entered the chamber. with trembling hand i conveyed the instruments
 out of the room, but i reflected that i ought not to leave the relics of my
 work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and i accordingly
 put them into basket, with great quantity of stones, and laying them
 up, determined to throw them into the that very night; and in the
 meantime i sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my
 chemical apparatus.
 
nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
 in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. i had
 before regarded my promise with gloomy despair as thing that, with
 whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but i now felt as if film
 had been taken from before my eyes and that i for the first time saw
 clearly. the idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
 to me; the threat i had heard weighed on my thoughts, but i did not
 reflect that voluntary act of mine could avert it. i had resolved in
 my own mind that to create another like the fiend i had first made
 would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and i
 banished from my mind every thought that could lead to different
 conclusion.
 
between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and i then, putting my
 basket aboard little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
 the scene was perfectly solitary; few boats were returning towards land,
 but i sailed away from them. i felt as if i was about the commission of a
 dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my
 fellow creatures. at one time the moon, which had before been clear, was
 suddenly overspread by thick cloud, and i took advantage of the moment of
 darkness and cast my basket into the sea; i listened to the gurgling sound
 as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. the sky became clouded, but
 the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then
 rising. but it refreshed and filled with such agreeable sensations
 that i resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a
 direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. clouds hid the
 moon, everything was obscure, and i heard only the sound of the boat as its
 keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in short time i
 slept soundly.
 
i do not know how long i remained in this situation, but when i awoke i
 found that the sun had already mounted considerably. the wind was high, and
 the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. i found
 that the wind was northeast and must have driven far from the coast from
 which i had embarked. i endeavoured to change my course but quickly found
 that if i again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with
 water. thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. i
 confess that i felt few sensations of terror. i had compass with me
 and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the
 world that the sun was of little benefit to me. i might be driven into the
 wide atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in
 the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. i had already
 been out many hours and felt the torment of burning thirst, prelude to
 my other sufferings. i looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds
 that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; i looked upon the
 sea; it was to be my grave. “fiend,” i exclaimed, “your
 task is already fulfilled!” i thought of elizabeth, of my father, and
 of clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
 sanguinary and merciless passions. this idea plunged into reverie so
 despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
 closing before for ever, i shudder to reflect on it.
 
some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
 horizon, the wind died away into gentle breeze and the became
 free from breakers. but these gave place to heavy swell; i felt sick
 and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly i saw line of high
 land towards the south.
 
almost spent, as i was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense i endured
 for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like flood of
 warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.
 
how mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have
 of life even in the excess of misery! i constructed another sail with a
 part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. it had a
 wild and rocky appearance, but as i approached nearer i easily perceived
 the traces of cultivation. i saw vessels near the shore and found myself
 suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. i
 carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed steeple which i at
 length saw issuing from behind small promontory. as i was in state of
 extreme debility, i resolved to sail directly towards the town, as place
 where i could most easily procure nourishment. fortunately i had money with
 me. as i turned the promontory i perceived small neat town and good
 harbour, which i entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
 escape.
 
as i was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
 people crowded towards the spot. they seemed much surprised at my
 appearance, but instead of offering any assistance, whispered
 together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
 slight sensation of alarm. as it was, i merely remarked that they
 spoke english, and i therefore addressed them in that language. “my
 good friends,” said i, “will you be so kind as to tell the name of
 this town and inform where i am?”
 
“you will know that soon enough,” replied man with hoarse voice.
 “maybe you are come to place that will not prove much to your taste,
 but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, i promise you.”
 
i was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
 stranger, and i was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
 angry countenances of his companions. “why do you answer so
 roughly?” i replied. “surely it is not the custom of englishmen to
 receive strangers so inhospitably.”
 
“i do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the
 english may be, but it is the custom of the irish to hate villains.”
 
while this strange dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly
 increase. their faces expressed mixture of curiosity and anger, which
 annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. i inquired the way to the inn, but
 one replied. i then moved forward, and murmuring sound arose from the
 crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man
 approaching tapped on the shoulder and said, “come, sir, you must
 follow to mr. kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.”
 
“who is mr. kirwin? why am i to give an account of myself? is not
 this free country?”
 
“ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. mr. kirwin is magistrate,
 and you are to give an account of the death of gentleman who was
 found murdered here last night.”
 
this answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself. i was innocent;
 that could easily be proved; accordingly i followed my conductor in silence
 and was led to one of the best houses in the town. i was ready to sink from
 fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by crowd, i thought it politic
 to rouse all my strength, that physical debility might be construed into
 apprehension or conscious guilt. little did i then expect the calamity that
 was in few moments to overwhelm and extinguish in horror and despair
 all fear of ignominy or death.
 
i must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of
 the frightful events which i am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
 recollection.
 



chapter 21
 

i was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
 benevolent man with calm and mild manners. looked upon me, however,
 with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors,
 asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.
 
about half dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the
 magistrate, deposed that had been out fishing the night before with
 his and brother-in-law, daniel nugent, when, about ten o’clock,
 they observed strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
 for port. it was very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
 not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at creek about
 two miles below. walked on first, carrying part of the fishing tackle,
 and his companions followed him at some distance. as was proceeding
 along the sands, struck his foot against something and fell at his
 length on the ground. his companions came up to assist him, and by the
 light of their lantern they found that had fallen on the body of man,
 who was to all appearance dead. their first supposition was that it was the
 corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
 waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even
 that the body was not then cold. they instantly carried it to the cottage
 of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
 to life. it appeared to be handsome young man, about five and twenty
 years of age. had apparently been strangled, for there was sign of
 any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.
 
the first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but
 when the mark of the fingers was mentioned i remembered the murder of
 my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
 mist came over my eyes, which obliged to lean on chair for
 support. the magistrate observed with keen eye and of course drew
 an unfavourable augury from my manner.
 
the confirmed his father’s account, but when daniel nugent was
 called swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he
 saw boat, with single man in it, at short distance from the shore;
 and as far as could judge by the light of few stars, it was the same
 boat in which i had just landed.
 
woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door
 of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour
 before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw boat with
 only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
 was afterwards found.
 
another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
 body into her house; it was not cold. they put it into bed and
 rubbed it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was
 quite gone.
 
several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed
 that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
 was very probable that i had beaten about for many hours and had been
 obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed.
 besides, they observed that it appeared that i had brought the body
 from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know
 the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
 of the town of —— from the place where i had deposited the corpse.
 
mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that i should be taken into
 the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what
 effect the sight of it would produce upon me. this idea was probably
 suggested by the extreme agitation i had exhibited when the mode of the
 murder had been described. i was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate
 and several other persons, to the inn. i could not help being struck by the
 strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but,
 knowing that i had been conversing with several persons in the island i had
 inhabited about the time that the body had been found, i was perfectly
 tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.
 
i entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. how
 can i describe my sensations on beholding it? i feel yet parched with
 horror, nor can i reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and
 agony. the examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
 passed like dream from my memory when i saw the lifeless form of henry
 clerval stretched before me. i gasped for breath, and throwing myself on
 the body, i exclaimed, “have my murderous machinations deprived you
 also, my dearest henry, of life? two i have already destroyed; other
 victims await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my
 benefactor—”
 
the human frame could longer support the agonies that i endured, and
 i was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.
 
fever succeeded to this. i lay for two months on the point of death; my
 ravings, as i afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the
 murderer of william, of justine, and of clerval. sometimes i entreated my
 attendants to assist in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was
 tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already grasping
 my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. fortunately, as i spoke
 my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and
 bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
 
why did i not die? more miserable than man ever was before, why did i not
 sink into forgetfulness and rest? death snatches away many blooming
 children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and
 youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
 next prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! of what materials was i
 made that i could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of
 the wheel, continually renewed the torture?
 
but i was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from
 dream, in prison, stretched on wretched bed, surrounded by
 gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of dungeon.
 it was morning, i remember, when i thus awoke to understanding; i had
 forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some
 great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when i looked around
 and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which i
 was, all flashed across my memory and i groaned bitterly.
 
this sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in chair beside
 me. she was hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
 countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise
 that class. the lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
 persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. her
 tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed in english,
 and the voice struck as one that i had heard during my sufferings.
 
“are you better now, sir?” said she.
 
i replied in the same language, with feeble voice, “i believe i am;
 but if it be all true, if indeed i did not dream, i am sorry that i am
 still alive to feel this misery and horror.”
 
“for that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the
 gentleman you murdered, i believe that it were better for you if you
 were dead, for i fancy it will go hard with you! however, that’s none
 of my business; i am sent to nurse you and get you well; i do my duty
 with safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”
 
i turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
 speech to person just saved, on the very edge of death; but i felt
 languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. the whole series
 of my life appeared to as dream; i sometimes doubted if indeed it
 were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
 of reality.
 
as the images that floated before became more distinct, i grew
 feverish; darkness pressed around me; one was near who soothed
 with the gentle voice of love; dear hand supported me. the
 physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
 them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
 expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
 second. who could be interested in the fate of murderer but the
 hangman who would gain his fee?
 
these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had
 shown extreme kindness. had caused the best room in the prison
 to be prepared for (wretched indeed was the best); and it was who
 had provided physician and nurse. it is true, seldom came to
 see me, for although ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
 every human creature, did not wish to be present at the agonies and
 miserable ravings of murderer. came, therefore, sometimes to see
 that i was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
 intervals.
 
one day, while i was gradually recovering, i was seated in chair, my eyes
 half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. i was overcome by gloom
 and misery and often reflected i had better seek death than desire to
 remain in world which to was replete with wretchedness. at one time i
 considered whether i should not declare myself guilty and suffer the
 penalty of the law, less innocent than poor justine had been. such were my
 thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and mr. kirwin entered.
 his countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; drew chair close to
 mine and addressed in french,
 
“i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do anything to
 make you more comfortable?”
 
“i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
 earth there is comfort which i am capable of receiving.”
 
“i know that the sympathy of stranger can be but of little relief to
 one borne down as you are by so strange misfortune. but you will, i
 hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can
 easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”
 
“that is my least concern; i am, by course of strange events, become
 the most miserable of mortals. persecuted and tortured as i am and
 have been, can death be any evil to me?”
 
“nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
 strange chances that have lately occurred. you were thrown, by some
 surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
 seized immediately, and charged with murder. the first sight that was
 presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
 unaccountable manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
 your path.”
 
as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endured on
 this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at
 the knowledge seemed to possess concerning me. i suppose some
 astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hastened
 to say,
 
“immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on
 your person were brought me, and i examined them that i might discover some
 trace by which i could send to your relations an account of your misfortune
 and illness. i found several letters, and, among others, one which i
 discovered from its commencement to be from your father. i instantly wrote
 to geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
 but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any
 kind.”
 
“this suspense is thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
 tell what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am
 now to lament?”
 
“your family is perfectly well,” said mr. kirwin with
 gentleness; “and someone, friend, is come to visit you.”
 
i know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
 instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
 misery and taunt with the death of clerval, as new incitement for
 to comply with his hellish desires. i put my hand before my eyes,
 and cried out in agony,
 
“oh! take him away! i cannot see him; for god’s sake, do not
 let him enter!”
 
mr. kirwin regarded with troubled countenance. could not help
 regarding my exclamation as presumption of my guilt and said in
 rather severe tone,
 
“i should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
 would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.”
 
“my father!” cried i, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
 from anguish to pleasure. “is my father indeed come? how kind, how
 very kind! but where is he, why does not hasten to me?”
 
my change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
 thought that my former exclamation was momentary return of delirium,
 and now instantly resumed his former benevolence. rose and
 quitted the room with my nurse, and in moment my father entered it.
 
nothing, at this moment, could have given greater pleasure than the
 arrival of my father. i stretched out my hand to him and cried,
 
“are you then safe—and elizabeth—and ernest?”
 
my father calmed with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
 dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
 desponding spirits; but soon felt that prison cannot be the abode of
 cheerfulness. “what place is this that you inhabit, my son!”
 said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
 of the room. “you travelled to seek happiness, but fatality seems
 to pursue you. and poor clerval—”
 
the name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
 great to be endured in my weak state; i shed tears.
 
“alas! yes, my father,” replied i; “some destiny of the
 most horrible kind hangs over me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i
 should have died on the coffin of henry.”
 
we were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
 precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
 could ensure tranquillity. mr. kirwin came in and insisted that my
 strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. but the
 appearance of my father was to like that of my good angel, and i
 gradually recovered my health.
 
as my sickness quitted me, i was absorbed by gloomy and black
 melancholy that nothing could dissipate. the image of clerval was
 for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. more than once the agitation
 into which these reflections threw made my friends dread dangerous
 relapse. alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a
 life? it was surely that i might fulfil my destiny, which is now
 drawing to close. soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
 throbbings and relieve from the mighty weight of anguish that bears
 to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, i shall also
 sink to rest. then the appearance of death was distant, although the
 wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hours
 motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
 might bury and my destroyer in its ruins.
 
the season of the assizes approached. i had already been three months
 in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a
 relapse, i was obliged to travel nearly hundred miles to the country
 town where the court was held. mr. kirwin charged himself with every
 care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. i was spared
 the disgrace of appearing publicly as criminal, as the case was not
 brought before the court that decides on life and death. the grand
 jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that i was on the orkney
 islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and fortnight
 after my removal i was liberated from prison.
 
my father was enraptured on finding freed from the vexations of a
 criminal charge, that i was again allowed to breathe the fresh
 atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. i did not
 participate in these feelings, for to the walls of dungeon or a
 palace were alike hateful. the cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
 although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i
 saw around nothing but dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
 light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. sometimes
 they were the expressive eyes of henry, languishing in death, the dark
 orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
 them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as i
 first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt.
 
my father tried to awaken in the feelings of affection. talked
 of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but
 these words only drew deep groans from me. sometimes, indeed, i felt a
 wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
 cousin or longed, with devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
 the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to in early
 childhood; but my general state of feeling was torpor in which a
 prison was as welcome residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
 these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and
 despair. at these moments i often endeavoured to put an end to the
 existence i loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
 to restrain from committing some dreadful act of violence.
 
yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
 triumphed over my selfish despair. it was necessary that i should
 return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
 i so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
 chance led to the place of his concealment, or if dared again to
 blast by his presence, i might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
 the existence of the monstrous image which i had endued with the
 mockery of soul still more monstrous. my father still desired to
 delay our departure, fearful that i could not sustain the fatigues of a
 journey, for i was shattered wreck—the shadow of human being. my
 strength was gone. i was mere skeleton, and fever night and day
 preyed upon my wasted frame.
 
still, as i urged our leaving ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
 my father thought it best to yield. we took our passage on board vessel
 bound for havre-de-grace and sailed with fair wind from the irish shores.
 it was midnight. i lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to
 the dashing of the waves. i hailed the darkness that shut ireland from my
 sight, and my pulse beat with feverish joy when i reflected that i should
 soon see geneva. the past appeared to in the light of frightful dream;
 yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew from the detested
 shore of ireland, and the which surrounded me, told too forcibly
 that i was deceived by vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest
 companion, had fallen victim to and the monster of my creation. i
 repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
 with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
 ingolstadt. i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried on
 to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i called to mind the night in
 which first lived. i was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
 thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept bitterly.
 
ever since my recovery from the fever, i had been in the custom of taking
 every night small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
 only that i was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
 life. oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, i now
 swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. but sleep did
 not afford respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a
 thousand objects that scared me. towards morning i was possessed by kind
 of nightmare; i felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
 myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. my father, who was
 watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves
 were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: sense of
 security, feeling that truce was established between the present hour
 and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to kind of calm
 forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly
 susceptible.
 



chapter 22
 

the voyage came to an end. we landed, and proceeded to paris. i soon
 found that i had overtaxed my strength and that i must repose before i
 could continue my journey. my father’s care and attentions were
 indefatigable, but did not know the origin of my sufferings and
 sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. wished to
 seek amusement in society. i abhorred the face of man. oh, not
 abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and i felt
 attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an
 angelic nature and celestial mechanism. but i felt that i had right
 to share their intercourse. i had unchained an enemy among them whose
 joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. how they
 would, each and all, abhor and hunt from the world, did they know
 my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!
 
my father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by
 various arguments to banish my despair. sometimes thought that i
 felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer charge of
 murder, and endeavoured to prove to the futility of pride.
 
“alas! my father,” said i, “how little do you know me. 
human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such
 wretch as i felt pride. justine, poor unhappy justine, was as innocent
 as i, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and i am the cause
 of this—i murdered her. william, justine, and henry—they all
 died by my hands.”
 
my father had often, during my imprisonment, heard make the same
 assertion; when i thus accused myself, sometimes seemed to desire an
 explanation, and at others appeared to consider it as the offspring of
 delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
 itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which i preserved in my
 convalescence. i avoided explanation and maintained continual silence
 concerning the wretch i had created. i had persuasion that i should be
 supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. but,
 besides, i could not bring myself to disclose secret which would fill my
 hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of
 his breast. i checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was
 silent when i would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
 yet, still, words like those i have recorded would burst uncontrollably
 from me. i could offer explanation of them, but their truth in part
 relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.
 
upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder,
 “my dearest victor, what infatuation is this? my dear son, i entreat
 you never to make such an assertion again.”
 
“i am not mad,” i cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
 have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. i am the
 assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
 thousand times would i have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
 saved their lives; but i could not, my father, indeed i could not
 sacrifice the whole human race.”
 
the conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
 deranged, and instantly changed the subject of our conversation and
 endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. wished as much as
 possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
 ireland and never alluded to them or suffered to speak of my
 misfortunes.
 
as time passed away i became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my
 heart, but i longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
 crimes; sufficient for was the consciousness of them. by the utmost
 self-violence i curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
 sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners
 were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
 to the of ice.
 
few days before we left paris on our way to switzerland, i received the
 following letter from elizabeth:
 
“my dear friend,
 
“it gave the greatest pleasure to receive letter from my uncle
 dated at paris; you are longer at formidable distance, and i may
 hope to see you in less than fortnight. my poor cousin, how much you
 must have suffered! i expect to see you looking even more ill than
 when you quitted geneva. this winter has been passed most miserably,
 tortured as i have been by anxious suspense; yet i hope to see peace in
 your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
 comfort and tranquillity.
 
“yet i fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
 year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. i would not disturb you at
 this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a
 conversation that i had with my uncle previous to his departure renders
 some explanation necessary before we meet.
 
explanation! you may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain? if
 you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
 but you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet
 be pleased with this explanation; and in probability of this being the
 case, i dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, i
 have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.
 
“you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of
 your parents ever since our infancy. we were told this when young, and
 taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
 place. we were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, i
 believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. but
 as brother and sister often entertain lively affection towards each
 other without desiring more intimate union, may not such also be our
 case? tell me, dearest victor. answer me, i conjure you by our mutual
 happiness, with simple truth—do you not love another?
 
“you have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
 ingolstadt; and i confess to you, my friend, that when i saw you last
 autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every
 creature, i could not help supposing that you might regret our
 connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
 your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
 but this is false reasoning. i confess to you, my friend, that i love
 you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant
 friend and companion. but it is your happiness i desire as well as my
 own when i declare to you that our marriage would render eternally
 miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. even now
 i weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
 misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that
 love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. i, who
 have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries
 tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. ah! victor, be assured
 that your cousin and playmate has too sincere love for you not to be
 made miserable by this supposition. be happy, my friend; and if you
 obey in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
 will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.
 
“do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
 next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. my uncle
 will send news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your
 lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, i
 shall need other happiness.
 
“elizabeth lavenza.
 


“geneva, may 18th, 17—”
 


this letter revived in my memory what i had before forgotten, the threat of
 the fiend—“_i will be with you on your
 wedding-night!_” such was my sentence, and on that night would the
 dæmon employ every art to destroy and tear from the glimpse of
 happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. on that night he
 had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. well, be it so; a
 deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if were
 victorious i should be at peace and his power over be at an end. if he
 were vanquished, i should be free man. alas! what freedom? such as the
 peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
 cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and is turned adrift, homeless,
 penniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberty except that in my
 elizabeth i possessed treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
 remorse and guilt which would pursue until death.
 
sweet and beloved elizabeth! i read and reread her letter, and some
 softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
 dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
 angel’s arm bared to drive from all hope. yet i would die to make
 her happy. if the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
 again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. my
 destruction might indeed arrive few months sooner, but if my torturer
 should suspect that i postponed it, influenced by his menaces, would
 surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. had vowed
 _to be with on my wedding-night_, yet did not consider that
 threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show that
 was not yet satiated with blood, had murdered clerval immediately
 after the enunciation of his threats. i resolved, therefore, that if my
 immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
 father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life
 should not retard it single hour.
 
in this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth. my letter was calm and
 affectionate. “i fear, my beloved girl,” i said, “little happiness
 remains for us on earth; yet all that i may one day enjoy is centred in
 you. chase away your idle fears; to you alone do i consecrate my life
 and my endeavours for contentment. i have one secret, elizabeth, a
 dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
 horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
 wonder that i survive what i have endured. i will confide this tale of
 misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place,
 for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. but
 until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. this i most
 earnestly entreat, and i know you will comply.”
 
in about week after the arrival of elizabeth’s letter we returned
 to geneva. the sweet girl welcomed with warm affection, yet tears were
 in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. i saw a
 change in her also. she was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly
 vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of
 compassion made her more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as i
 was.
 
the tranquillity which i now enjoyed did not endure. memory brought madness
 with it, and when i thought of what had passed, real insanity possessed
 me; sometimes i was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and
 despondent. i neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless,
 bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
 
elizabeth alone had the power to draw from these fits; her gentle voice
 would soothe when transported by passion and inspire with human
 feelings when sunk in torpor. she wept with and for me. when reason
 returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire with
 resignation. ah! it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the
 guilty there is peace. the agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is
 otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.
 
soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
 elizabeth. i remained silent.
 
“have you, then, some other attachment?”
 
“none on earth. i love elizabeth and look forward to our union with
 delight. let the day therefore be fixed; and on it i will consecrate
 myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”
 
“my dear victor, do not speak thus. heavy misfortunes have befallen
 us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love
 for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. our circle will be
 small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
 and when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
 care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly
 deprived.”
 
such were the lessons of my father. but to the remembrance of the
 threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had
 yet been in his deeds of blood, i should almost regard him as
 invincible, and that when had pronounced the words “_i shall be with
 you on your wedding-night_,” i should regard the threatened fate as
 unavoidable. but death was evil to if the loss of elizabeth were
 balanced with it, and i therefore, with contented and even cheerful
 countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
 ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined,
 the seal to my fate.
 
great god! if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish
 intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banished myself
 for ever from my native country and wandered friendless outcast over
 the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. but, as if
 possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded to his real
 intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i
 hastened that of far dearer victim.
 
as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or
 prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me. but i concealed my
 feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the
 countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer
 eye of elizabeth. she looked forward to our union with placid contentment,
 not unmingled with little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed,
 that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate
 into an airy dream and leave trace but deep and everlasting regret.
 
preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
 and all wore smiling appearance. i shut up, as well as i could, in my own
 heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness
 into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
 decorations of my tragedy. through my father’s exertions part of
 the inheritance of elizabeth had been restored to her by the austrian
 government. small possession on the shores of belonged to her. it
 was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to villa
 lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake
 near which it stood.
 
in the meantime i took every precaution to defend my person in case the
 fiend should openly attack me. i carried pistols and dagger
 constantly about and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and
 by these means gained greater degree of tranquillity. indeed, as the
 period approached, the threat appeared more as delusion, not to be
 regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness i hoped for
 in my marriage wore greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed
 for its solemnisation drew nearer and i heard it continually spoken of
 as an occurrence which accident could possibly prevent.
 
elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
 calm her mind. but on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
 destiny, she was melancholy, and presentiment of evil pervaded her;
 and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which i had
 promised to reveal to her on the following day. my father was in the
 meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in
 the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of bride.
 
after the ceremony was performed large party assembled at my
 father’s, but it was agreed that elizabeth and i should commence our
 journey by water, sleeping that night at evian and continuing our
 voyage on the following day. the day was fair, the wind favourable;
 all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.
 
those were the last moments of my life during which i enjoyed the
 feeling of happiness. we passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we
 were sheltered from its rays by kind of canopy while we enjoyed the
 beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
 mont salêve, the pleasant banks of montalègre, and at distance,
 surmounting all, the beautiful mont blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
 mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
 opposite banks, we saw the mighty jura opposing its dark side to the
 ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
 insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.
 
i took the hand of elizabeth. “you are sorrowful, my love. ah! if
 you knew what i have suffered and what i may yet endure, you would
 endeavour to let taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
 one day at least permits to enjoy.”
 
“be happy, my dear victor,” replied elizabeth; “there is, i hope,
 nothing to distress you; and be assured that if lively joy is not
 painted in my face, my heart is contented. something whispers to me
 not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but i
 will not listen to such sinister voice. observe how fast we move
 along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise
 above the dome of mont blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
 interesting. look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in
 the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at
 the bottom. what divine day! how happy and serene all nature
 appears!”
 
thus elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
 reflection upon melancholy subjects. but her temper was fluctuating;
 joy for few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place
 to distraction and reverie.
 
the sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river drance and
 observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
 lower hills. the alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
 the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. the
 spire of evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range
 of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.
 
the wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
 sank at sunset to light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water
 and caused pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the
 shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and
 hay. the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as i touched
 the shore i felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp
 and cling to for ever.
 



chapter 23
 

it was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for short time on the
 shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and
 contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
 in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.
 
the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence
 in the west. the moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was
 beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
 flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the
 scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
 that were beginning to rise. suddenly heavy storm of rain descended.
 
i had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the
 shapes of objects, thousand fears arose in my mind. i was anxious
 and watchful, while my right hand grasped pistol which was hidden in
 my bosom; every sound terrified me, but i resolved that i would sell my
 life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that
 of my adversary was extinguished.
 
elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
 but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and
 trembling, she asked, “what is it that agitates you, my dear victor?
 what is it you fear?”
 
“oh! peace, peace, my love,” replied i; “this night, and
 all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.”
 
i passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly i reflected how
 fearful the combat which i momentarily expected would be to my wife,
 and i earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her
 until i had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
 
she left me, and i continued some time walking up and down the passages
 of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford retreat to
 my adversary. but i discovered trace of him and was beginning to
 conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
 execution of his menaces when suddenly i heard shrill and dreadful
 scream. it came from the room into which elizabeth had retired. as i
 heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
 motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; i could feel the blood
 trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. this
 state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and i rushed
 into the room.
 
great god! why did i not then expire! why am i here to relate the
 destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? she was
 there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
 and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. everywhere i
 turn i see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung
 by the murderer on its bridal bier. could i behold this and live? alas!
 life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. for moment
 only did i lose recollection; i fell senseless on the ground.
 
when i recovered i found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their
 countenances expressed breathless terror, but the horror of others
 appeared only as mockery, shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. i
 escaped from them to the room where lay the body of elizabeth, my love, my
 wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. she had been moved from the
 posture in which i had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
 her arm and handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, i might have
 supposed her asleep. i rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but
 the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told that what i now held
 in my arms had ceased to be the elizabeth whom i had loved and cherished.
 the murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
 breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
 
while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i happened to look up.
 the windows of the room had before been darkened, and i felt kind of
 panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
 the shutters had been thrown back, and with sensation of horror not to be
 described, i saw at the open window figure the most hideous and abhorred.
 grin was on the face of the monster; seemed to jeer, as with his
 fiendish finger pointed towards the corpse of my wife. i rushed towards
 the window, and drawing pistol from my bosom, fired; but eluded me,
 leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning,
 plunged into the lake.
 
the report of the pistol brought crowd into the room. i pointed to
 the spot where had disappeared, and we followed the track with
 boats; nets were cast, but in vain. after passing several hours, we
 returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a
 form conjured up by my fancy. after having landed, they proceeded to
 search the country, parties going in different directions among the
 woods and vines.
 
i attempted to accompany them and proceeded short distance from the
 house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of drunken
 man, i fell at last in state of utter exhaustion; film covered my
 eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. in this state i
 was carried back and placed on bed, hardly conscious of what had
 happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that
 i had lost.
 
after an interval i arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room
 where the corpse of my beloved lay. there were women weeping around; i
 hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
 distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
 various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their
 cause. i was bewildered, in cloud of wonder and horror. the death
 of william, the execution of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastly
 of my wife; even at that moment i knew not that my only remaining
 friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now
 might be writhing under his grasp, and ernest might be dead at his
 feet. this idea made shudder and recalled to action. i started
 up and resolved to return to geneva with all possible speed.
 
there were horses to be procured, and i must return by the lake; but the
 wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. however, it was
 hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night. i hired men
 to row and took an oar myself, for i had always experienced relief from
 mental torment in bodily exercise. but the overflowing misery i now felt,
 and the excess of agitation that i endured rendered incapable of any
 exertion. i threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way
 to every gloomy idea that arose. if i looked up, i saw scenes which were
 familiar to in my happier time and which i had contemplated but the day
 before in the company of her who was now but shadow and recollection.
 tears streamed from my eyes. the rain had ceased for moment, and i saw
 the fish play in the waters as they had done few hours before; they had
 then been observed by elizabeth. nothing is so painful to the human mind as
 great and sudden change. the sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
 but nothing could appear to as it had done the day before. fiend had
 snatched from every hope of future happiness; creature had ever been
 so miserable as i was; so frightful an event is single in the history of
 man.
 
but why should i dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
 overwhelming event? mine has been tale of horrors; i have reached their
 _acme_, and what i must now relate can but be tedious to you. know
 that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; i was left desolate. my
 own strength is exhausted, and i must tell, in few words, what remains of
 my hideous narration.
 
i arrived at geneva. my father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk
 under the tidings that i bore. i see him now, excellent and venerable old
 man! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their
 delight—his elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom doted on with
 all that affection which man feels, who in the decline of life, having
 few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. cursed, cursed
 be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
 in wretchedness! could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
 around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; was unable to
 rise from his bed, and in few days died in my arms.
 
what then became of me? i know not; i lost sensation, and chains and
 darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. sometimes,
 indeed, i dreamt that i wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
 with the friends of my youth, but i awoke and found myself in a
 dungeon. melancholy followed, but by degrees i gained clear
 conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
 prison. for they had called mad, and during many months, as i
 understood, solitary cell had been my habitation.
 
liberty, however, had been useless gift to me, had i not, as i
 awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. as the
 memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their
 cause—the monster whom i had created, the miserable dæmon whom i had
 sent abroad into the world for my destruction. i was possessed by a
 maddening rage when i thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
 that i might have him within my grasp to wreak great and signal
 revenge on his cursed head.
 
nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to
 reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
 month after my release, i repaired to criminal judge in the town
 and told him that i had an accusation to make, that i knew the
 destroyer of my family, and that i required him to exert his whole
 authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
 
the magistrate listened to with attention and kindness. “be
 assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall
 be spared to discover the villain.”
 
“i thank you,” replied i; “listen, therefore, to the
 deposition that i have to make. it is indeed tale so strange that i
 should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth
 which, however wonderful, forces conviction. the story is too connected to
 be mistaken for dream, and i have motive for falsehood.” my
 manner as i thus addressed him was impressive but calm; i had formed in my
 own heart resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose
 quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled to life. i now related
 my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
 accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
 
the magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as i continued
 became more attentive and interested; i saw him sometimes shudder with
 horror; at others lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted
 on his countenance.
 
when i had concluded my narration, i said, “this is the being whom i
 accuse and for whose seizure and punishment i call upon you to exert your
 whole power. it is your duty as magistrate, and i believe and hope that
 your feelings as man will not revolt from the execution of those
 functions on this occasion.”
 
this address caused considerable change in the physiognomy of my own
 auditor. had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given
 to tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when was called upon
 to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity
 returned. he, however, answered mildly, “i would willingly afford you
 every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to
 have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. who can follow an
 animal which can traverse the of ice and inhabit caves and dens where
 man would venture to intrude? besides, some months have elapsed since
 the commission of his crimes, and one can conjecture to what place he
 has wandered or what region may now inhabit.”
 
“i do not doubt that hovers near the spot which i inhabit, and if
 has indeed taken refuge in the alps, may be hunted like the chamois
 and destroyed as beast of prey. but i perceive your thoughts; you do not
 credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
 punishment which is his desert.”
 
as i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
 “you are mistaken,” said he. “i will exert myself, and if
 it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that shall suffer
 punishment proportionate to his crimes. but i fear, from what you have
 yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
 impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should
 make up your mind to disappointment.”
 
“that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail. my
 revenge is of moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be vice, i
 confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. my rage
 is unspeakable when i reflect that the murderer, whom i have turned
 loose upon society, still exists. you refuse my just demand; i have
 but one resource, and i devote myself, either in my life or death, to
 his destruction.”
 
i trembled with excess of agitation as i said this; there was frenzy
 in my manner, and something, i doubt not, of that haughty fierceness
 which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. but to genevan
 magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
 devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
 madness. endeavoured to soothe as nurse does child and
 reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.
 
“man,” i cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of
 wisdom! cease; you know not what it is you say.”
 
i broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on
 some other mode of action.
 



chapter 24
 

my present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
 swallowed up and lost. i was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
 endowed with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and
 allowed to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise
 delirium or death would have been my portion.
 
my first resolution was to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when i
 was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
 hateful. i provided myself with sum of money, together with few jewels
 which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
 
and now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. i have
 traversed vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships
 which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. how i
 have lived i hardly know; many times have i stretched my failing limbs upon
 the sandy plain and prayed for death. but revenge kept alive; i dared
 not die and leave my adversary in being.
 
when i quitted geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which i
 might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. but my plan was unsettled,
 and i wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain
 what path i should pursue. as night approached i found myself at the
 entrance of the cemetery where william, elizabeth, and my father
 reposed. i entered it and approached the tomb which marked their
 graves. everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which
 were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
 scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
 observer. the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
 cast shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
 mourner.
 
the deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
 rage and despair. they were dead, and i lived; their murderer also lived,
 and to destroy him i must drag out my weary existence. i knelt on the grass
 and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “by the
 sacred earth on which i kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
 deep and eternal grief that i feel, i swear; and by thee, night, and the
 spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery,
 until or i shall perish in mortal conflict. for this purpose i will
 preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will i again behold the sun
 and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my
 eyes for ever. and i call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering
 ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct in my work. let the cursed
 and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now
 torments me.”
 
i had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
 that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but
 the furies possessed as i concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
 
i was answered through the stillness of night by loud and fiendish
 laugh. it rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
 it, and i felt as if all hell surrounded with mockery and laughter.
 surely in that moment i should have been possessed by frenzy and have
 destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that i
 was reserved for vengeance. the laughter died away, when well-known
 and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed in an
 audible whisper, “i am satisfied, miserable wretch! you have
 determined to live, and i am satisfied.”
 
i darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil
 eluded my grasp. suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
 full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as fled with more than
 mortal speed.
 
i pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. guided by a
 slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly. the
 blue mediterranean appeared, and by strange chance, i saw the fiend
 enter by night and hide himself in vessel bound for the black sea. i
 took my passage in the same ship, but escaped, i know not how.
 
amidst the wilds of tartary and russia, although still evaded me, i
 have ever followed in his track. sometimes the peasants, scared by
 this horrid apparition, informed of his path; sometimes himself,
 who feared that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die,
 left some mark to guide me. the snows descended on my head, and i saw
 the print of his huge step on the white plain. to you first entering
 on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
 what i have felt and still feel? cold, want, and fatigue were the
 least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by some devil
 and carried about with my eternal hell; yet still spirit of good
 followed and directed my steps and when i most murmured would suddenly
 extricate from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. sometimes,
 when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, repast
 was prepared for in the desert that restored and inspirited me. the
 fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
 i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had
 invoked to aid me. often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
 i was parched by thirst, slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
 few drops that revived me, and vanish.
 
i followed, when i could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon
 generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
 country chiefly collected. in other places human beings were seldom
 seen, and i generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
 path. i had money with and gained the friendship of the villagers
 by distributing it; or i brought with some food that i had killed,
 which, after taking small part, i always presented to those who had
 provided with fire and utensils for cooking.
 
my life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
 sleep alone that i could taste joy. blessed sleep! often, when most
 miserable, i sank to repose, and my dreams lulled even to rapture. the
 spirits that guarded had provided these moments, or rather hours, of
 happiness that i might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. deprived of
 this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships. during the day i was
 sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep i saw my
 friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again i saw the benevolent
 countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my elizabeth’s
 voice, and beheld clerval enjoying health and youth. often, when wearied by
 toilsome march, i persuaded myself that i was dreaming until night should
 come and that i should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest
 friends. what agonising fondness did i feel for them! how did i cling to
 their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and
 persuade myself that they still lived! at such moments vengeance, that
 burned within me, died in my heart, and i pursued my path towards the
 destruction of the dæmon more as task enjoined by heaven, as the
 mechanical impulse of some power of which i was unconscious, than as the
 ardent desire of my soul.
 
what his feelings were whom i pursued i cannot know. sometimes, indeed, he
 left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
 and instigated my fury. “my reign is not yet
 over”—these words were legible in one of these
 inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. follow me; i
 seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
 cold and frost, to which i am impassive. you will find near this place, if
 you follow not too tardily, dead hare; eat and be refreshed. come on, my
 enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable
 hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.”
 
scoffing devil! again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee,
 miserable fiend, to torture and death. never will i give up my search
 until or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my
 elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for the
 reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!
 
as i still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the
 cold increased in degree almost too severe to support. the peasants were
 shut up in their hovels, and only few of the most hardy ventured forth to
 seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to
 seek for prey. the rivers were covered with ice, and fish could be
 procured; and thus i was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
 
the triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. one
 inscription that left was in these words: “prepare! your toils
 only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
 upon journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
 hatred.”
 
my courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; i
 resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support
 me, i continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
 until the ocean appeared at distance and formed the utmost boundary
 of the horizon. oh! how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the
 south! covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by
 its superior wildness and ruggedness. the greeks wept for joy when
 they beheld the mediterranean from the hills of asia, and hailed with
 rapture the boundary of their toils. i did not weep, but i knelt down
 and with full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting in
 safety to the place where i hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe,
 to meet and grapple with him.
 
some weeks before this period i had procured sledge and dogs and thus
 traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. i know not whether the
 fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had
 daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gained on him, so much so that
 when i first saw the ocean was but one day’s journey in advance, and
 i hoped to intercept him before should reach the beach. with new
 courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrived at wretched
 hamlet on the seashore. i inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
 fiend and gained accurate information. gigantic monster, they said,
 had arrived the night before, armed with gun and many pistols,
 putting to flight the inhabitants of solitary cottage through fear of
 his terrific appearance. had carried off their store of winter
 food, and placing it in sledge, to draw which had seized on a
 numerous drove of trained dogs, had harnessed them, and the same
 night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
 journey across the in direction that led to land; and they
 conjectured that must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
 ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.
 
on hearing this information i suffered temporary access of despair.
 had escaped me, and i must commence destructive and almost endless
 journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
 of the inhabitants could long endure and which i, the native of a
 genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. yet at the idea
 that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
 returned, and like mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
 after slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
 round and instigated to toil and revenge, i prepared for my journey.
 
i exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of
 the frozen ocean, and purchasing plentiful stock of provisions, i
 departed from land.
 
i cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but i have endured
 misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of just retribution
 burning within my heart could have enabled to support. immense and
 rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and i often heard
 the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. but
 again the frost came and made the paths of the secure.
 
by the quantity of provision which i had consumed, i should guess that
 i had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction
 of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
 despondency and grief from my eyes. despair had indeed almost secured
 her prey, and i should soon have sunk beneath this misery. once, after
 the poor animals that conveyed had with incredible toil gained the
 summit of sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue,
 died, i viewed the expanse before with anguish, when suddenly my eye
 caught dark speck upon the dusky plain. i strained my sight to
 discover what it could be and uttered wild cry of ecstasy when i
 distinguished sledge and the distorted proportions of well-known
 form within. oh! with what burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
 warm tears filled my eyes, which i hastily wiped away, that they might
 not intercept the view i had of the dæmon; but still my sight was
 dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that
 oppressed me, i wept aloud.
 
but this was not the time for delay; i disencumbered the dogs of their
 dead companion, gave them plentiful portion of food, and after an
 hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
 irksome to me, i continued my route. the sledge was still visible, nor
 did i again lose sight of it except at the moments when for short
 time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. i indeed
 perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, i
 beheld my enemy at more than mile distant, my heart bounded within
 me.
 
but now, when i appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
 suddenly extinguished, and i lost all trace of him more utterly than i had
 ever done before. ground was heard; the thunder of its progress, as
 the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous
 and terrific. i pressed on, but in vain. the wind arose; the roared;
 and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
 tremendous and overwhelming sound. the work was soon finished; in few
 minutes tumultuous rolled between and my enemy, and i was left
 drifting on scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and
 thus preparing for hideous death.
 
in this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and i
 myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when i saw your
 vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to hopes of succour and life.
 i had conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded
 at the sight. i quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and
 by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in
 the direction of your ship. i had determined, if you were going southwards,
 still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my
 purpose. i hoped to induce you to grant boat with which i could pursue
 my enemy. but your direction was northwards. you took on board when my
 vigour was exhausted, and i should soon have sunk under my multiplied
 hardships into death which i still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.
 
oh! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting to the dæmon, allow
 the rest i so much desire; or must i die, and yet live? if i do,
 swear to me, walton, that shall not escape, that you will seek him
 and satisfy my vengeance in his death. and do i dare to ask of you to
 undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that i have undergone?
 no; i am not so selfish. yet, when i am dead, if should appear, if
 the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
 shall not live—swear that shall not triumph over my accumulated
 woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. is eloquent
 and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
 trust him not. his soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
 and fiend-like malice. hear him not; call on the names of william,
 justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched victor, and
 thrust your sword into his heart. i will hover near and direct the
 steel aright.
 
walton, _in continuation._
 

august 26th, 17—.
 

you have read this strange and terrific story, margaret; and do you not
 feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles
 mine? sometimes, seized with sudden agony, could not continue his
 tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with
 difficulty the words so replete with anguish. his fine and lovely eyes
 were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
 and quenched in infinite wretchedness. sometimes commanded his
 countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
 tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
 volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
 of the wildest rage as shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.
 
his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth,
 yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which showed me,
 and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to a
 greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
 however earnest and connected. such monster has, then, really existence!
 i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration. sometimes i
 endeavoured to gain from frankenstein the particulars of his
 creature’s formation, but on this point was impenetrable.
 
“are you mad, my friend?” said he. “or whither does your
 senseless curiosity lead you? would you also create for yourself and the
 world demoniacal enemy? peace, peace! learn my miseries and do not seek
 to increase your own.”
 
frankenstein discovered that i made notes concerning his history; asked
 to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
 but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations held
 with his enemy. “since you have preserved my narration,” said
 he, “i would not that mutilated one should go down to
 posterity.”
 
thus has week passed away, while i have listened to the strangest
 tale that ever imagination formed. my thoughts and every feeling of my
 soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale
 and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. i wish to soothe
 him, yet can i counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of
 every hope of consolation, to live? oh, no! the only joy that can
 now know will be when composes his shattered spirit to peace and
 death. yet enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
 delirium; believes that when in dreams holds converse with his
 friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or
 excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his
 fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a
 remote world. this faith gives solemnity to his reveries that render
 them to almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
 
our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
 misfortunes. on every point of general literature displays
 unbounded knowledge and quick and piercing apprehension. his
 eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can i hear him, when relates
 pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love,
 without tears. what glorious creature must have been in the days
 of his prosperity, when is thus noble and godlike in ruin! seems
 to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.
 
“when younger,” said he, “i believed myself destined for
 some great enterprise. my feelings are profound, but i possessed coolness
 of judgment that fitted for illustrious achievements. this sentiment of
 the worth of my nature supported when others would have been oppressed,
 for i deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that
 might be useful to my fellow creatures. when i reflected on the work i had
 completed, less one than the creation of sensitive and rational
 animal, i could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. but
 this thought, which supported in the commencement of my career, now
 serves only to plunge lower in the dust. all my speculations and hopes
 are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, i am
 chained in an eternal hell. my imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
 analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities i
 conceived the idea and executed the creation of man. even now i cannot
 recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. i trod
 heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea
 of their effects. from my infancy i was imbued with high hopes and lofty
 ambition; but how am i sunk! oh! my friend, if you had known as i once
 was, you would not recognise in this state of degradation. despondency
 rarely visited my heart; high destiny seemed to bear on, until i fell,
 never, never again to rise.”
 
must i then lose this admirable being? i have longed for friend; i have
 sought one who would sympathise with and love me. behold, on these desert
 seas i have found such one, but i fear i have gained him only to know his
 value and lose him. i would reconcile him to life, but repulses the idea.
 
“i thank you, walton,” said, “for your kind intentions towards so
 miserable wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
 affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? can any
 man be to as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth? even
 where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence,
 the companions of our childhood always possess certain power over our
 minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. they know our
 infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified,
 are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more
 certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. sister or a
 brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
 suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
 however strongly may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be
 contemplated with suspicion. but i enjoyed friends, dear not only
 through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
 i am, the soothing voice of my elizabeth and the conversation of
 clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. they are dead, and but one
 feeling in such solitude can persuade to preserve my life. if i
 were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
 utility to my fellow creatures, then could i live to fulfil it. but
 such is not my destiny; i must pursue and destroy the being to whom i
 gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and i may die.”
 
my beloved sister,
 
september 2d.
 

i write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether i am ever
 doomed to see again dear england and the dearer friends that inhabit
 it. i am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of escape and
 threaten every moment to crush my vessel. the brave fellows whom i
 have persuaded to be my companions look towards for aid, but i have
 none to bestow. there is something terribly appalling in our
 situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. yet it is
 terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered
 through me. if we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
 
and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind? you will not hear of my
 destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. years will pass, and
 you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. oh! my
 beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is,
 in prospect, more terrible to than my own death. but you have husband
 and lovely children; you may be happy. heaven bless you and make you so!
 
my unfortunate guest regards with the tenderest compassion. he
 endeavours to fill with hope and talks as if life were possession
 which valued. reminds how often the same accidents have
 happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite
 of myself, fills with cheerful auguries. even the sailors feel
 the power of his eloquence; when speaks, they longer despair; he
 rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these
 vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the
 resolutions of man. these feelings are transitory; each day of
 expectation delayed fills them with fear, and i almost dread mutiny
 caused by this despair.
 
september 5th.
 

scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is
 highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet i cannot
 forbear recording it.
 
we are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger
 of being crushed in their conflict. the cold is excessive, and many of
 my unfortunate comrades have already found grave amidst this scene of
 desolation. frankenstein has daily declined in health; feverish fire
 still glimmers in his eyes, but is exhausted, and when suddenly
 roused to any exertion, speedily sinks again into apparent
 lifelessness.
 
i mentioned in my last letter the fears i entertained of mutiny.
 this morning, as i sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his
 eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—i was roused by half
 dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. they
 entered, and their leader addressed me. told that and his
 companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation
 to to make requisition which, in justice, i could not refuse.
 we were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they
 feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and free
 passage be opened, i should be rash enough to continue my voyage and
 lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
 this. they insisted, therefore, that i should engage with solemn
 promise that if the vessel should be freed i would instantly direct my
 course southwards.
 
this speech troubled me. i had not despaired, nor had i yet conceived
 the idea of returning if set free. yet could i, in justice, or even in
 possibility, refuse this demand? i hesitated before i answered, when
 frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly
 to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
 and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. turning towards the men,
 said,
 
“what do you mean? what do you demand of your captain? are you, then,
 so easily turned from your design? did you not call this glorious
 expedition? “and wherefore was it glorious? not because the way was
 smooth and placid as southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and
 terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth
 and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and
 these you were to brave and overcome. for this was it glorious, for this
 was it an honourable undertaking. you were hereafter to be hailed as the
 benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men
 who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. and now,
 behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first
 mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content
 to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
 peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
 firesides. why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come
 thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of defeat merely to prove
 yourselves cowards. oh! be men, or be more than men. be steady to your
 purposes and firm as rock. this ice is not made of such stuff as your
 hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
 shall not. do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
 marked on your brows. return as heroes who have fought and conquered and
 who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”
 
spoke this with voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed
 in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can
 you wonder that these men were moved? they looked at one another and were
 unable to reply. i spoke; i told them to retire and consider of what had
 been said, that i would not lead them farther north if they strenuously
 desired the contrary, but that i hoped that, with reflection, their courage
 would return.
 
they retired and i turned towards my friend, but was sunk in languor and
 almost deprived of life.
 
how all this will terminate, i know not, but i had rather die than
 return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. yet i fear such will be my
 fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
 willingly continue to endure their present hardships.
 
september 7th.
 

the die is cast; i have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
 thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; i come back
 ignorant and disappointed. it requires more philosophy than i possess
 to bear this injustice with patience.
 
september 12th.
 

it is past; i am returning to england. i have lost my hopes of utility
 and glory; i have lost my friend. but i will endeavour to detail these
 bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while i am wafted
 towards england and towards you, i will not despond.
 
september 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard
 at distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. we were
 in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief
 attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in
 such degree that was entirely confined to his bed. the ice cracked
 behind us and was driven with force towards the north; breeze sprang from
 the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
 free. when the sailors saw this and that their return to their native
 country was apparently assured, shout of tumultuous joy broke from them,
 loud and long-continued. frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
 cause of the tumult. “they shout,” i said, “because they
 will soon return to england.”
 
“do you, then, really return?”
 
“alas! yes; i cannot withstand their demands. i cannot lead them
 unwillingly to danger, and i must return.”
 
“do so, if you will; but i will not. you may give up your purpose, but
 mine is assigned to by heaven, and i dare not. i am weak, but
 surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow with
 sufficient strength.” saying this, endeavoured to spring from the
 bed, but the exertion was too great for him; fell back and fainted.
 
it was long before was restored, and i often thought that life was
 entirely extinct. at length opened his eyes; breathed with
 difficulty and was unable to speak. the surgeon gave him composing
 draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. in the meantime he
 told that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.
 
his sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient. i sat
 by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and i thought slept; but
 presently called to in feeble voice, and bidding come near,
 said, “alas! the strength i relied on is gone; i feel that i shall
 soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. think
 not, walton, that in the last moments of my existence i feel that burning
 hatred and ardent desire of revenge i once expressed; but i feel myself
 justified in desiring the death of my adversary. during these last days i
 have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do i find it blamable.
 in fit of enthusiastic madness i created rational creature and was
 bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and
 well-being. this was my duty, but there was another still paramount to
 that. my duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to
 my attention because they included greater proportion of happiness or
 misery. urged by this view, i refused, and i did right in refusing, to
 create companion for the first creature. showed unparalleled malignity
 and selfishness in evil; destroyed my friends; devoted to destruction
 beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do i
 know where this thirst for vengeance may end. miserable himself that may
 render other wretched, ought to die. the task of his destruction was
 mine, but i have failed. when actuated by selfish and vicious motives, i
 asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and i renew this request now,
 when i am only induced by reason and virtue.
 
“yet i cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil
 this task; and now that you are returning to england, you will have
 little chance of meeting with him. but the consideration of these
 points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, i
 leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
 approach of death. i dare not ask you to do what i think right, for i
 may still be misled by passion.
 
“that should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
 other respects, this hour, when i momentarily expect my release, is the
 only happy one which i have enjoyed for several years. the forms of
 the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms. farewell,
 walton! seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
 be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
 science and discoveries. yet why do i say this? i have myself been
 blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.”
 
his voice became fainter as spoke, and at length, exhausted by his
 effort, sank into silence. about half an hour afterwards he
 attempted again to speak but was unable; pressed my hand feebly, and
 his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of gentle smile passed
 away from his lips.
 
margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this
 glorious spirit? what can i say that will enable you to understand the
 depth of my sorrow? all that i should express would be inadequate and
 feeble. my tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by cloud of
 disappointment. but i journey towards england, and i may there find
 consolation.
 
i am interrupted. what do these sounds portend? it is midnight; the
 breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. again there
 is sound as of human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
 where the remains of frankenstein still lie. i must arise and examine.
 good night, my sister.
 
great god! what scene has just taken place! i am yet dizzy with the
 remembrance of it. i hardly know whether i shall have the power to detail
 it; yet the tale which i have recorded would be incomplete without this
 final and wonderful catastrophe.
 
i entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
 friend. over him hung form which i cannot find words to
 describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
 proportions. as hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long
 locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
 apparent texture like that of mummy. when heard the sound of my
 approach, ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung
 towards the window. never did i behold vision so horrible as his face, of
 such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. i shut my eyes involuntarily and
 endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
 i called on him to stay.
 
paused, looking on with wonder, and again turning towards the
 lifeless form of his creator, seemed to forget my presence, and
 every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
 uncontrollable passion.
 
“that is also my victim!” exclaimed. “in his murder my
 crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
 close! oh, frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does it
 avail that i now ask thee to pardon me? i, who irretrievably destroyed thee
 by destroying all thou lovedst. alas! is cold, cannot answer
 me.”
 
his voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to
 the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his
 enemy, were now suspended by mixture of curiosity and compassion. i
 approached this tremendous being; i dared not again raise my eyes to his
 face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. i
 attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. the monster
 continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. at length i
 gathered resolution to address him in pause of the tempest of his passion.
 
“your repentance,” i said, “is now superfluous. if you
 had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse
 before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity,
 frankenstein would yet have lived.”
 
“and do you dream?” said the dæmon. “do you think that i was then
 dead to agony and remorse? he,” continued, pointing to the corpse,
 “he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. oh! not the
 ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
 lingering detail of its execution. frightful selfishness hurried me
 on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. think you that the
 groans of clerval were music to my ears? my heart was fashioned to be
 susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
 and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without
 torture such as you cannot even imagine.
 
“after the murder of clerval i returned to switzerland, heart-broken
 and overcome. i pitied frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; i
 abhorred myself. but when i discovered that he, the author at once of
 my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
 happiness, that while accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
 sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
 indulgence of which i was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter
 indignation filled with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. i
 recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. i
 knew that i was preparing for myself deadly torture, but i was the
 slave, not the master, of an impulse which i detested yet could not
 disobey. yet when she died! nay, then i was not miserable. i had
 cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my
 despair. evil thenceforth became my good. urged thus far, i had no
 choice but to adapt my nature to an element which i had willingly
 chosen. the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable
 passion. and now it is ended; there is my last victim!”
 
i was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when i called
 to mind what frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and
 persuasion, and when i again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
 friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “wretch!” i said.
 “it is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
 have made. you throw torch into pile of buildings, and when they are
 consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. hypocritical fiend!
 if whom you mourn still lived, still would be the object, again would
 become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. it is not pity that you
 feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
 from your power.”
 
“oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being.
 “yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to
 be the purport of my actions. yet i seek not fellow feeling in my misery.
 sympathy may i ever find. when i first sought it, it was the love of
 virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
 overflowed, that i wished to be participated. but now that virtue has
 become to shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
 bitter and loathing despair, in what should i seek for sympathy? i am
 content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when i die, i am
 well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. once
 my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. once
 i falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would
 love for the excellent qualities which i was capable of unfolding. i was
 nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. but now crime has
 degraded beneath the meanest animal. guilt, mischief, no
 malignity, misery, can be found comparable to mine. when i run over the
 frightful catalogue of my sins, i cannot believe that i am the same
 creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
 visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. but it is even so; the
 fallen angel becomes malignant devil. yet even that enemy of god and man
 had friends and associates in his desolation; i am alone.
 
“you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have knowledge of my
 crimes and his misfortunes. but in the detail which gave you of them
 could not sum up the hours and months of misery which i endured
 wasting in impotent passions. for while i destroyed his hopes, i did
 not satisfy my own desires. they were for ever ardent and craving; still
 i desired love and fellowship, and i was still spurned. was there no
 injustice in this? am i to be thought the only criminal, when all
 humankind sinned against me? why do you not hate felix, who drove his
 friend from his door with contumely? why do you not execrate the rustic
 who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? nay, these are virtuous
 and immaculate beings! i, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
 abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. even now my
 blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.
 
“but it is true that i am wretch. i have murdered the lovely and
 the helpless; i have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to
 death his throat who never injured or any other living thing. i have
 devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and
 admiration among men, to misery; i have pursued him even to that
 irremediable ruin. there lies, white and cold in death. you hate me, but
 your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself. i look on the
 hands which executed the deed; i think on the heart in which the
 imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
 will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts more.
 
“fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief. my work
 is nearly complete. neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
 consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done,
 but it requires my own. do not think that i shall be slow to perform this
 sacrifice. i shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
 thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; i shall
 collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its
 remains may afford light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would
 create such another as i have been. i shall die. i shall longer feel the
 agonies which now consume or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet
 unquenched. is dead who called into being; and when i shall be no
 more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. i shall no
 longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. light,
 feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must i find my
 happiness. some years ago, when the images which this world affords first
 opened upon me, when i felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the
 rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to
 me, i should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. polluted by
 crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can i find rest but in
 death?
 
“farewell! i leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these
 eyes will ever behold. farewell, frankenstein! if thou wert yet alive
 and yet cherished desire of revenge against me, it would be better
 satiated in my life than in my destruction. but it was not so; thou
 didst seek my extinction, that i might not cause greater wretchedness;
 and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
 and feel, thou wouldst not desire against vengeance greater than
 that which i feel. blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to
 thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my
 wounds until death shall close them for ever.
 
“but soon,” cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “i
 shall die, and what i now feel be longer felt. soon these burning
 miseries will be extinct. i shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and
 exult in the agony of the torturing flames. the light of that conflagration
 will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the by the winds. my spirit
 will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
 farewell.”
 
sprang from the cabin-window as said this, upon the ice raft
 which lay close to the vessel. was soon borne away by the waves and
 lost in darkness and distance.
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 



