the project gutenberg ebook of leviathan
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: leviathan
 
author: thomas hobbes
 
release date: may 1, 2002 [ebook #3207]
 most recently updated: march 27, 2021
 
language: english
 
credits: edward white and david widger
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook leviathan ***
 



leviathan
 
by thomas hobbes
 
1651
 

leviathan or the matter, forme, & power of common-wealth
 ecclesiastical and civill
 
thomas hobbes of malmesbury
 

printed for andrew crooke, at the green dragon in st. paul’s churchyard,
 1651.
 


transcriber’s notes on the e-text:
 
this e-text was prepared from the pelican classics edition of leviathan,
 which in turn was prepared from the first edition. i have tried to
 follow as closely as possible the original, and to give the flavour of
 the text that hobbes himself proof-read, but the following differences
 were unavoidable.
 
hobbes used capitals and italics very extensively, for emphasis, for
 proper names, for quotations, and sometimes, it seems, just because.
 
the original has very extensive margin notes, which are used to show
 where introduces the definitions of words and concepts, to give in
 short the subject that paragraph or section is dealing with, and to
 give references to his quotations, largely but not exclusively biblical.
 to some degree, these margin notes seem to have been intended to serve
 in place of an index, the original having none. they are all in italics.
 
also used italics for words in other languages than english, and
 there are number of greek words, in the greek alphabet, in the text.
 
to deal with these within the limits of plain vanilla ascii, i have done
 the following in this e-text.
 
i have restricted my use of full capitalization to those places where
 hobbes used it, except in the chapter headings, which i have fully
 capitalized, where hobbes used mixture of full capitalization and
 italics.
 
where it is clear that the italics are to indicate the text is quoting,
 i have introduced quotation marks. within quotation marks i have
 retained the capitalization that hobbes used.
 
where italics seem to be used for emphasis, or for proper names, or just
 because, i have capitalized the initial letter of the words. this has
 the disadvantage that they are not then distinguished from those that
 hobbes capitalized in plain text, but the extent of his italics would
 make the text very ugly if i was to use an underscore or slash.
 
where the margin notes are either to introduce the paragraph subject,
 or to show where introduces word definitions, i have included them as
 headers to the paragraph, again with all words having initial capitals,
 and on shortened line.
 
for margin references to quotes, i have included them in the text,
 in brackets immediately next to the quotation. where hobbes included
 references in the main text, i have left them as put them, except to
 change his square brackets to round.
 
for the greek alphabet, i have simply substituted the nearest ordinary
 letters that i can, and i have used initial capitals for foreign
 language words.
 
neither thomas hobbes nor his typesetters seem to have had many
 inhibitions about spelling and punctuation. i have tried to reproduce
 both exactly, with the exception of the introduction of quotation marks.
 
in preparing the text, i have found that it has much more meaning if
 i read it with sub-vocalization, or aloud, rather than trying to read
 silently. hobbes’ use of emphasis and his eccentric punctuation and
 construction seem then to work.
 


to my most honor’d friend mr. francis godolphin of godolphin
 

honor’d sir.
 
your most worthy brother mr sidney godolphin, when lived, was pleas’d
 to think my studies something, and otherwise to oblige me, as you know,
 with reall testimonies of his good opinion, great in themselves, and the
 greater for the worthinesse of his person. for there is not any vertue
 that disposeth man, either to the service of god, or to the service
 of his country, to civill society, or private friendship, that did not
 manifestly appear in his conversation, not as acquired by necessity,
 or affected upon occasion, but inhaerent, and shining in generous
 constitution of his nature. therefore in honour and gratitude to him,
 and with devotion to your selfe, i humbly dedicate unto you this my
 discourse of common-wealth. i know not how the world will receive it,
 nor how it may reflect on those that shall seem to favour it. for in a
 way beset with those that contend on one side for too great liberty, and
 on the other side for too much authority, ’tis hard to passe between the
 points of both unwounded. but yet, thinks, the endeavour to advance
 the civill power, should not be by the civill power condemned; nor
 private men, by reprehending it, declare they think that power too
 great. besides, i speak not of the men, but (in the abstract) of the
 seat of power, (like to those simple and unpartiall creatures in the
 roman capitol, that with their noyse defended those within it, not
 because they were they, but there) offending none, i think, but those
 without, or such within (if there be any such) as favour them. that
 which perhaps may most offend, are certain texts of holy scripture,
 alledged by to other purpose than ordinarily they use to be by
 others. but i have done it with due submission, and also (in order to
 my subject) necessarily; for they are the outworks of the enemy, from
 whence they impugne the civill power. if notwithstanding this, you find
 my labour generally decryed, you may be pleased to excuse your selfe,
 and say that i am man that love my own opinions, and think all true i
 say, that i honoured your brother, and honour you, and have presum’d on
 that, to assume the title (without your knowledge) of being, as i am,
 
sir,
 
your most humble, and most obedient servant, thomas hobbes.
 
paris aprill 15/25 1651.
 



contents of the chapters
 

the first part
 

of man
 

introduction
 
1. of sense
 
2. of imagination
 
3. of the consequences or train of imaginations
 
4. of speech
 
5. of reason and science
 
6. of the interiour beginnings of voluntary motions, commonly called the
 passions; and the speeches by which they are expressed
 
7. of the ends or resolutions of discourse
 
8. of the vertues, commonly called intellectuall, and their contrary
 defects
 
9. of the severall subjects of knowledge
 
10. of power, worth, dignity, honour, and worthinesse
 
11. of the difference of manners
 
12. of religion
 
13. of the naturall condition of mankind as concerning their felicity
 and misery
 
14. of the first and second naturall lawes, and of contract
 
15. of other lawes of nature
 
16. of persons, authors, and things personated
 

the second part
 

of common-wealth
 

17. of the causes, generation, and definition of common-wealth
 
18. of the rights of soveraignes by institution
 
19. of severall kinds of common-wealth by institution; and of succesion
 to the soveraign power
 
20. of dominion paternall, and despoticall
 
21. of the liberty of subjects
 
22. of systemes subject, politicall, and private
 
23. of the publique ministers of soveraign power
 
24. of the nutrition, and procreation of common-wealth
 
25. of counsell
 
26. of civill lawes
 
27. of crimes, excuses, and extenuations
 
28. of punishments, and rewards
 
29. of those things that weaken, or tend to the dissolution of a
 common-wealth
 
30. of the office of the soveraign representative
 
31. of the kingdom of god by nature
 


the third part
 

of christian common-wealth
 

32. of the principles of christian politiques
 
33. of the number, antiquity, scope, authority, and interpreters of the
 books of holy scripture
 
34. of the signification, of spirit, angell, and inspiration in the
 books of holy scripture
 
35. of the signification in scripture of the kingdome of god, of holy,
 sacred, and sacrament
 
36. of the word of god, and of prophets
 
37. of miracles, and their use
 
38. of the signification in scripture of eternall life, hel, salvation,
 the world to come, and redemption
 
39. of the signification in scripture of the word church
 
40. of the rights of the kingdome of god, in abraham, moses, the high
 priests, and the kings of judah
 
41. of the office of our blessed saviour
 
42. of power ecclesiasticall
 
43. of what is necessary for mans reception into the kingdome of heaven
 


the fourth part
 
of the kingdome of darknesse
 

44. of spirituall darknesse from misinterpretation of scripture
 
45. of daemonology, and other reliques of the religion of the gentiles
 
46. of darknesse from vaine philosophy, and fabulous traditions
 
47. of the benefit proceeding from such darknesse; and to whom it
 accreweth
 


48. review and conclusion
 



the introduction
 

nature (the art whereby god hath made and governes the world) is by the
 art of man, as in many other things, so in this also imitated, that it
 can make an artificial animal. for seeing life is but motion of limbs,
 the begining whereof is in some principall part within; why may we not
 say, that all automata (engines that move themselves by springs and
 wheeles as doth watch) have an artificiall life? for what is the
 heart, but spring; and the nerves, but so many strings; and the
 joynts, but so many wheeles, giving motion to the whole body, such as
 was intended by the artificer? art goes yet further, imitating that
 rationall and most excellent worke of nature, man. for by art is created
 that great leviathan called common-wealth, or state, (in latine
 civitas) which is but an artificiall man; though of greater stature
 and strength than the naturall, for whose protection and defence it
 was intended; and in which, the soveraignty is an artificiall soul, as
 giving life and motion to the whole body; the magistrates, and other
 officers of judicature and execution, artificiall joynts; reward and
 punishment (by which fastned to the seat of the soveraignty, every joynt
 and member is moved to performe his duty) are the nerves, that do the
 same in the body naturall; the wealth and riches of all the particular
 members, are the strength; salus populi (the peoples safety) its
 businesse; counsellors, by whom all things needfull for it to know,
 are suggested unto it, are the memory; equity and lawes, an artificiall
 reason and will; concord, health; sedition, sicknesse; and civill war,
 death. lastly, the pacts and covenants, by which the parts of this body
 politique were at first made, set together, and united, resemble that
 fiat, or the let us make man, pronounced by god in the creation.
 
to describe the nature of this artificiall man, i will consider
 
first the matter thereof, and the artificer; both which is man.
 
secondly, how, and by what covenants it is made; what are the rights and
 just power or authority of soveraigne; and what it is that preserveth
 and dissolveth it.
 
thirdly, what is christian common-wealth.
 
lastly, what is the kingdome of darkness.
 
concerning the first, there is saying much usurped of late, that
 wisedome is acquired, not by reading of books, but of men. consequently
 whereunto, those persons, that for the most part can give other proof
 of being wise, take great delight to shew what they think they have read
 in men, by uncharitable censures of one another behind their backs.
 but there is another saying not of late understood, by which they might
 learn truly to read one another, if they would take the pains; and that
 is, nosce teipsum, read thy self: which was not meant, as it is now
 used, to countenance, either the barbarous state of men in power,
 towards their inferiors; or to encourage men of low degree, to a
 sawcie behaviour towards their betters; but to teach us, that for the
 similitude of the thoughts, and passions of one man, to the thoughts,
 and passions of another, whosoever looketh into himselfe, and
 considereth what doth, when does think, opine, reason, hope,
 feare, &c, and upon what grounds; shall thereby read and know,
 what are the thoughts, and passions of all other men, upon the like
 occasions. i say the similitude of passions, which are the same in all
 men, desire, feare, hope, &c; not the similitude or the objects of the
 passions, which are the things desired, feared, hoped, &c: for these the
 constitution individuall, and particular education do so vary, and they
 are so easie to be kept from our knowledge, that the characters of mans
 heart, blotted and confounded as they are, with dissembling, lying,
 counterfeiting, and erroneous doctrines, are legible onely to him that
 searcheth hearts. and though by mens actions wee do discover their
 designee sometimes; yet to do it without comparing them with our own,
 and distinguishing all circumstances, by which the case may come to
 be altered, is to decypher without key, and be for the most part
 deceived, by too much trust, or by too much diffidence; as that
 reads, is himselfe good or evill man.
 
but let one man read another by his actions never so perfectly, it
 serves him onely with his acquaintance, which are but few. that is
 to govern whole nation, must read in himselfe, not this, or that
 particular man; but man-kind; which though it be hard to do, harder than
 to learn any language, or science; yet, when i shall have set down my
 own reading orderly, and perspicuously, the pains left another, will be
 onely to consider, if also find not the same in himselfe. for this
 kind of doctrine, admitteth other demonstration.
 



part i.
 of man
 



chapter i. of sense
 

concerning the thoughts of man, i will consider them first singly, and
 afterwards in trayne, or dependance upon one another. singly, they
 are every one representation or apparence, of some quality, or other
 accident of body without us; which is commonly called an object. which
 object worketh on the eyes, eares, and other parts of mans body; and by
 diversity of working, produceth diversity of apparences.
 
the originall of them all, is that which we call sense; (for there is
 conception in mans mind, which hath not at first, totally, or by
 parts, been begotten upon the organs of sense.) the rest are derived
 from that originall.
 
to know the naturall cause of sense, is not very necessary to the
 business now in hand; and i have els-where written of the same at large.
 nevertheless, to fill each part of my present method, i will briefly
 deliver the same in this place.
 
the cause of sense, is the externall body, or object, which presseth the
 organ proper to each sense, either immediatly, as in the tast and touch;
 or mediately, as in seeing, hearing, and smelling: which pressure, by
 the mediation of nerves, and other strings, and membranes of the body,
 continued inwards to the brain, and heart, causeth there resistance,
 or counter-pressure, or endeavour of the heart, to deliver it self:
 which endeavour because outward, seemeth to be some matter without. and
 this seeming, or fancy, is that which men call sense; and consisteth, as
 to the eye, in light, or colour figured; to the eare, in sound; to
 the nostrill, in an odour; to the tongue and palat, in savour; and
 to the rest of the body, in heat, cold, hardnesse, softnesse, and such
 other qualities, as we discern by feeling. all which qualities called
 sensible, are in the object that causeth them, but so many several
 motions of the matter, by which it presseth our organs diversly. neither
 in us that are pressed, are they anything els, but divers motions; (for
 motion, produceth nothing but motion.) but their apparence to us is
 fancy, the same waking, that dreaming. and as pressing, rubbing,
 or striking the eye, makes us fancy light; and pressing the eare,
 produceth dinne; so do the bodies also we see, or hear, produce the
 same by their strong, though unobserved action, for if those colours,
 and sounds, were in the bodies, or objects that cause them, they could
 not bee severed from them, as by glasses, and in ecchoes by reflection,
 wee see they are; where we know the thing we see, is in one place; the
 apparence, in another. and though at some certain distance, the reall,
 and very object seem invested with the fancy it begets in us; yet still
 the object is one thing, the image or fancy is another. so that sense in
 all cases, is nothing els but originall fancy, caused (as i have said)
 by the pressure, that is, by the motion, of externall things upon our
 eyes, eares, and other organs thereunto ordained.
 
but the philosophy-schooles, through all the universities of
 christendome, grounded upon certain texts of aristotle, teach another
 doctrine; and say, for the cause of vision, that the thing seen, sendeth
 forth on every side visible species(in english) visible shew,
 apparition, or aspect, or being seen; the receiving whereof into the
 eye, is seeing. and for the cause of hearing, that the thing heard,
 sendeth forth an audible species, that is, an audible aspect, or audible
 being seen; which entring at the eare, maketh hearing. nay for the
 cause of understanding also, they say the thing understood sendeth forth
 intelligible species, that is, an intelligible being seen; which
 comming into the understanding, makes us understand. i say not this,
 as disapproving the use of universities: but because i am to speak
 hereafter of their office in common-wealth, i must let you see on
 all occasions by the way, what things would be amended in them; amongst
 which the frequency of insignificant speech is one.
 


chapter ii. of imagination
 

that when thing lies still, unlesse somewhat els stirre it, it will
 lye still for ever, is truth that man doubts of. but that when a
 thing is in motion, it will eternally be in motion, unless somewhat els
 stay it, though the reason be the same, (namely, that nothing can change
 it selfe,) is not so easily assented to. for men measure, not onely
 other men, but all other things, by themselves: and because they find
 themselves subject after motion to pain, and lassitude, think every
 thing els growes weary of motion, and seeks repose of its own accord;
 little considering, whether it be not some other motion, wherein that
 desire of rest they find in themselves, consisteth. from hence it is,
 that the schooles say, heavy bodies fall downwards, out of an appetite
 to rest, and to conserve their nature in that place which is most proper
 for them; ascribing appetite, and knowledge of what is good for their
 conservation, (which is more than man has) to things inanimate absurdly.
 
when body is once in motion, it moveth (unless something els hinder
 it) eternally; and whatsoever hindreth it, cannot in an instant, but in
 time, and by degrees quite extinguish it: and as wee see in the water,
 though the wind cease, the waves give not over rowling for long
 time after; so also it happeneth in that motion, which is made in the
 internall parts of man, then, when sees, dreams, &c. for after the
 object is removed, or the eye shut, wee still retain an image of the
 thing seen, though more obscure than when we see it. and this is it,
 that latines call imagination, from the image made in seeing; and apply
 the same, though improperly, to all the other senses. but the greeks
 call it fancy; which signifies apparence, and is as proper to one sense,
 as to another. imagination therefore is nothing but decaying sense; and
 is found in men, and many other living creatures, as well sleeping, as
 waking.
 



memory
 
the decay of sense in men waking, is not the decay of the motion made in
 sense; but an obscuring of it, in such manner, as the light of the sun
 obscureth the light of the starres; which starrs do less exercise
 their vertue by which they are visible, in the day, than in the night.
 but because amongst many stroaks, which our eyes, eares, and other
 organs receive from externall bodies, the predominant onely is sensible;
 therefore the light of the sun being predominant, we are not affected
 with the action of the starrs. and any object being removed from our
 eyes, though the impression it made in us remain; yet other objects more
 present succeeding, and working on us, the imagination of the past is
 obscured, and made weak; as the voyce of man is in the noyse of the
 day. from whence it followeth, that the longer the time is, after the
 sight, or sense of any object, the weaker is the imagination. for the
 continuall change of mans body, destroyes in time the parts which in
 sense were moved: so that the distance of time, and of place, hath one
 and the same effect in us. for as at distance of place, that which wee
 look at, appears dimme, and without distinction of the smaller parts;
 and as voyces grow weak, and inarticulate: so also after great distance
 of time, our imagination of the past is weak; and wee lose( for example)
 of cities wee have seen, many particular streets; and of actions, many
 particular circumstances. this decaying sense, when wee would express
 the thing it self, (i mean fancy it selfe,) wee call imagination, as i
 said before; but when we would express the decay, and signifie that the
 sense is fading, old, and past, it is called memory. so that imagination
 and memory, are but one thing, which for divers considerations hath
 divers names.
 
much memory, or memory of many things, is called experience. againe,
 imagination being only of those things which have been formerly
 perceived by sense, either all at once, or by parts at severall
 times; the former, (which is the imagining the whole object, as it was
 presented to the sense) is simple imagination; as when one imagineth a
 man, or horse, which hath seen before. the other is compounded; as
 when from the sight of man at one time, and of horse at another, we
 conceive in our mind centaure. so when man compoundeth the image of
 his own person, with the image of the actions of an other man; as when a
 man imagins himselfe hercules, or an alexander, (which happeneth often
 to them that are much taken with reading of romants) it is compound
 imagination, and properly but fiction of the mind. there be also other
 imaginations that rise in men, (though waking) from the great impression
 made in sense; as from gazing upon the sun, the impression leaves an
 image of the sun before our eyes long time after; and from being long
 and vehemently attent upon geometricall figures, man shall in the
 dark, (though awake) have the images of lines, and angles before his
 eyes: which kind of fancy hath particular name; as being thing that
 doth not commonly fall into mens discourse.
 



dreams
 
the imaginations of them that sleep, are those we call dreams. and these
 also (as all other imaginations) have been before, either totally, or
 by parcells in the sense. and because in sense, the brain, and nerves,
 which are the necessary organs of sense, are so benummed in sleep, as
 not easily to be moved by the action of externall objects, there can
 happen in sleep, imagination; and therefore dreame, but what
 proceeds from the agitation of the inward parts of mans body; which
 inward parts, for the connexion they have with the brayn, and other
 organs, when they be distempered, do keep the same in motion; whereby
 the imaginations there formerly made, appeare as if man were waking;
 saving that the organs of sense being now benummed, so as there is
 new object, which can master and obscure them with more vigorous
 impression, dreame must needs be more cleare, in this silence of
 sense, than are our waking thoughts. and hence it cometh to pass, that
 it is hard matter, and by many thought impossible to distinguish
 exactly between sense and dreaming. for my part, when i consider, that
 in dreames, i do not often, nor constantly think of the same persons,
 places, objects, and actions that i do waking; nor remember so long a
 trayne of coherent thoughts, dreaming, as at other times; and because
 waking i often observe the absurdity of dreames, but never dream of
 the absurdities of my waking thoughts; i am well satisfied, that being
 awake, i know i dreame not; though when i dreame, i think my selfe
 awake.
 
and seeing dreames are caused by the distemper of some of the inward
 parts of the body; divers distempers must needs cause different dreams.
 and hence it is, that lying cold breedeth dreams of feare, and raiseth
 the thought and image of some fearfull object (the motion from the
 brain to the inner parts, and from the inner parts to the brain being
 reciprocall:) and that as anger causeth heat in some parts of the body,
 when we are awake; so when we sleep, the over heating of the same parts
 causeth anger, and raiseth up in the brain the imagination of an enemy.
 in the same manner; as naturall kindness, when we are awake causeth
 desire; and desire makes heat in certain other parts of the body; so
 also, too much heat in those parts, while wee sleep, raiseth in the
 brain an imagination of some kindness shewn. in summe, our dreams are
 the reverse of our waking imaginations; the motion when we are awake,
 beginning at one end; and when we dream, at another.
 



apparitions or visions
 
the most difficult discerning of mans dream, from his waking thoughts,
 is then, when by some accident we observe not that we have slept:
 which is easie to happen to man full of fearfull thoughts; and
 whose conscience is much troubled; and that sleepeth, without the
 circumstances, of going to bed, or putting off his clothes, as one that
 noddeth in chayre. for that taketh pains, and industriously layes
 himselfe to sleep, in case any uncouth and exorbitant fancy come unto
 him, cannot easily think it other than dream. we read of marcus
 brutes, (one that had his life given him by julius caesar, and was also
 his favorite, and notwithstanding murthered him,) how at phillipi,
 the night before gave battell to augustus caesar, saw fearfull
 apparition, which is commonly related by historians as vision: but
 considering the circumstances, one may easily judge to have been but
 short dream. for sitting in his tent, pensive and troubled with the
 horrour of his rash act, it was not hard for him, slumbering in the
 cold, to dream of that which most affrighted him; which feare, as by
 degrees it made him wake; so also it must needs make the apparition by
 degrees to vanish: and having assurance that slept, could have
 cause to think it dream, or any thing but vision. and this is no
 very rare accident: for even they that be perfectly awake, if they be
 timorous, and supperstitious, possessed with fearfull tales, and alone
 in the dark, are subject to the like fancies, and believe they see
 spirits and dead mens ghosts walking in churchyards; whereas it is
 either their fancy onely, or els the knavery of such persons, as make
 use of such superstitious feare, to pass disguised in the night, to
 places they would not be known to haunt.
 
from this ignorance of how to distinguish dreams, and other strong
 fancies, from vision and sense, did arise the greatest part of the
 religion of the gentiles in time past, that worshipped satyres, fawnes,
 nymphs, and the like; and now adayes the opinion than rude people have
 of fayries, ghosts, and goblins; and of the power of witches. for as for
 witches, i think not that their witch craft is any reall power; but yet
 that they are justly punished, for the false beliefe they have, that
 they can do such mischiefe, joyned with their purpose to do it if they
 can; their trade being neerer to new religion, than to craft or
 science. and for fayries, and walking ghosts, the opinion of them has i
 think been on purpose, either taught, or not confuted, to keep in
 credit the use of exorcisme, of crosses, of holy water, and other such
 inventions of ghostly men. neverthelesse, there is doubt, but god can
 make unnaturall apparitions. but that does it so often, as men need
 to feare such things, more than they feare the stay, or change, of the
 course of nature, which also can stay, and change, is point of
 christian faith. but evill men under pretext that god can do any thing,
 are so bold as to say any thing when it serves their turn, though
 they think it untrue; it is the part of wise man, to believe them no
 further, than right reason makes that which they say, appear credible.
 if this superstitious fear of spirits were taken away, and with it,
 prognostiques from dreams, false prophecies, and many other things
 depending thereon, by which, crafty ambitious persons abuse the
 simple people, men would be much more fitted than they are for civill
 obedience.
 
and this ought to be the work of the schooles; but they rather nourish
 such doctrine. for (not knowing what imagination, or the senses are),
 what they receive, they teach: some saying, that imaginations rise of
 themselves, and have cause: others that they rise most commonly from
 the will; and that good thoughts are blown (inspired) into man, by
 god; and evill thoughts by the divell: or that good thoughts are powred
 (infused) into man, by god; and evill ones by the divell. some say
 the senses receive the species of things, and deliver them to the
 common-sense; and the common sense delivers them over to the fancy, and
 the fancy to the memory, and the memory to the judgement, like
 handing of things from one to another, with many words making nothing
 understood.
 



understanding
 
the imagination that is raysed in man (or any other creature indued with
 the faculty of imagining) by words, or other voluntary signes, is that
 we generally call understanding; and is common to man and beast. for a
 dogge by custome will understand the call, or the rating of his master;
 and so will many other beasts. that understanding which is peculiar to
 man, is the understanding not onely his will; but his conceptions and
 thoughts, by the sequell and contexture of the names of things into
 affirmations, negations, and other formes of speech: and of this kinde
 of understanding i shall speak hereafter.
 


chapter iii. of the consequence or trayne of imaginations
 

by consequence, or trayne of thoughts, i understand that succession
 of one thought to another, which is called (to distinguish it from
 discourse in words) mentall discourse.
 
when man thinketh on any thing whatsoever, his next thought after, is
 not altogether so casuall as it seems to be. not every thought to every
 thought succeeds indifferently. but as wee have imagination, whereof
 we have not formerly had sense, in whole, or in parts; so we have no
 transition from one imagination to another, whereof we never had the
 like before in our senses. the reason whereof is this. all fancies
 are motions within us, reliques of those made in the sense: and those
 motions that immediately succeeded one another in the sense, continue
 also together after sense: in so much as the former comming again to
 take place, and be praedominant, the later followeth, by coherence of
 the matter moved, is such manner, as water upon plain table is drawn
 which way any one part of it is guided by the finger. but because
 in sense, to one and the same thing perceived, sometimes one thing,
 sometimes another succeedeth, it comes to passe in time, that in the
 imagining of any thing, there is certainty what we shall imagine
 next; onely this is certain, it shall be something that succeeded the
 same before, at one time or another.
 



trayne of thoughts unguided
 
this trayne of thoughts, or mentall discourse, is of two sorts. the
 first is unguided, without designee, and inconstant; wherein there is no
 passionate thought, to govern and direct those that follow, to it self,
 as the end and scope of some desire, or other passion: in which case the
 thoughts are said to wander, and seem impertinent one to another, as
 in dream. such are commonly the thoughts of men, that are not onely
 without company, but also without care of any thing; though even then
 their thoughts are as busie as at other times, but without harmony; as
 the sound which lute out of tune would yeeld to any man; or in tune,
 to one that could not play. and yet in this wild ranging of the mind,
 man may oft-times perceive the way of it, and the dependance of one
 thought upon another. for in discourse of our present civill warre,
 what could seem more impertinent, than to ask (as one did) what was the
 value of roman penny? yet the cohaerence to was manifest enough.
 for the thought of the warre, introduced the thought of the delivering
 up the king to his enemies; the thought of that, brought in the thought
 of the delivering up of christ; and that again the thought of the 30
 pence, which was the price of that treason: and thence easily followed
 that malicious question; and all this in moment of time; for thought
 is quick.
 



trayne of thoughts regulated
 
the second is more constant; as being regulated by some desire, and
 designee. for the impression made by such things as wee desire, or
 feare, is strong, and permanent, or, (if it cease for time,) of quick
 return: so strong it is sometimes, as to hinder and break our sleep.
 from desire, ariseth the thought of some means we have seen produce the
 like of that which we ayme at; and from the thought of that, the
 thought of means to that mean; and so continually, till we come to some
 beginning within our own power. and because the end, by the greatnesse
 of the impression, comes often to mind, in case our thoughts begin to
 wander, they are quickly again reduced into the way: which observed by
 one of the seven wise men, made him give men this praecept, which is
 now worne out, respice finem; that is to say, in all your actions,
 look often upon what you would have, as the thing that directs all your
 thoughts in the way to attain it.
 



remembrance
 
the trayn of regulated thoughts is of two kinds; one, when of an effect
 imagined, wee seek the causes, or means that produce it: and this
 is common to man and beast. the other is, when imagining any thing
 whatsoever, wee seek all the possible effects, that can by it be
 produced; that is to say, we imagine what we can do with it, when wee
 have it. of which i have not at any time seen any signe, but in man
 onely; for this is curiosity hardly incident to the nature of any
 living creature that has other passion but sensuall, such as are
 hunger, thirst, lust, and anger. in summe, the discourse of the mind,
 when it is governed by designee, is nothing but seeking, or the faculty
 of invention, which the latines call sagacitas, and solertia; hunting
 out of the causes, of some effect, present or past; or of the effects,
 of some present or past cause, sometimes man seeks what hath lost;
 and from that place, and time, wherein hee misses it, his mind runs
 back, from place to place, and time to time, to find where, and when
 had it; that is to say, to find some certain, and limited time and
 place, in which to begin method of seeking. again, from thence, his
 thoughts run over the same places and times, to find what action, or
 other occasion might make him lose it. this we call remembrance,
 or calling to mind: the latines call it reminiscentia, as it were a
 re-conning of our former actions.
 
sometimes man knows place determinate, within the compasse whereof
 his is to seek; and then his thoughts run over all the parts thereof,
 in the same manner, as one would sweep room, to find jewell; or as
 spaniel ranges the field, till find sent; or as man should run
 over the alphabet, to start rime.
 



prudence
 
sometime man desires to know the event of an action; and then he
 thinketh of some like action past, and the events thereof one after
 another; supposing like events will follow like actions. as that
 foresees what wil become of criminal, re-cons what has seen follow
 on the like crime before; having this order of thoughts, the crime,
 the officer, the prison, the judge, and the gallowes. which kind
 of thoughts, is called foresight, and prudence, or providence; and
 sometimes wisdome; though such conjecture, through the difficulty of
 observing all circumstances, be very fallacious. but this is certain; by
 how much one man has more experience of things past, than another; by
 so much also is more prudent, and his expectations the seldomer faile
 him. the present onely has being in nature; things past have being
 in the memory onely, but things to come have being at all; the future
 being but fiction of the mind, applying the sequels of actions past,
 to the actions that are present; which with most certainty is done by
 him that has most experience; but not with certainty enough. and though
 it be called prudence, when the event answereth our expectation; yet in
 its own nature, it is but presumption. for the foresight of things to
 come, which is providence, belongs onely to him by whose will they are
 to come. from him onely, and supernaturally, proceeds prophecy. the best
 prophet naturally is the best guesser; and the best guesser, that is
 most versed and studied in the matters guesses at: for hath most
 signes to guesse by.
 



signes
 
signe, is the event antecedent, of the consequent; and contrarily,
 the consequent of the antecedent, when the like consequences have been
 observed, before: and the oftner they have been observed, the lesse
 uncertain is the signe. and therefore that has most experience in
 any kind of businesse, has most signes, whereby to guesse at the future
 time, and consequently is the most prudent: and so much more prudent
 than that is new in that kind of business, as not to be equalled by
 any advantage of naturall and extemporary wit: though perhaps many young
 men think the contrary.
 
neverthelesse it is not prudence that distinguisheth man from beast.
 there be beasts, that at year old observe more, and pursue that which
 is for their good, more prudently, than child can do at ten.
 



conjecture of the time past
 
as prudence is praesumtion of the future, contracted from the
 experience of time past; so there is praesumtion of things past taken
 from other things (not future but) past also. for that hath seen
 by what courses and degrees, flourishing state hath first come into
 civill warre, and then to ruine; upon the sights of the ruines of any
 other state, will guesse, the like warre, and the like courses have been
 there also. but his conjecture, has the same incertainty almost with the
 conjecture of the future; both being grounded onely upon experience.
 
there is other act of mans mind, that i can remember, naturally
 planted in him, so, as to need other thing, to the exercise of it,
 but to be born man, and live with the use of his five senses. those
 other faculties, of which i shall speak by and by, and which seem proper
 to man onely, are acquired, and encreased by study and industry; and of
 most men learned by instruction, and discipline; and proceed all from
 the invention of words, and speech. for besides sense, and thoughts, and
 the trayne of thoughts, the mind of man has other motion; though by
 the help of speech, and method, the same facultyes may be improved to
 such height, as to distinguish men from all other living creatures.
 
whatsoever we imagine, is finite. therefore there is idea, or
 conception of anything we call infinite. man can have in his mind an
 image of infinite magnitude; nor conceive the ends, and bounds of
 the thing named; having conception of the thing, but of our own
 inability. and therefore the name of god is used, not to make us
 conceive him; (for is incomprehensible; and his greatnesse, and power
 are unconceivable;) but that we may honour him. also because whatsoever
 (as i said before,) we conceive, has been perceived first by sense,
 either all at once, or by parts; man can have thought, representing
 any thing, not subject to sense. man therefore can conceive any
 thing, but must conceive it in some place; and indued with some
 determinate magnitude; and which may be divided into parts; nor that any
 thing is all in this place, and all in another place at the same time;
 nor that two, or more things can be in one, and the same place at once:
 for none of these things ever have, or can be incident to sense; but are
 absurd speeches, taken upon credit (without any signification at all,)
 from deceived philosophers, and deceived, or deceiving schoolemen.
 


chapter iv. of speech
 



originall of speech
 
the invention of printing, though ingenious, compared with the invention
 of letters, is great matter. but who was the first that found the use
 of letters, is not known. that first brought them into greece, men
 say was cadmus, the sonne of agenor, king of phaenicia. profitable
 invention for continuing the memory of time past, and the conjunction of
 mankind, dispersed into so many, and distant regions of the earth; and
 with all difficult, as proceeding from watchfull observation of the
 divers motions of the tongue, palat, lips, and other organs of speech;
 whereby to make as many differences of characters, to remember them.
 but the most noble and profitable invention of all other, was that of
 speech, consisting of names or apellations, and their connexion; whereby
 men register their thoughts; recall them when they are past; and also
 declare them one to another for mutuall utility and conversation;
 without which, there had been amongst men, neither common-wealth, nor
 society, nor contract, nor peace, more than amongst lyons, bears,
 and wolves. the first author of speech was god himselfe, that instructed
 adam how to name such creatures as presented to his sight; for the
 scripture goeth further in this matter. but this was sufficient
 to direct him to adde more names, as the experience and use of the
 creatures should give him occasion; and to joyn them in such manner by
 degrees, as to make himselfe understood; and so by succession of time,
 so much language might be gotten, as had found use for; though not so
 copious, as an orator or philosopher has need of. for i do not find any
 thing in the scripture, out of which, directly or by consequence can
 be gathered, that adam was taught the names of all figures, numbers,
 measures, colours, sounds, fancies, relations; much less the names
 of words and speech, as generall, speciall, affirmative, negative,
 interrogative, optative, infinitive, all which are usefull; and least of
 all, of entity, intentionality, quiddity, and other significant words of
 the school.
 
but all this language gotten, and augmented by adam and his posterity,
 was again lost at the tower of babel, when by the hand of god, every man
 was stricken for his rebellion, with an oblivion of his former language.
 and being hereby forced to disperse themselves into severall parts of
 the world, it must needs be, that the diversity of tongues that now is,
 proceeded by degrees from them, in such manner, as need (the mother of
 all inventions) taught them; and in tract of time grew every where more
 copious.
 



the use of speech
 
the generall use of speech, is to transferre our mentall discourse, into
 verbal; or the trayne of our thoughts, into trayne of words; and that
 for two commodities; whereof one is, the registring of the consequences
 of our thoughts; which being apt to slip out of our memory, and put
 us to new labour, may again be recalled, by such words as they were
 marked by. so that the first use of names, is to serve for markes,
 or notes of remembrance. another is, when many use the same words,
 to signifie (by their connexion and order,) one to another, what they
 conceive, or think of each matter; and also what they desire, feare,
 or have any other passion for, and for this use they are called
 signes. speciall uses of speech are these; first, to register, what by
 cogitation, wee find to be the cause of any thing, present or past; and
 what we find things present or past may produce, or effect: which in
 summe, is acquiring of arts. secondly, to shew to others that knowledge
 which we have attained; which is, to counsell, and teach one another.
 thirdly, to make known to others our wills, and purposes, that we may
 have the mutuall help of one another. fourthly, to please and delight
 our selves, and others, by playing with our words, for pleasure or
 ornament, innocently.
 



abuses of speech
 
to these uses, there are also foure correspondent abuses. first,
 when men register their thoughts wrong, by the inconstancy of the
 signification of their words; by which they register for their
 conceptions, that which they never conceived; and so deceive themselves.
 secondly, when they use words metaphorically; that is, in other sense
 than that they are ordained for; and thereby deceive others. thirdly,
 when by words they declare that to be their will, which is not.
 fourthly, when they use them to grieve one another: for seeing nature
 hath armed living creatures, some with teeth, some with horns, and some
 with hands, to grieve an enemy, it is but an abuse of speech, to grieve
 him with the tongue, unlesse it be one whom wee are obliged to govern;
 and then it is not to grieve, but to correct and amend.
 
the manner how speech serveth to the remembrance of the consequence
 of causes and effects, consisteth in the imposing of names, and the
 connexion of them.
 



names proper & common universall
 
of names, some are proper, and singular to one onely thing; as peter,
 john, this man, this tree: and some are common to many things; as man,
 horse, tree; every of which though but one name, is nevertheless the
 name of divers particular things; in respect of all which together, it
 is called an universall; there being nothing in the world universall
 but names; for the things named, are every one of them individual and
 singular.
 
one universall name is imposed on many things, for their similitude in
 some quality, or other accident: and whereas proper name bringeth to
 mind one thing onely; universals recall any one of those many.
 
and of names universall, some are of more, and some of lesse extent; the
 larger comprehending the lesse large: and some again of equall extent,
 comprehending each other reciprocally. as for example, the name body is
 of larger signification than the word man, and conprehendeth it; and the
 names man and rationall, are of equall extent, comprehending mutually
 one another. but here wee must take notice, that by name is not
 alwayes understood, as in grammar, one onely word; but sometimes by
 circumlocution many words together. for all these words, hee that in
 his actions observeth the lawes of his country, make but one name,
 equivalent to this one word, just.
 
by this imposition of names, some of larger, some of stricter
 signification, we turn the reckoning of the consequences of things
 imagined in the mind, into reckoning of the consequences of
 appellations. for example, man that hath use of speech at all,
 (such, as is born and remains perfectly deafe and dumb,) if set
 before his eyes triangle, and by it two right angles, (such as are the
 corners of square figure,) may by meditation compare and find, that
 the three angles of that triangle, are equall to those two right angles
 that stand by it. but if another triangle be shewn him different in
 shape from the former, cannot know without new labour, whether the
 three angles of that also be equall to the same. but that hath the
 use of words, when observes, that such equality was consequent, not
 to the length of the sides, nor to any other particular thing in his
 triangle; but onely to this, that the sides were straight, and the
 angles three; and that that was all, for which named it triangle;
 will boldly conclude universally, that such equality of angles is in
 all triangles whatsoever; and register his invention in these generall
 termes, every triangle hath its three angles equall to two right angles.
 and thus the consequence found in one particular, comes to be registred
 and remembred, as universall rule; and discharges our mentall
 reckoning, of time and place; and delivers us from all labour of the
 mind, saving the first; and makes that which was found true here, and
 now, to be true in all times and places.
 
but the use of words in registring our thoughts, is in nothing so
 evident as in numbering. naturall foole that could never learn by
 heart the order of numerall words, as one, two, and three, may observe
 every stroak of the clock, and nod to it, or say one, one, one; but can
 never know what houre it strikes. and it seems, there was time when
 those names of number were not in use; and men were fayn to apply their
 fingers of one or both hands, to those things they desired to keep
 account of; and that thence it proceeded, that now our numerall words
 are but ten, in any nation, and in some but five, and then they begin
 again. and that can tell ten, if recite them out of order, will
 lose himselfe, and not know when has done: much lesse will be
 able to add, and substract, and performe all other operations of
 arithmetique. so that without words, there is possibility of
 reckoning of numbers; much lesse of magnitudes, of swiftnesse, of force,
 and other things, the reckonings whereof are necessary to the being, or
 well-being of man-kind.
 
when two names are joyned together into consequence, or affirmation;
 as thus, man is living creature; or thus, if be man, is a
 living creature, if the later name living creature, signifie all that
 the former name man signifieth, then the affirmation, or consequence is
 true; otherwise false. for true and false are attributes of speech, not
 of things. and where speech in not, there is neither truth nor falshood.
 errour there may be, as when wee expect that which shall not be; or
 suspect what has not been: but in neither case can man be charged with
 untruth.
 
seeing then that truth consisteth in the right ordering of names in our
 affirmations, man that seeketh precise truth, had need to remember
 what every name uses stands for; and to place it accordingly; or els
 will find himselfe entangled in words, as bird in lime-twiggs; the
 more struggles, the more belimed. and therefore in geometry, (which
 is the onely science that it hath pleased god hitherto to bestow on
 mankind,) men begin at settling the significations of their words; which
 settling of significations, they call definitions; and place them in the
 beginning of their reckoning.
 
by this it appears how necessary it is for any man that aspires to true
 knowledge, to examine the definitions of former authors; and either
 to correct them, where they are negligently set down; or to make them
 himselfe. for the errours of definitions multiply themselves, according
 as the reckoning proceeds; and lead men into absurdities, which at last
 they see, but cannot avoyd, without reckoning anew from the beginning;
 in which lyes the foundation of their errours. from whence it happens,
 that they which trust to books, do as they that cast up many little
 summs into greater, without considering whether those little summes
 were rightly cast up or not; and at last finding the errour visible,
 and not mistrusting their first grounds, know not which way to cleere
 themselves; but spend time in fluttering over their bookes; as birds
 that entring by the chimney, and finding themselves inclosed in a
 chamber, flitter at the false light of glasse window, for want of wit
 to consider which way they came in. so that in the right definition
 of names, lyes the first use of speech; which is the acquisition of
 science: and in wrong, or definitions’ lyes the first abuse; from
 which proceed all false and senslesse tenets; which make those men that
 take their instruction from the authority of books, and not from their
 own meditation, to be as much below the condition of ignorant men, as
 men endued with true science are above it. for between true science,
 and erroneous doctrines, ignorance is in the middle. naturall sense and
 imagination, are not subject to absurdity. nature it selfe cannot erre:
 and as men abound in copiousnesse of language; so they become more wise,
 or more mad than ordinary. nor is it possible without letters for any
 man to become either excellently wise, or (unless his memory be hurt by
 disease, or ill constitution of organs) excellently foolish. for words
 are wise mens counters, they do but reckon by them: but they are the
 mony of fooles, that value them by the authority of an aristotle, a
 cicero, or thomas, or any other doctor whatsoever, if but man.
 



subject to names
 
subject to names, is whatsoever can enter into, or be considered in an
 account; and be added one to another to make summe; or substracted one
 from another, and leave remainder. the latines called accounts of mony
 rationes, and accounting, ratiocinatio: and that which we in bills or
 books of account call items, they called nomina; that is, names: and
 thence it seems to proceed, that they extended the word ratio, to the
 faculty of reckoning in all other things. the greeks have but one word
 logos, for both speech and reason; not that they thought there was no
 speech without reason; but reasoning without speech: and the act of
 reasoning they called syllogisme; which signifieth summing up of the
 consequences of one saying to another. and because the same things may
 enter into account for divers accidents; their names are (to shew that
 diversity) diversly wrested, and diversified. this diversity of names
 may be reduced to foure generall heads.
 
first, thing may enter into account for matter, or body; as living,
 sensible, rationall, hot, cold, moved, quiet; with all which names the
 word matter, or body is understood; all such, being names of matter.
 
secondly, it may enter into account, or be considered, for some accident
 or quality, which we conceive to be in it; as for being moved, for being
 so long, for being hot, &c; and then, of the name of the thing it selfe,
 by little change or wresting, wee make name for that accident, which
 we consider; and for living put into account life; for moved, motion;
 for hot, heat; for long, length, and the like. and all such names, are
 the names of the accidents and properties, by which one matter, and body
 is distinguished from another. these are called names abstract; because
 severed (not from matter, but) from the account of matter.
 
thirdly, we bring into account, the properties of our own bodies,
 whereby we make such distinction: as when any thing is seen by us, we
 reckon not the thing it selfe; but the sight, the colour, the idea of
 it in the fancy: and when any thing is heard, wee reckon it not; but the
 hearing, or sound onely, which is our fancy or conception of it by the
 eare: and such are names of fancies.
 
fourthly, we bring into account, consider, and give names, to names
 themselves, and to speeches: for, generall, universall, speciall,
 oequivocall, are names of names. and affirmation, interrogation,
 commandement, narration, syllogisme, sermon, oration, and many other
 such, are names of speeches.
 



use of names positive
 
and this is all the variety of names positive; which are put to mark
 somewhat which is in nature, or may be feigned by the mind of man, as
 bodies that are, or may be conceived to be; or of bodies, the properties
 that are, or may be feigned to be; or words and speech.
 



negative names with their uses
 
there be also other names, called negative; which are notes to signifie
 that word is not the name of the thing in question; as these words
 nothing, man, infinite, indocible, three want foure, and the
 like; which are nevertheless of use in reckoning, or in correcting of
 reckoning; and call to mind our past cogitations, though they be not
 names of any thing; because they make us refuse to admit of names not
 rightly used.
 



words insignificant
 
all other names, are but insignificant sounds; and those of two
 sorts. one, when they are new, and yet their meaning not explained by
 definition; whereof there have been aboundance coyned by schoole-men,
 and pusled philosophers.
 
another, when men make name of two names, whose significations are
 contradictory and inconsistent; as this name, an incorporeall body, or
 (which is all one) an incorporeall substance, and great number more.
 for whensoever any affirmation is false, the two names of which it
 is composed, put together and made one, signifie nothing at all. for
 example if it be false affirmation to say quadrangle is round,
 the word round quadrangle signifies nothing; but is meere sound. so
 likewise if it be false, to say that vertue can be powred, or blown up
 and down; the words in-powred vertue, in-blown vertue, are as absurd
 and insignificant, as round quadrangle. and therefore you shall hardly
 meet with senselesse and insignificant word, that is not made up of
 some latin or greek names. frenchman seldome hears our saviour called
 by the name of parole, but by the name of verbe often; yet verbe and
 parole differ more, but that one is latin, the other french.
 



understanding
 
when man upon the hearing of any speech, hath those thoughts which the
 words of that speech, and their connexion, were ordained and constituted
 to signifie; then is said to understand it; understanding being
 nothing els, but conception caused by speech. and therefore if speech
 be peculiar to man (as for ought i know it is,) then is understanding
 peculiar to him also. and therefore of absurd and false affirmations,
 in case they be universall, there can be understanding; though many
 think they understand, then, when they do but repeat the words softly,
 or them in their mind.
 
what kinds of speeches signifie the appetites, aversions, and passions
 of mans mind; and of their use and abuse, i shall speak when i have
 spoken of the passions.
 



inconstant names
 
the names of such things as affect us, that is, which please, and
 displease us, because all men be not alike affected with the same thing,
 nor the same man at all times, are in the common discourses of men, of
 inconstant signification. for seeing all names are imposed to signifie
 our conceptions; and all our affections are but conceptions; when we
 conceive the same things differently, we can hardly avoyd different
 naming of them. for though the nature of that we conceive, be the
 same; yet the diversity of our reception of it, in respect of different
 constitutions of body, and prejudices of opinion, gives everything a
 tincture of our different passions. and therefore in reasoning, man
 bust take heed of words; which besides the signification of what we
 imagine of their nature, disposition, and interest of the speaker; such
 as are the names of vertues, and vices; for one man calleth wisdome,
 what another calleth feare; and one cruelty, what another justice;
 one prodigality, what another magnanimity; one gravity, what another
 stupidity, &c. and therefore such names can never be true grounds of any
 ratiocination. more can metaphors, and tropes of speech: but these
 are less dangerous, because they profess their inconstancy; which the
 other do not.
 


chapter v. of reason, and science.
 



reason what it is
 
when man reasoneth, hee does nothing els but conceive summe totall,
 from addition of parcels; or conceive remainder, from substraction of
 one summe from another: which (if it be done by words,) is conceiving of
 the consequence of the names of all the parts, to the name of the whole;
 or from the names of the whole and one part, to the name of the other
 part. and though in some things, (as in numbers,) besides adding and
 substracting, men name other operations, as multiplying and dividing;
 yet they are the same; for multiplication, is but addition together of
 things equall; and division, but substracting of one thing, as often as
 we can. these operations are not incident to numbers onely, but to
 all manner of things that can be added together, and taken one out of
 another. for as arithmeticians teach to adde and substract in numbers;
 so the geometricians teach the same in lines, figures (solid and
 superficiall,) angles, proportions, times, degrees of swiftnesse, force,
 power, and the like; the logicians teach the same in consequences
 of words; adding together two names, to make an affirmation; and two
 affirmations, to make syllogisme; and many syllogismes to make a
 demonstration; and from the summe, or conclusion of syllogisme, they
 substract one proposition, to finde the other. writers of politiques,
 adde together pactions, to find mens duties; and lawyers, lawes and
 facts, to find what is right and wrong in the actions of private men.
 in summe, in what matter soever there is place for addition and
 substraction, there also is place for reason; and where these have no
 place, there reason has nothing at all to do.
 



reason defined
 
out of all which we may define, (that is to say determine,) what that
 is, which is meant by this word reason, when wee reckon it amongst
 the faculties of the mind. for reason, in this sense, is nothing but
 reckoning (that is, adding and substracting) of the consequences of
 generall names agreed upon, for the marking and signifying of our
 thoughts; i say marking them, when we reckon by our selves; and
 signifying, when we demonstrate, or approve our reckonings to other men.
 



right reason where
 
and as in arithmetique, unpractised men must, and professors themselves
 may often erre, and cast up false; so also in any other subject of
 reasoning, the ablest, most attentive, and most practised men, may
 deceive themselves, and inferre false conclusions; not but that reason
 it selfe is always right reason, as well as arithmetique is certain
 and infallible art: but one mans reason, nor the reason of any
 one number of men, makes the certaintie; more than an account is
 therefore well cast up, because great many men have unanimously
 approved it. and therfore, as when there is controversy in an account,
 the parties must by their own accord, set up for right reason, the
 reason of some arbitrator, or judge, to whose sentence they will
 both stand, or their controversie must either come to blowes, or be
 undecided, for want of right reason constituted by nature; so is
 it also in all debates of what kind soever: and when men that think
 themselves wiser than all others, clamor and demand right reason for
 judge; yet seek more, but that things should be determined, by no
 other mens reason but their own, it is as intolerable in the society of
 men, as it is in play after trump is turned, to use for trump on every
 occasion, that suite whereof they have most in their hand. for they do
 nothing els, that will have every of their passions, as it comes to
 bear sway in them, to be taken for right reason, and that in their own
 controversies: bewraying their want of right reason, by the claym they
 lay to it.
 



the use of reason
 
the use and end of reason, is not the finding of the summe, and truth
 of one, or few consequences, remote from the first definitions, and
 settled significations of names; but to begin at these; and proceed from
 one consequence to another. for there can be certainty of the last
 conclusion, without certainty of all those affirmations and negations,
 on which it was grounded, and inferred. as when master of family,
 in taking an account, casteth up the summs of all the bills of expence,
 into one sum; and not regarding how each bill is summed up, by those
 that give them in account; nor what it is payes for; advantages
 himselfe more, than if allowed the account in grosse, trusting to
 every of the accountants skill and honesty; so also in reasoning of all
 other things, that takes up conclusions on the trust of authors, and
 doth not fetch them from the first items in every reckoning, (which are
 the significations of names settled by definitions), loses his labour;
 and does not know any thing; but onely beleeveth.
 



of error and absurdity
 
when man reckons without the use of words, which may be done in
 particular things, (as when upon the sight of any one thing, wee
 conjecture what was likely to have preceded, or is likely to follow upon
 it;) if that which thought likely to follow, followes not; or that
 which thought likely to have preceded it, hath not preceded it, this
 is called error; to which even the most prudent men are subject. but
 when we reason in words of generall signification, and fall upon a
 generall inference which is false; though it be commonly called error,
 it is indeed an absurdity, or senseless speech. for error is but a
 deception, in presuming that somewhat is past, or to come; of which,
 though it were not past, or not to come; yet there was impossibility
 discoverable. but when we make generall assertion, unlesse it be a
 true one, the possibility of it is unconceivable. and words whereby we
 conceive nothing but the sound, are those we call absurd, insignificant,
 and non-sense. and therefore if man should talk to of round
 quadrangle; or accidents of bread in cheese; or immaterial substances;
 or of free subject; free will; or any free, but free from being
 hindred by opposition, i should not say were in an errour; but that
 his words were without meaning; that is to say, absurd.
 
i have said before, (in the second chapter,) that man did excell
 all other animals in this faculty, that when conceived any thing
 whatsoever, was apt to enquire the consequences of it, and what
 effects could do with it. and now i adde this other degree of the
 same excellence, that can by words reduce the consequences findes
 to generall rules, called theoremes, or aphorismes; that is, can
 reason, or reckon, not onely in number; but in all other things, whereof
 one may be added unto, or substracted from another.
 
but this priviledge, is allayed by another; and that is, by the
 priviledge of absurdity; to which living creature is subject, but man
 onely. and of men, those are of all most subject to it, that professe
 philosophy. for it is most true that cicero sayth of them somewhere;
 that there can be nothing so absurd, but may be found in the books of
 philosophers. and the reason is manifest. for there is not one of them
 that begins his ratiocination from the definitions, or explications of
 the names they are to use; which is method that hath been used onely
 in geometry; whose conclusions have thereby been made indisputable.
 



causes of absurditie
 
the first cause of absurd conclusions i ascribe to the want of method;
 in that they begin not their ratiocination from definitions; that
 is, from settled significations of their words: as if they could cast
 account, without knowing the value of the numerall words, one, two, and
 three.
 
and whereas all bodies enter into account upon divers considerations,
 (which i have mentioned in the precedent chapter;) these considerations
 being diversly named, divers absurdities proceed from the confusion, and
 unfit connexion of their names into assertions. and therefore
 
the second cause of absurd assertions, i ascribe to the giving of names
 of bodies, to accidents; or of accidents, to bodies; as they do, that
 say, faith is infused, or inspired; when nothing can be powred, or
 breathed into any thing, but body; and that, extension is body; that
 phantasmes are spirits, &c.
 
the third i ascribe to the giving of the names of the accidents of
 bodies without us, to the accidents of our own bodies; as they do that
 say, the colour is in the body; the sound is in the ayre, &c.
 
the fourth, to the giving of the names of bodies, to names, or speeches;
 as they do that say, that there be things universall; that living
 creature is genus, or generall thing, &c.
 
the fifth, to the giving of the names of accidents, to names and
 speeches; as they do that say, the nature of thing is in its
 definition; mans command is his will; and the like.
 
the sixth, to the use of metaphors, tropes, and other rhetoricall
 figures, in stead of words proper. for though it be lawfull to say, (for
 example) in common speech, the way goeth, or leadeth hither, or thither,
 the proverb sayes this or that (whereas wayes cannot go, nor proverbs
 speak;) yet in reckoning, and seeking of truth, such speeches are not to
 be admitted.
 
the seventh, to names that signifie nothing; but are taken up, and
 learned by rote from the schooles, as hypostatical, transubstantiate,
 consubstantiate, eternal-now, and the like canting of schoole-men.
 
to him that can avoyd these things, it is not easie to fall into any
 absurdity, unlesse it be by the length of an account; wherein may
 perhaps forget what went before. for all men by nature reason alike, and
 well, when they have good principles. for who is so stupid, as both to
 mistake in geometry, and also to persist in it, when another detects his
 error to him?
 



science
 
by this it appears that reason is not as sense, and memory, borne with
 us; nor gotten by experience onely; as prudence is; but attayned by
 industry; first in apt imposing of names; and secondly by getting good
 and orderly method in proceeding from the elements, which are names,
 to assertions made by connexion of one of them to another; and so to
 syllogismes, which are the connexions of one assertion to another, till
 we come to knowledge of all the consequences of names appertaining to
 the subject in hand; and that is it, men call science. and whereas
 sense and memory are but knowledge of fact, which is thing past, and
 irrevocable; science is the knowledge of consequences, and dependance
 of one fact upon another: by which, out of that we can presently do, we
 know how to do something els when we will, or the like, another time;
 because when we see how any thing comes about, upon what causes, and by
 what manner; when the like causes come into our power, wee see how to
 make it produce the like effects.
 
children therefore are not endued with reason at all, till they have
 attained the use of speech: but are called reasonable creatures, for the
 possibility apparent of having the use of reason in time to come. and
 the most part of men, though they have the use of reasoning little
 way, as in numbring to some degree; yet it serves them to little use in
 common life; in which they govern themselves, some better, some worse,
 according to their differences of experience, quicknesse of memory, and
 inclinations to severall ends; but specially according to good or evill
 fortune, and the errors of one another. for as for science, or certain
 rules of their actions, they are so farre from it, that they know
 not what it is. geometry they have thought conjuring: but for other
 sciences, they who have not been taught the beginnings, and some
 progresse in them, that they may see how they be acquired and generated,
 are in this point like children, that having thought of generation,
 are made believe by the women, that their brothers and sisters are not
 born, but found in the garden.
 
but yet they that have science, are in better, and nobler condition
 with their naturall prudence; than men, that by mis-reasoning, or by
 trusting them that reason wrong, fall upon false and absurd generall
 rules. for ignorance of causes, and of rules, does not set men so farre
 out of their way, as relying on false rules, and taking for causes of
 what they aspire to, those that are not so, but rather causes of the
 contrary.
 
to conclude, the light of humane minds is perspicuous words, but by
 exact definitions first snuffed, and purged from ambiguity; reason is
 the pace; encrease of science, the way; and the benefit of man-kind, the
 end. and on the contrary, metaphors, and senslesse and ambiguous words,
 are like ignes fatui; and reasoning upon them, is wandering amongst
 innumerable absurdities; and their end, contention, and sedition, or
 contempt.
 



prudence & sapience, with their difference
 
as, much experience, is prudence; so, is much science, sapience. for
 though wee usually have one name of wisedome for them both; yet
 the latines did always distinguish between prudentia and sapientia,
 ascribing the former to experience, the later to science. but to make
 their difference appeare more cleerly, let us suppose one man endued
 with an excellent naturall use, and dexterity in handling his armes; and
 another to have added to that dexterity, an acquired science, of where
 can offend, or be offended by his adversarie, in every possible
 posture, or guard: the ability of the former, would be to the ability
 of the later, as prudence to sapience; both usefull; but the later
 infallible. but they that trusting onely to the authority of books,
 follow the blind blindly, are like him that trusting to the false rules
 of the master of fence, ventures praesumptuously upon an adversary, that
 either kills, or disgraces him.
 



signes of science
 
the signes of science, are some, certain and infallible; some,
 uncertain. certain, when that pretendeth the science of any thing,
 can teach the same; that is to say, demonstrate the truth thereof
 perspicuously to another: uncertain, when onely some particular events
 answer to his pretence, and upon many occasions prove so as sayes
 they must. signes of prudence are all uncertain; because to observe by
 experience, and remember all circumstances that may alter the successe,
 is impossible. but in any businesse, whereof man has not infallible
 science to proceed by; to forsake his own natural judgement, and be
 guided by generall sentences read in authors, and subject to many
 exceptions, is signe of folly, and generally scorned by the name of
 pedantry. and even of those men themselves, that in councells of the
 common-wealth, love to shew their reading of politiques and history,
 very few do it in their domestique affaires, where their particular
 interest is concerned; having prudence enough for their private
 affaires: but in publique they study more the reputation of their owne
 wit, than the successe of anothers businesse.
 


chapter vi. of the interiour beginnings of voluntary motions
 
commonly called the passions. and the speeches by which they are
 expressed.
 



motion vitall and animal
 
there be in animals, two sorts of motions peculiar to them: one called
 vitall; begun in generation, and continued without interruption through
 their whole life; such as are the course of the bloud, the pulse, the
 breathing, the concoctions, nutrition, excretion, &c; to which motions
 there needs help of imagination: the other in animal motion,
 otherwise called voluntary motion; as to go, to speak, to move any of
 our limbes, in such manner as is first fancied in our minds. that sense,
 is motion in the organs and interiour parts of mans body, caused by
 the action of the things we see, heare, &c.; and that fancy is but the
 reliques of the same motion, remaining after sense, has been already
 sayd in the first and second chapters. and because going, speaking, and
 the like voluntary motions, depend alwayes upon precedent thought of
 whither, which way, and what; it is evident, that the imagination is
 the first internall beginning of all voluntary motion. and although
 unstudied men, doe not conceive any motion at all to be there, where
 the thing moved is invisible; or the space it is moved in, is (for the
 shortnesse of it) insensible; yet that doth not hinder, but that such
 motions are. for let space be never so little, that which is moved
 over greater space, whereof that little one is part, must first be
 moved over that. these small beginnings of motion, within the body
 of man, before they appear in walking, speaking, striking, and other
 visible actions, are commonly called endeavour.
 



endeavour; appetite; desire; hunger; thirst; aversion
 
this endeavour, when it is toward something which causes it, is called
 appetite, or desire; the later, being the generall name; and the other,
 oftentimes restrayned to signifie the desire of food, namely hunger and
 thirst. and when the endeavour is fromward something, it is generally
 called aversion. these words appetite, and aversion we have from the
 latines; and they both of them signifie the motions, one of approaching,
 the other of retiring. so also do the greek words for the same, which
 are orme and aphorme. for nature it selfe does often presse upon men
 those truths, which afterwards, when they look for somewhat beyond
 nature, they stumble at. for the schooles find in meere appetite to go,
 or move, actuall motion at all: but because some motion they must
 acknowledge, they call it metaphoricall motion; which is but an absurd
 speech; for though words may be called metaphoricall; bodies, and
 motions cannot.
 
that which men desire, they are also sayd to love; and to hate those
 things, for which they have aversion. so that desire, and love, are the
 same thing; save that by desire, we alwayes signifie the absence of
 the object; by love, most commonly the presence of the same. so also
 by aversion, we signifie the absence; and by hate, the presence of the
 object.
 
of appetites, and aversions, some are born with men; as appetite of
 food, appetite of excretion, and exoneration, (which may also and more
 properly be called aversions, from somewhat they feele in their bodies;)
 and some other appetites, not many. the rest, which are appetites of
 particular things, proceed from experience, and triall of their effects
 upon themselves, or other men. for of things wee know not at all, or
 believe not to be, we can have further desire, than to tast and try.
 but aversion wee have for things, not onely which we know have hurt us;
 but also that we do not know whether they will hurt us, or not.
 



contempt
 
those things which we neither desire, nor hate, we are said to contemne:
 contempt being nothing els but an immobility, or contumacy of the heart,
 in resisting the action of certain things; and proceeding from that the
 heart is already moved otherwise, by either more potent objects; or from
 want of experience of them.
 
and because the constitution of mans body, is in continuall mutation;
 it is impossible that all the same things should alwayes cause in him
 the same appetites, and aversions: much lesse can all men consent, in
 the desire of almost any one and the same object.
 



good evill
 
but whatsoever is the object of any mans appetite or desire; that is
 it, which for his part calleth good: and the object of his hate,
 and aversion, evill; and of his contempt, vile, and inconsiderable.
 for these words of good, evill, and contemptible, are ever used with
 relation to the person that useth them: there being nothing simply and
 absolutely so; nor any common rule of good and evill, to be taken from
 the nature of the objects themselves; but from the person of the man
 (where there is common-wealth;) or, (in common-wealth,) from the
 person that representeth it; or from an arbitrator or judge, whom men
 disagreeing shall by consent set up, and make his sentence the rule
 thereof.
 



pulchrum turpe; delightfull profitable; unpleasant unprofitable
 
the latine tongue has two words, whose significations approach to
 those of good and evill; but are not precisely the same; and those are
 pulchrum and turpe. whereof the former signifies that, which by some
 apparent signes promiseth good; and the later, that, which promiseth
 evill. but in our tongue we have not so generall names to expresse them
 by. but for pulchrum, we say in some things, fayre; in other beautifull,
 or handsome, or gallant, or honourable, or comely, or amiable; and
 for turpe, foule, deformed, ugly, base, nauseous, and the like, as the
 subject shall require; all which words, in their proper places signifie
 nothing els, but the mine, or countenance, that promiseth good and
 evill. so that of good there be three kinds; good in the promise,
 that is pulchrum; good in effect, as the end desired, which is called
 jucundum, delightfull; and good as the means, which is called utile,
 profitable; and as many of evill: for evill, in promise, is that
 they call turpe; evill in effect, and end, is molestum, unpleasant,
 troublesome; and evill in the means, inutile, unprofitable, hurtfull.
 



delight displeasure
 
as, in sense, that which is really within us, is (as i have sayd
 before) onely motion, caused by the action of externall objects, but in
 apparence; to the sight, light and colour; to the eare, sound; to the
 nostrill, odour, &c: so, when the action of the same object is continued
 from the eyes, eares, and other organs to the heart; the real effect
 there is nothing but motion, or endeavour; which consisteth in appetite,
 or aversion, to, or from the object moving. but the apparence, or sense
 of that motion, is that wee either call delight, or trouble of mind.
 



pleasure offence
 
this motion, which is called appetite, and for the apparence of it
 delight, and pleasure, seemeth to be, corroboration of vitall motion,
 and help thereunto; and therefore such things as caused delight, were
 not improperly called jucunda, (a juvando,) from helping or fortifying;
 and the contrary, molesta, offensive, from hindering, and troubling the
 motion vitall.
 
pleasure therefore, (or delight,) is the apparence, or sense of good;
 and molestation or displeasure, the apparence, or sense of evill. and
 consequently all appetite, desire, and love, is accompanied with some
 delight more or lesse; and all hatred, and aversion, with more or lesse
 displeasure and offence.
 



pleasures of sense; pleasures of the mind; joy paine griefe
 
of pleasures, or delights, some arise from the sense of an object
 present; and those may be called pleasures of sense, (the word sensuall,
 as it is used by those onely that condemn them, having place till
 there be lawes.) of this kind are all onerations and exonerations of the
 body; as also all that is pleasant, in the sight, hearing, smell,
 tast, or touch; others arise from the expectation, that proceeds from
 foresight of the end, or consequence of things; whether those things in
 the sense please or displease: and these are pleasures of the mind of
 him that draweth those consequences; and are generally called joy. in
 the like manner, displeasures, are some in the sense, and called payne;
 others, in the expectation of consequences, and are called griefe.
 
these simple passions called appetite, desire, love, aversion, hate,
 joy, and griefe, have their names for divers considerations diversified.
 as first, when they one succeed another, they are diversly called from
 the opinion men have of the likelihood of attaining what they
 desire. secondly, from the object loved or hated. thirdly, from the
 consideration of many of them together. fourthly, from the alteration or
 succession it selfe.
 

hope-- for appetite with an opinion of attaining, is called hope.
 
despaire-- the same, without such opinion, despaire.
 
feare-- aversion, with opinion of hurt from the object, feare.
 
courage-- the same, with hope of avoyding that hurt by resistance,
 courage.
 
anger-- sudden courage, anger.
 
confidence-- constant hope, confidence of our selves.
 
diffidence-- constant despayre, diffidence of our selves.
 
indignation-- anger for great hurt done to another, when we conceive the
 same to be done by injury, indignation.
 
benevolence-- desire of good to another, benevolence, good will,
 charity. if to man generally, good nature.
 
covetousnesse-- desire of riches, covetousnesse: name used alwayes in
 signification of blame; because men contending for them, are displeased
 with one anothers attaining them; though the desire in it selfe, be to
 be blamed, or allowed, according to the means by which those riches are
 sought.
 
ambition-- desire of office, or precedence, ambition: name used also
 in the worse sense, for the reason before mentioned.
 
pusillanimity-- desire of things that conduce but little to our ends;
 and fear of things that are but of little hindrance, pusillanimity.
 
magnanimity-- contempt of little helps, and hindrances, magnanimity.
 
valour-- magnanimity, in danger of death, or wounds, valour, fortitude.
 
liberality-- magnanimity in the use of riches, liberality
 
miserablenesse-- pusillanimity, in the same wretchednesse,
 miserablenesse; or parsimony; as it is liked or disliked.
 
kindnesse-- love of persons for society, kindnesse.
 
naturall lust-- love of persons for pleasing the sense onely, natural
 lust.
 
luxury-- love of the same, acquired from rumination, that is imagination
 of pleasure past, luxury.
 
the passion of love; jealousie-- love of one singularly, with desire to
 be singularly beloved, the passion of love. the same, with fear that the
 love is not mutuall, jealousie.
 
revengefulnesse-- desire, by doing hurt to another, to make him condemn
 some fact of his own, revengefulnesse.
 
curiosity-- desire, to know why, and how, curiosity; such as is in no
 living creature but man; so that man is distinguished, not onely by his
 reason; but also by this singular passion from other animals; in whom
 the appetite of food, and other pleasures of sense, by praedominance,
 take away the care of knowing causes; which is lust of the mind,
 that by perseverance of delight in the continuall and indefatigable
 generation of knowledge, exceedeth the short vehemence of any carnall
 pleasure.
 
religion superstition; true religion-- feare of power invisible, feigned
 by the mind, or imagined from tales publiquely allowed, religion; not
 allowed, superstition. and when the power imagined is truly such as we
 imagine, true religion.
 
panique terrour-- feare, without the apprehension of why, or what,
 panique terror; called so from the fables that make pan the author of
 them; whereas in truth there is always in him that so feareth, first,
 some apprehension of the cause, though the rest run away by example;
 every one supposing his fellow to know why. and therefore this passion
 happens to none but in throng, or multitude of people.
 
admiration-- joy, from apprehension of novelty, admiration; proper to
 man, because it excites the appetite of knowing the cause.
 
glory vaine-glory-- joy, arising from imagination of man’s own power
 and ability, is that exultation of the mind which is called glorying:
 which, if grounded upon the experience of his own former actions, is
 the same with confidence: but if grounded on the flattery of others, or
 onely supposed by himselfe, for delight in the consequences of it,
 is called vaine-glory: which name is properly given; because a
 well-grounded confidence begetteth attempt; whereas the supposing of
 power does not, and is therefore rightly called vaine.
 
dejection-- griefe, from opinion of want of power, is called dejection
 of mind.
 
the vaine-glory which consisteth in the feigning or supposing of
 abilities in ourselves, which we know are not, is most incident to young
 men, and nourished by the histories or fictions of gallant persons; and
 is corrected often times by age, and employment.
 
sudden glory laughter-- sudden glory, is the passion which maketh those
 grimaces called laughter; and is caused either by some sudden act of
 their own, that pleaseth them; or by the apprehension of some
 deformed thing in another, by comparison whereof they suddenly applaud
 themselves. and it is incident most to them, that are conscious of the
 fewest abilities in themselves; who are forced to keep themselves in
 their own favour, by observing the imperfections of other men.
 and therefore much laughter at the defects of others is signe of
 pusillanimity. for of great minds, one of the proper workes is, to help
 and free others from scorn; and compare themselves onely with the most
 able.
 
sudden dejection weeping-- on the contrary, sudden dejection is the
 passion that causeth weeping; and is caused by such accidents, as
 suddenly take away some vehement hope, or some prop of their power: and
 they are most subject to it, that rely principally on helps externall,
 such as are women, and children. therefore, some weep for the loss of
 friends; others for their unkindnesse; others for the sudden stop made
 to their thoughts of revenge, by reconciliation. but in all cases, both
 laughter and weeping, are sudden motions; custome taking them both away.
 for man laughs at old jests; or weeps for an old calamity.
 
shame blushing-- griefe, for the discovery of some defect of ability
 is shame, or the passion that discovereth itself in blushing; and
 consisteth in the apprehension of some thing dishonourable; and in young
 men, is signe of the love of good reputation; and commendable: in
 old men it is signe of the same; but because it comes too late, not
 commendable.
 
impudence-- the contempt of good reputation is called impudence.
 
pitty-- griefe, for the calamity of another is pitty; and ariseth
 from the imagination that the like calamity may befall himselfe; and
 therefore is called also compassion, and in the phrase of this present
 time fellow-feeling: and therefore for calamity arriving from
 great wickedness, the best men have the least pitty; and for the same
 calamity, those have least pitty, that think themselves least obnoxious
 to the same.
 
cruelty-- contempt, or little sense of the calamity of others, is that
 which men call cruelty; proceeding from security of their own fortune.
 for, that any man should take pleasure in other mens’ great harmes,
 without other end of his own, i do not conceive it possible.
 
emulation envy-- griefe, for the success of competitor in wealth,
 honour, or other good, if it be joyned with endeavour to enforce our own
 abilities to equal or exceed him, is called emulation: but joyned with
 endeavour to supplant or hinder competitor, envie.
 
deliberation-- when in the mind of man, appetites and aversions, hopes
 and feares, concerning one and the same thing, arise alternately; and
 divers good and evill consequences of the doing, or omitting the thing
 propounded, come successively into our thoughts; so that sometimes we
 have an appetite to it, sometimes an aversion from it; sometimes hope to
 be able to do it; sometimes despaire, or feare to attempt it; the whole
 sum of desires, aversions, hopes and feares, continued till the thing be
 either done, or thought impossible, is that we call deliberation.
 
therefore of things past, there is deliberation; because manifestly
 impossible to be changed: nor of things known to be impossible, or
 thought so; because men know, or think such deliberation vaine. but
 of things impossible, which we think possible, we may deliberate; not
 knowing it is in vain. and it is called deliberation; because it is a
 putting an end to the liberty we had of doing, or omitting, according to
 our own appetite, or aversion.
 
this alternate succession of appetites, aversions, hopes and feares is
 less in other living creatures than in man; and therefore beasts also
 deliberate.
 
every deliberation is then sayd to end when that whereof they
 deliberate, is either done, or thought impossible; because till then wee
 retain the liberty of doing, or omitting, according to our appetite, or
 aversion.
 



the will
 
in deliberation, the last appetite, or aversion, immediately adhaering
 to the action, or to the omission thereof, is that wee call the
 will; the act, (not the faculty,) of willing. and beasts that have
 deliberation must necessarily also have will. the definition of the
 will, given commonly by the schooles, that it is rationall appetite,
 is not good. for if it were, then could there be voluntary act
 against reason. for voluntary act is that, which proceedeth from the
 will, and other. but if in stead of rationall appetite, we shall
 say an appetite resulting from precedent deliberation, then the
 definition is the same that i have given here. will, therefore, is the
 last appetite in deliberating. and though we say in common discourse, a
 man had will once to do thing, that neverthelesse forbore to
 do; yet that is properly but an inclination, which makes action
 voluntary; because the action depends not of it, but of the last
 inclination, or appetite. for if the intervenient appetites make any
 action voluntary, then by the same reason all intervenient aversions
 should make the same action involuntary; and so one and the same action
 should be both voluntary & involuntary.
 
by this it is manifest, that not onely actions that have their beginning
 from covetousness, ambition, lust, or other appetites to the thing
 propounded; but also those that have their beginning from aversion,
 or feare of those consequences that follow the omission, are voluntary
 actions.
 



formes of speech, in passion
 
the formes of speech by which the passions are expressed, are partly the
 same, and partly different from those, by which we express our thoughts.
 and first generally all passions may be expressed indicatively; as, i
 love, i feare, i joy, i deliberate, i will, i command: but some of them
 have particular expressions by themselves, which nevertheless are not
 affirmations, unless it be when they serve to make other inferences,
 besides that of the passion they proceed from. deliberation is expressed
 subjunctively; which is speech proper to signifie suppositions, with
 their consequences; as, if this be done, then this will follow; and
 differs not from the language of reasoning, save that reasoning is in
 generall words, but deliberation for the most part is of particulars.
 the language of desire, and aversion, is imperative; as, do this,
 forbear that; which when the party is obliged to do, or forbear, is
 command; otherwise prayer; or els counsell. the language of vaine-glory,
 of indignation, pitty and revengefulness, optative: but of the desire to
 know, there is peculiar expression called interrogative; as, what is
 it, when shall it, how is it done, and why so? other language of the
 passions i find none: for cursing, swearing, reviling, and the like, do
 not signifie as speech; but as the actions of tongue accustomed.
 
these forms of speech, i say, are expressions, or voluntary
 significations of our passions: but certain signes they be not; because
 they may be used arbitrarily, whether they that use them, have such
 passions or not. the best signes of passions present, are either in the
 countenance, motions of the body, actions, and ends, or aims, which we
 otherwise know the man to have.
 



good and evill apparent
 
and because in deliberation the appetites and aversions are raised by
 foresight of the good and evill consequences, and sequels of the action
 whereof we deliberate; the good or evill effect thereof dependeth on the
 foresight of long chain of consequences, of which very seldome any man
 is able to see to the end. but for so far as man seeth, if the good
 in those consequences be greater than the evill, the whole chain is that
 which writers call apparent or seeming good. and contrarily, when the
 evill exceedeth the good, the whole is apparent or seeming evill: so
 that who hath by experience, or reason, the greatest and surest
 prospect of consequences, deliberates best himself; and is able, when he
 will, to give the best counsel unto others.
 



felicity
 
continual successe in obtaining those things which man from time to
 time desireth, that is to say, continual prospering, is that men call
 felicity; i mean the felicity of this life. for there is such thing
 as perpetual tranquillity of mind, while we live here; because life
 itself is but motion, and can never be without desire, nor without
 feare, more than without sense. what kind of felicity god hath
 ordained to them that devoutly honour him, man shall sooner know,
 than enjoy; being joys, that now are as incomprehensible, as the word of
 school-men, beatifical vision, is unintelligible.
 



praise magnification
 
the form of speech whereby men signifie their opinion of the goodnesse
 of anything is praise. that whereby they signifie the power and
 greatness of anything is magnifying. and that whereby they signifie
 the opinion they have of man’s felicity is by the greeks called
 makarismos, for which we have name in our tongue. and thus much is
 sufficient for the present purpose to have been said of the passions.
 


chapter vii. of the ends or resolutions of discourse
 

of all discourse, governed by desire of knowledge, there is at last
 an end, either by attaining, or by giving over. and in the chain of
 discourse, wheresoever it be interrupted, there is an end for that time.
 



judgement, or sentence final; doubt
 
if the discourse be meerly mentall, it consisteth of thoughts that the
 thing will be, and will not be; or that it has been, and has not been,
 alternately. so that wheresoever you break off the chayn of mans
 discourse, you leave him in praesumption of it will be, or, it will
 not be; or it has been, or, has not been. all which is opinion. and that
 which is alternate appetite, in deliberating concerning good and evil,
 the same is alternate opinion in the enquiry of the truth of past, and
 future. and as the last appetite in deliberation is called the will, so
 the last opinion in search of the truth of past, and future, is called
 the judgement, or resolute and final sentence of him that discourseth.
 and as the whole chain of appetites alternate, in the question of good
 or bad is called deliberation; so the whole chain of opinions alternate,
 in the question of true, or false is called doubt.
 
discourse whatsoever, can end in absolute knowledge of fact, past, or
 to come. for, as for the knowledge of fact, it is originally, sense; and
 ever after, memory. and for the knowledge of consequence, which i have
 said before is called science, it is not absolute, but conditionall. no
 man can know by discourse, that this, or that, is, has been, or will
 be; which is to know absolutely: but onely, that if this be, that is; if
 this has been, that has been; if this shall be, that shall be: which
 is to know conditionally; and that not the consequence of one thing to
 another; but of one name of thing, to another name of the same thing.
 



science opinion conscience
 
and therefore, when the discourse is put into speech, and begins with
 the definitions of words, and proceeds by connexion of the same into
 general affirmations, and of these again into syllogismes, the end or
 last sum is called the conclusion; and the thought of the mind by it
 signified is that conditional knowledge, or knowledge of the consequence
 of words, which is commonly called science. but if the first ground of
 such discourse be not definitions, or if the definitions be not rightly
 joyned together into syllogismes, then the end or conclusion is again
 opinion, namely of the truth of somewhat said, though sometimes in
 absurd and senslesse words, without possibility of being understood.
 when two, or more men, know of one and the same fact, they are said
 to be conscious of it one to another; which is as much as to know it
 together. and because such are fittest witnesses of the facts of one
 another, or of third, it was, and ever will be reputed very evill
 act, for any man to speak against his conscience; or to corrupt or force
 another so to do: insomuch that the plea of conscience, has been always
 hearkened unto very diligently in all times. afterwards, men made use
 of the same word metaphorically, for the knowledge of their own secret
 facts, and secret thoughts; and therefore it is rhetorically said that
 the conscience is thousand witnesses. and last of all, men, vehemently
 in love with their own new opinions, (though never so absurd,) and
 obstinately bent to maintain them, gave those their opinions also that
 reverenced name of conscience, as if they would have it seem unlawful,
 to change or speak against them; and so pretend to know they are true,
 when they know at most but that they think so.
 



beliefe faith
 
when mans discourse beginneth not at definitions, it beginneth either
 at some other contemplation of his own, and then it is still called
 opinion; or it beginneth at some saying of another, of whose ability to
 know the truth, and of whose honesty in not deceiving, doubteth
 not; and then the discourse is not so much concerning the thing, as the
 person; and the resolution is called beleefe, and faith: faith, in the
 man; beleefe, both of the man, and of the truth of what sayes. so
 then in beleefe are two opinions; one of the saying of the man; the
 other of his vertue. to have faith in, or trust to, or beleeve man,
 signifie the same thing; namely, an opinion of the veracity of the man:
 but to beleeve what is said, signifieth onely an opinion of the truth
 of the saying. but wee are to observe that this phrase, i beleeve in;
 as also the latine, credo in; and the greek, pisteno eis, are never used
 but in the writings of divines. in stead of them, in other writings are
 put, i beleeve him; i have faith in him; i rely on him: and in latin,
 credo illi; fido illi: and in greek, pisteno anto: and that this
 singularity of the ecclesiastical use of the word hath raised many
 disputes about the right object of the christian faith.
 
but by beleeving in, as it is in the creed, is meant, not trust in the
 person; but confession and acknowledgement of the doctrine. for not
 onely christians, but all manner of men do so believe in god, as to hold
 all for truth they heare him say, whether they understand it, or not;
 which is all the faith and trust can possibly be had in any person
 whatsoever: but they do not all believe the doctrine of the creed.
 
from whence we may inferre, that when wee believe any saying whatsoever
 it be, to be true, from arguments taken, not from the thing it selfe, or
 from the principles of naturall reason, but from the authority, and
 good opinion wee have, of him that hath sayd it; then is the speaker, or
 person we believe in, or trust in, and whose word we take, the object of
 our faith; and the honour done in believing, is done to him onely. and
 consequently, when wee believe that the scriptures are the word of god,
 having immediate revelation from god himselfe, our beleefe, faith,
 and trust is in the church; whose word we take, and acquiesce therein.
 and they that believe that which prophet relates unto them in the
 name of god, take the word of the prophet, do honour to him, and in him
 trust, and believe, touching the truth of what relateth, whether he
 be true, or false prophet. and so it is also with all other history.
 for if i should not believe all that is written by historians, of the
 glorious acts of alexander, or caesar; i do not think the ghost of
 alexander, or caesar, had any just cause to be offended; or any body
 else, but the historian. if livy say the gods made once cow speak, and
 we believe it not; wee distrust not god therein, but livy. so that it is
 evident, that whatsoever we believe, upon other reason, than what is
 drawn from authority of men onely, and their writings; whether they be
 sent from god or not, is faith in men onely.
 


chapter viii. of the vertues commonly called intellectual; and their
 contrary defects
 



intellectuall vertue defined
 
vertue generally, in all sorts of subjects, is somewhat that is valued
 for eminence; and consisteth in comparison. for if all things
 were equally in all men, nothing would be prized. and by vertues
 intellectuall, are always understood such abilityes of the mind, as men
 praise, value, and desire should be in themselves; and go commonly under
 the name of good witte; though the same word witte, be used also, to
 distinguish one certain ability from the rest.
 



wit, naturall, or acquired
 
these vertues are of two sorts; naturall, and acquired. by naturall, i
 mean not, that which man hath from his birth: for that is nothing else
 but sense; wherein men differ so little one from another, and from brute
 beasts, as it is not to be reckoned amongst vertues. but i mean, that
 witte, which is gotten by use onely, and experience; without method,
 culture, or instruction. this naturall witte, consisteth principally
 in two things; celerity of imagining, (that is, swift succession of one
 thought to another;) and steddy direction to some approved end. on the
 contrary slow imagination, maketh that defect, or fault of the mind,
 which is commonly called dulnesse, stupidity, and sometimes by other
 names that signifie slownesse of motion, or difficulty to be moved.
 



good wit, or fancy; good judgement; discretion
 
and this difference of quicknesse, is caused by the difference of mens
 passions; that love and dislike, some one thing, some another: and
 therefore some mens thoughts run one way, some another: and are held to,
 and observe differently the things that passe through their imagination.
 and whereas in his succession of mens thoughts, there is nothing to
 observe in the things they think on, but either in what they be like one
 another, or in what they be unlike, or what they serve for, or how they
 serve to such purpose; those that observe their similitudes, in case
 they be such as are but rarely observed by others, are sayd to have a
 good wit; by which, in this occasion, is meant good fancy. but they
 that observe their differences, and dissimilitudes; which is called
 distinguishing, and discerning, and judging between thing and thing; in
 case, such discerning be not easie, are said to have good judgement:
 and particularly in matter of conversation and businesse; wherein,
 times, places, and persons are to be discerned, this vertue is called
 discretion. the former, that is, fancy, without the help of judgement,
 is not commended as vertue: but the later which is judgement, and
 discretion, is commended for it selfe, without the help of fancy.
 besides the discretion of times, places, and persons, necessary to a
 good fancy, there is required also an often application of his thoughts
 to their end; that is to say, to some use to be made of them. this done;
 that hath this vertue, will be easily fitted with similitudes, that
 will please, not onely by illustration of his discourse, and adorning it
 with new and apt metaphors; but also, by the rarity or their invention.
 but without steddinesse, and direction to some end, great fancy is one
 kind of madnesse; such as they have, that entring into any discourse,
 are snatched from their purpose, by every thing that comes in their
 thought, into so many, and so long digressions, and parentheses, that
 they utterly lose themselves: which kind of folly, i know particular
 name for: but the cause of it is, sometimes want of experience; whereby
 that seemeth to man new and rare, which doth not so to others:
 sometimes pusillanimity; by which that seems great to him, which other
 men think trifle: and whatsoever is new, or great, and therefore
 thought fit to be told, withdrawes man by degrees from the intended
 way of his discourse.
 
in good poem, whether it be epique, or dramatique; as also in sonnets,
 epigrams, and other pieces, both judgement and fancy are required:
 but the fancy must be more eminent; because they please for the
 extravagancy; but ought not to displease by indiscretion.
 
in good history, the judgement must be eminent; because the goodnesse
 consisteth, in the method, in the truth, and in the choyse of the
 actions that are most profitable to be known. fancy has place, but
 onely in adorning the stile.
 
in orations of prayse, and in invectives, the fancy is praedominant;
 because the designe is not truth, but to honour or dishonour; which is
 done by noble, or by vile comparisons. the judgement does but suggest
 what circumstances make an action laudable, or culpable.
 
in hortatives, and pleadings, as truth, or disguise serveth best to the
 designe in hand; so is the judgement, or the fancy most required.
 
in demonstration, in councell, and all rigourous search of truth,
 judgement does all; except sometimes the understanding have need to be
 opened by some apt similitude; and then there is so much use of fancy.
 but for metaphors, they are in this case utterly excluded. for seeing
 they openly professe deceipt; to admit them into councell, or reasoning,
 were manifest folly.
 
and in any discourse whatsoever, if the defect of discretion be
 apparent, how extravagant soever the fancy be, the whole discourse
 will be taken for signe of want of wit; and so will it never when the
 discretion is manifest, though the fancy be never so ordinary.
 
the secret thoughts of man run over all things, holy, prophane,
 clean, obscene, grave, and light, without shame, or blame; which verball
 discourse cannot do, farther than the judgement shall approve of the
 time, place, and persons. an anatomist, or physitian may speak, or
 write his judgement of unclean things; because it is not to please,
 but profit: but for another man to write his extravagant, and pleasant
 fancies of the same, is as if man, from being tumbled into the dirt,
 should come and present himselfe before good company. and ’tis the want
 of discretion that makes the difference. again, in profest remissnesse
 of mind, and familiar company, man may play with the sounds, and
 aequivocal significations of words; and that many times with encounters
 of extraordinary fancy: but in sermon, or in publique, or before
 persons unknown, or whom we ought to reverence, there is gingling of
 words that will not be accounted folly: and the difference is onely in
 the want of discretion. so that where wit is wanting, it is not fancy
 that is wanting, but discretion. judgement therefore without fancy is
 wit, but fancy without judgement not.
 



prudence
 
when the thoughts of man, that has designe in hand, running over a
 multitude of things, observes how they conduce to that designe; or what
 designe they may conduce into; if his observations be such as are not
 easie, or usuall, this wit of his is called prudence; and dependeth on
 much experience, and memory of the like things, and their consequences
 heretofore. in which there is not so much difference of men, as there is
 in their fancies and judgements; because the experience of men equall
 in age, is not much unequall, as to the quantity; but lyes in different
 occasions; every one having his private designes. to govern well a
 family, and kingdome, are not different degrees of prudence; but
 different sorts of businesse; more then to draw picture in little,
 or as great, or greater then the life, are different degrees of art. a
 plain husband-man is more prudent in affaires of his own house, then a
 privy counseller in the affaires of another man.
 



craft
 
to prudence, if you adde the use of unjust, or dishonest means, such
 as usually are prompted to men by feare, or want; you have that crooked
 wisdome, which is called craft; which is signe of pusillanimity. for
 magnanimity is contempt of unjust, or dishonest helps. and that which
 the latines call versutia, (translated into english, shifting,) and is
 putting off of present danger or incommodity, by engaging into
 greater, as when man robbs one to pay another, is but shorter
 sighted craft, called versutia, from versura, which signifies taking
 mony at usurie, for the present payment of interest.
 



acquired wit
 
as for acquired wit, (i mean acquired by method and instruction,) there
 is none but reason; which is grounded on the right use of speech; and
 produceth the sciences. but of reason and science, i have already spoken
 in the fifth and sixth chapters.
 
the causes of this difference of witts, are in the passions: and
 the difference of passions, proceedeth partly from the different
 constitution of the body, and partly from different education. for if
 the difference proceeded from the temper of the brain, and the organs of
 sense, either exterior or interior, there would be lesse difference
 of men in their sight, hearing, or other senses, than in their fancies,
 and discretions. it proceeds therefore from the passions; which are
 different, not onely from the difference of mens complexions; but also
 from their difference of customes, and education.
 
the passions that most of all cause the differences of wit, are
 principally, the more or lesse desire of power, of riches, of knowledge,
 and of honour. all which may be reduced to the first, that is desire of
 power. for riches, knowledge and honour are but severall sorts of power.
 



giddinesse madnesse
 
and therefore, man who has great passion for any of these things;
 but is as men terme it indifferent; though may be so farre good
 man, as to be free from giving offence; yet cannot possibly have
 either great fancy, or much judgement. for the thoughts, are to the
 desires, as scouts, and spies, to range abroad, and find the way to the
 things desired: all stedinesse of the minds motion, and all quicknesse
 of the same, proceeding from thence. for as to have desire, is to
 be dead: so to have weak passions, is dulnesse; and to have passions
 indifferently for every thing, giddinesse, and distraction; and to have
 stronger, and more vehement passions for any thing, than is ordinarily
 seen in others, is that which men call madnesse.
 
whereof there be almost as many kinds, as of the passions themselves.
 sometimes the extraordinary and extravagant passion, proceedeth from the
 evill constitution of the organs of the body, or harme done them; and
 sometimes the hurt, and indisposition of the organs, is caused by the
 vehemence, or long continuance of the passion. but in both cases the
 madnesse is of one and the same nature.
 
the passion, whose violence, or continuance maketh madnesse, is either
 great vaine-glory; which is commonly called pride, and selfe-conceipt;
 or great dejection of mind.
 



rage
 
pride, subjecteth man to anger, the excesse whereof, is the madnesse
 called rage, and fury. and thus it comes to passe that excessive desire
 of revenge, when it becomes habituall, hurteth the organs, and becomes
 rage: that excessive love, with jealousie, becomes also rage: excessive
 opinion of mans own selfe, for divine inspiration, for wisdome,
 learning, forme, and the like, becomes distraction, and giddinesse:
 the same, joyned with envy, rage: vehement opinion of the truth of any
 thing, contradicted by others, rage.
 



melancholy
 
dejection, subjects man to causelesse fears; which is madnesse
 commonly called melancholy, apparent also in divers manners; as in
 haunting of solitudes, and graves; in superstitious behaviour; and in
 fearing some one, some another particular thing. in summe, all passions
 that produce strange and unusuall behaviour, are called by the generall
 name of madnesse. but of the severall kinds of madnesse, that
 would take the paines, might enrowle legion. and if the excesses be
 madnesse, there is doubt but the passions themselves, when they tend
 to evill, are degrees of the same.
 
(for example,) though the effect of folly, in them that are possessed of
 an opinion of being inspired, be not visible alwayes in one man, by any
 very extravagant action, that proceedeth from such passion; yet when
 many of them conspire together, the rage of the whole multitude is
 visible enough. for what argument of madnesse can there be greater, than
 to clamour, strike, and throw stones at our best friends? yet this is
 somewhat lesse than such multitude will do. for they will clamour,
 fight against, and destroy those, by whom all their lifetime before,
 they have been protected, and secured from injury. and if this be
 madnesse in the multitude, it is the same in every particular man. for
 as in the middest of the sea, though man perceive sound of
 that part of the water next him; yet is well assured, that part
 contributes as much, to the roaring of the sea, as any other part, of
 the same quantity: so also, thought wee perceive great unquietnesse,
 in one, or two men; yet we may be well assured, that their singular
 passions, are parts of the seditious roaring of troubled nation. and
 if there were nothing else that bewrayed their madnesse; yet that very
 arrogating such inspiration to themselves, is argument enough. if some
 man in bedlam should entertaine you with sober discourse; and you desire
 in taking leave, to know what were, that you might another time
 requite his civility; and should tell you, were god the father;
 i think you need expect extravagant action for argument of his
 madnesse.
 
this opinion of inspiration, called commonly, private spirit, begins
 very often, from some lucky finding of an errour generally held by
 others; and not knowing, or not remembring, by what conduct of reason,
 they came to so singular truth, (as they think it, though it be many
 times an untruth they light on,) they presently admire themselves; as
 being in the speciall grace of god almighty, who hath revealed the same
 to them supernaturally, by his spirit.
 
again, that madnesse is nothing else, but too much appearing passion,
 may be gathered out of the effects of wine, which are the same with
 those of the evill disposition of the organs. for the variety of
 behaviour in men that have drunk too much, is the same with that of
 mad-men: some of them raging, others loving, others laughing, all
 extravagantly, but according to their severall domineering passions:
 for the effect of the wine, does but remove dissimulation; and take from
 them the sight of the deformity of their passions. for, (i believe) the
 most sober men, when they walk alone without care and employment of the
 mind, would be unwilling the vanity and extravagance of their thoughts
 at that time should be publiquely seen: which is confession, that
 passions unguided, are for the most part meere madnesse.
 
the opinions of the world, both in antient and later ages, concerning
 the cause of madnesse, have been two. some, deriving them from the
 passions; some, from daemons, or spirits, either good, or bad, which
 they thought might enter into man, possesse him, and move his organs
 is such strange, and uncouth manner, as mad-men use to do. the former
 sort therefore, called such men, mad-men: but the later, called them
 sometimes daemoniacks, (that is, possessed with spirits;) sometimes
 energumeni, (that is agitated, or moved with spirits;) and now in
 italy they are called not onely pazzi, mad-men; but also spiritati, men
 possest.
 
there was once great conflux of people in abdera, city of the
 greeks, at the acting of the tragedy of andromeda, upon an extream hot
 day: whereupon, great many of the spectators falling into fevers, had
 this accident from the heat, and from the tragedy together, that they
 did nothing but pronounce iambiques, with the names of perseus and
 andromeda; which together with the fever, was cured, by the comming on
 of winter: and this madnesse was thought to proceed from the passion
 imprinted by the tragedy. likewise there raigned fit of madnesse in
 another graecian city, which seized onely the young maidens; and caused
 many of them to hang themselves. this was by most then thought an act of
 the divel. but one that suspected, that contempt of life in them,
 might proceed from some passion of the mind, and supposing they did not
 contemne also their honour, gave counsell to the magistrates, to strip
 such as so hang’d themselves, and let them hang out naked. this the
 story sayes cured that madnesse. but on the other side, the same
 graecians, did often ascribe madnesse, to the operation of the
 eumenides, or furyes; and sometimes of ceres, phoebus, and other gods:
 so much did men attribute to phantasmes, as to think them aereal living
 bodies; and generally to call them spirits. and as the romans in this,
 held the same opinion with the greeks: so also did the jewes; for they
 calle mad-men prophets, or (according as they thought the spirits
 good or bad) daemoniacks; and some of them called both prophets, and
 daemoniacks, mad-men; and some called the same man both daemoniack, and
 mad-man. but for the gentiles, ’tis wonder; because diseases, and
 health; vices, and vertues; and many naturall accidents, were with them
 termed, and worshipped as daemons. so that man was to understand by
 daemon, as well (sometimes) an ague, as divell. but for the jewes to
 have such opinion, is somewhat strange. for neither moses, nor abraham
 pretended to prophecy by possession of spirit; but from the voyce of
 god; or by vision or dream: nor is there any thing in his law,
 morall, or ceremoniall, by which they were taught, there was any such
 enthusiasme; or any possession. when god is sayd, (numb. 11. 25.) to
 take from the spirit that was in moses, and give it to the 70. elders,
 the spirit of god (taking it for the substance of god) is not divided.
 the scriptures by the spirit of god in man, mean mans spirit, enclined
 to godlinesse. and where it is said (exod. 28. 3.) "whom i have filled
 with the spirit of wisdome to make garments for aaron," is not meant a
 spirit put into them, that can make garments; but the wisdome of their
 own spirits in that kind of work. in the like sense, the spirit of
 man, when it produceth unclean actions, is ordinarily called an unclean
 spirit; and so other spirits, though not alwayes, yet as often as the
 vertue or vice so stiled, is extraordinary, and eminent. neither did the
 other prophets of the old testament pretend enthusiasme; or, that god
 spake in them; but to them by voyce, vision, or dream; and the burthen
 of the lord was not possession, but command. how then could the jewes
 fall into this opinion of possession? i can imagine reason, but that
 which is common to all men; namely, the want of curiosity to search
 naturall causes; and their placing felicity, in the acquisition of the
 grosse pleasures of the senses, and the things that most immediately
 conduce thereto. for they that see any strange, and unusuall ability, or
 defect in mans mind; unlesse they see withall, from what cause it may
 probably proceed, can hardly think it naturall; and if not naturall,
 they must needs thinke it supernaturall; and then what can it be, but
 that either god, or the divell is in him? and hence it came to passe,
 when our saviour (mark 3.21.) was compassed about with the multitude,
 those of the house doubted was mad, and went out to hold him: but
 the scribes said had belzebub, and that was it, by which cast out
 divels; as if the greater mad-man had awed the lesser. and that (john
 10. 20.) some said, "he hath divell, and is mad;" whereas others
 holding him for prophet, sayd, "these are not the words of one that
 hath divell." so in the old testament that came to anoynt jehu, (2
 kings 9.11.) was prophet; but some of the company asked jehu, "what
 came that mad-man for?" so that in summe, it is manifest, that whosoever
 behaved himselfe in extraordinary manner, was thought by the jewes to be
 possessed either with good, or evill spirit; except by the sadduces,
 who erred so farre on the other hand, as not to believe there were at
 all any spirits, (which is very neere to direct atheisme;) and thereby
 perhaps the more provoked others, to terme such men daemoniacks, rather
 than mad-men.
 
but why then does our saviour proceed in the curing of them, as if they
 were possest; and not as if they were mad. to which i can give other
 kind of answer, but that which is given to those that urge the scripture
 in like manner against the opinion of the motion of the earth. the
 scripture was written to shew unto men the kingdome of god; and to
 prepare their mindes to become his obedient subjects; leaving the
 world, and the philosophy thereof, to the disputation of men, for the
 exercising of their naturall reason. whether the earths, or suns motion
 make the day, and night; or whether the exorbitant actions of men,
 proceed from passion, or from the divell, (so we worship him not) it is
 all one, as to our obedience, and subjection to god almighty; which is
 the thing for which the scripture was written. as for that our saviour
 speaketh to the disease, as to person; it is the usuall phrase of all
 that cure by words onely, as christ did, (and inchanters pretend to
 do, whether they speak to divel or not.) for is not christ also said
 (math. 8.26.) to have rebuked the winds? is not said also (luk. 4.
 39.) to rebuke fever? yet this does not argue that fever is divel.
 and whereas many of these divels are said to confesse christ; it is not
 necessary to interpret those places otherwise, than that those mad-men
 confessed him. and whereas our saviour (math. 12. 43.) speaketh of an
 unclean spirit, that having gone out of man, wandreth through dry
 places, seeking rest, and finding none; and returning into the same
 man, with seven other spirits worse than himselfe; it is manifestly a
 parable, alluding to man, that after little endeavour to quit his
 lusts, is vanquished by the strength of them; and becomes seven times
 worse than was. so that i see nothing at all in the scripture, that
 requireth beliefe, that daemoniacks were any other thing but mad-men.
 



insignificant speech
 
there is yet another fault in the discourses of some men; which may also
 be numbred amongst the sorts of madnesse; namely, that abuse of words,
 whereof i have spoken before in the fifth chapter, by the name of
 absurdity. and that is, when men speak such words, as put together, have
 in them signification at all; but are fallen upon by some, through
 misunderstanding of the words they have received, and repeat by rote; by
 others, from intention to deceive by obscurity. and this is incident to
 none but those, that converse in questions of matters incomprehensible,
 as the schoole-men; or in questions of abstruse philosophy. the common
 sort of men seldome speak insignificantly, and are therefore, by those
 other egregious persons counted idiots. but to be assured their words
 are without any thing correspondent to them in the mind, there would
 need some examples; which if any man require, let him take schoole-man
 into his hands, and see if can translate any one chapter concerning
 any difficult point; as the trinity; the deity; the nature of christ;
 transubstantiation; free-will. &c. into any of the moderne tongues, so
 as to make the same intelligible; or into any tolerable latine, such
 as they were acquainted withall, that lived when the latine tongue was
 vulgar. what is the meaning of these words. "the first cause does not
 necessarily inflow any thing into the second, by force of the essential
 subordination of the second causes, by which it may help it to worke?"
 they are the translation of the title of the sixth chapter of suarez
 first booke, of the concourse, motion, and help of god. when men write
 whole volumes of such stuffe, are they not mad, or intend to make others
 so? and particularly, in the question of transubstantiation; where
 after certain words spoken, they that say, the white-nesse, round-nesse,
 magni-tude, quali-ty, corruptibili-ty, all which are incorporeall, &c.
 go out of the wafer, into the body of our blessed saviour, do they not
 make those nesses, tudes and ties, to be so many spirits possessing his
 body? for by spirits, they mean alwayes things, that being incorporeall,
 are neverthelesse moveable from one place to another. so that this kind
 of absurdity, may rightly be numbred amongst the many sorts of madnesse;
 and all the time that guided by clear thoughts of their worldly lust,
 they forbear disputing, or writing thus, but lucide intervals. and thus
 much of the vertues and defects intellectuall.
 


chapter ix. of the severall subjects of knowledge
 

there are of knowledge two kinds; whereof one is knowledge of fact: the
 other knowledge of the consequence of one affirmation to another. the
 former is nothing else, but sense and memory, and is absolute knowledge;
 as when we see fact doing, or remember it done: and this is the
 knowledge required in witnesse. the later is called science; and is
 conditionall; as when we know, that, if the figure showne be circle,
 then any straight line through the centre shall divide it into two
 equall parts. and this is the knowledge required in philosopher; that
 is to say, of him that pretends to reasoning.
 
the register of knowledge of fact is called history. whereof there be
 two sorts: one called naturall history; which is the history of such
 facts, or effects of nature, as have dependance on mans will; such as
 are the histories of metals, plants, animals, regions, and the like. the
 other, is civill history; which is the history of the voluntary actions
 of men in common-wealths.
 
the registers of science, are such books as contain the demonstrations
 of consequences of one affirmation, to another; and are commonly called
 books of philosophy; whereof the sorts are many, according to the
 diversity of the matter; and may be divided in such manner as i have
 divided them in the following table.
 
i. science, that is, knowledge of consequences; which is called
 also philosophy
 
a. consequences from accidents of bodies naturall; which is
 called naturall philosophy
 
1. consequences from the accidents common to all bodies naturall;
 which are quantity, and motion.
 
a. consequences from quantity, and motion indeterminate;
 which, being the principles or first foundation of
 philosophy, is called philosophia prima
 
philosophia prima
 
b. consequences from motion, and quantity determined
 
1) consequences from quantity, and motion determined
 
a) by figure, by number
 
1] mathematiques,
 
geometry
 arithmetique
 
2) consequences from the motion, and quantity of bodies in
 speciall
 
a) consequences from the motion, and quantity of the
 great parts of the world, as the earth and stars,
 
1] cosmography
 
astronomy
 geography
 
b) consequences from the motion of speciall kinds, and
 figures of body,
 
1] mechaniques, doctrine of weight
 
science of
 engineers
 architecture
 navigation
 
2. physiques, or consequences from qualities
 
a. consequences from the qualities of bodies transient, such
 as sometimes appear, sometimes vanish
 
meteorology
 
b. consequences from the qualities of bodies permanent
 
1) consequences from the qualities of the starres
 
a) consequences from the light of the starres. out of
 this, and the motion of the sunne, is made the
 science of
 
sciography
 
b) consequences from the influence of the starres,
 
astrology
 
2) consequences of the qualities from liquid bodies that
 fill the space between the starres; such as are the
 ayre, or substance aetherial.
 

3) consequences from qualities of bodies terrestrial
 
a) consequences from parts of the earth that are
 without sense,
 
1] consequences from qualities of minerals, as
 stones, metals, &c
 . 2] consequences from the qualities of vegetables
 
b) consequences from qualities of animals
 
1] consequences from qualities of animals in
 generall
 
a] consequences from vision,
 
optiques
 
b] consequences from sounds,
 
musique
 
c] consequences from the rest of the senses
 
2] consequences from qualities of men in speciall
 
a] consequences from passions of men,
 
ethiques
 
b] consequences from speech,
 
i) in magnifying, vilifying, etc.
 
poetry
 
ii) in persuading,
 
rhetorique
 
iii) in reasoning,
 
logique
 
iv) in contracting,
 
the science of
 just and unjust
 

b. consequences from the accidents of politique bodies; which is
 called politiques, and civill philosophy
 
1. of consequences from the institution of common-wealths, to
 the rights, and duties of the body politique, or soveraign.
 
2. of consequences from the same, to the duty and right of
 the subjects.
 


chapter x. of power, worth, dignity, honour and worthiness
 



power
 
the power of man, (to take it universally,) is his present means,
 to obtain some future apparent good. and is either originall, or
 instrumentall.
 
naturall power, is the eminence of the faculties of body, or mind: as
 extraordinary strength, forme, prudence, arts, eloquence, liberality,
 nobility. instrumentall are those powers, which acquired by these, or
 by fortune, are means and instruments to acquire more: as riches,
 reputation, friends, and the secret working of god, which men call
 good luck. for the nature of power, is in this point, like to fame,
 increasing as it proceeds; or like the motion of heavy bodies, which the
 further they go, make still the more hast.
 
the greatest of humane powers, is that which is compounded of the powers
 of most men, united by consent, in one person, naturall, or civill, that
 has the use of all their powers depending on his will; such as is the
 power of common-wealth: or depending on the wills of each particular;
 such as is the power of faction, or of divers factions leagued.
 therefore to have servants, is power; to have friends, is power: for
 they are strengths united.
 
also riches joyned with liberality, is power; because it procureth
 friends, and servants: without liberality, not so; because in this case
 they defend not; but expose men to envy, as prey.
 
reputation of power, is power; because it draweth with it the adhaerance
 of those that need protection.
 
so is reputation of love of mans country, (called popularity,) for the
 same reason.
 
also, what quality soever maketh man beloved, or feared of many; or
 the reputation of such quality, is power; because it is means to have
 the assistance, and service of many.
 
good successe is power; because it maketh reputation of wisdome, or good
 fortune; which makes men either feare him, or rely on him.
 
affability of men already in power, is encrease of power; because it
 gaineth love.
 
reputation of prudence in the conduct of peace or war, is power; because
 to prudent men, we commit the government of our selves, more willingly
 than to others.
 
nobility is power, not in all places, but onely in those common-wealths,
 where it has priviledges: for in such priviledges consisteth their
 power.
 
eloquence is power; because it is seeming prudence.
 
forme is power; because being promise of good, it recommendeth men to
 the favour of women and strangers.
 
the sciences, are small power; because not eminent; and therefore, not
 acknowledged in any man; nor are at all, but in few; and in them, but
 of few things. for science is of that nature, as none can understand
 it to be, but such as in good measure have attayned it.
 
arts of publique use, as fortification, making of engines, and other
 instruments of war; because they conferre to defence, and victory,
 are power; and though the true mother of them, be science, namely the
 mathematiques; yet, because they are brought into the light, by the hand
 of the artificer, they be esteemed (the midwife passing with the vulgar
 for the mother,) as his issue.
 



worth
 
the value, or worth of man, is as of all other things, his price;
 that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power:
 and therefore is not absolute; but thing dependant on the need and
 judgement of another. an able conductor of souldiers, is of great price
 in time of war present, or imminent; but in peace not so. learned and
 uncorrupt judge, is much worth in time of peace; but not so much in
 war. and as in other things, so in men, not the seller, but the buyer
 determines the price. for let man (as most men do,) rate themselves as
 the highest value they can; yet their true value is more than it is
 esteemed by others.
 
the manifestation of the value we set on one another, is that which is
 commonly called honouring, and dishonouring. to value man at high
 rate, is to honour him; at low rate, is to dishonour him. but high,
 and low, in this case, is to be understood by comparison to the rate
 that each man setteth on himselfe.
 



dignity
 
the publique worth of man, which is the value set on him by the
 common-wealth, is that which men commonly call dignity. and this value
 of him by the common-wealth, is understood, by offices of command,
 judicature, publike employment; or by names and titles, introduced for
 distinction of such value.
 



to honour and dishonour
 
to pray to another, for ayde of any kind, is to honour; because signe
 we have an opinion has power to help; and the more difficult the ayde
 is, the more is the honour.
 
to obey, is to honour; because man obeyes them, whom they think
 have power to help, or hurt them. and consequently to disobey, is to
 dishonour.
 
to give great gifts to man, is to honour him; because ’tis buying
 of protection, and acknowledging of power. to give little gifts, is to
 dishonour; because it is but almes, and signifies an opinion of the
 need of small helps. to be sedulous in promoting anothers good; also
 to flatter, is to honour; as signe we seek his protection or ayde. to
 neglect, is to dishonour.
 
to give way, or place to another, in any commodity, is to honour; being
 confession of greater power. to arrogate, is to dishonour.
 
to shew any signe of love, or feare of another, is to honour; for both
 to love, and to feare, is to value. to contemne, or lesse to love or
 feare then expects, is to dishonour; for ’tis undervaluing.
 
to praise, magnifie, or call happy, is to honour; because nothing but
 goodnesse, power, and felicity is valued. to revile, mock, or pitty, is
 to dishonour.
 
to speak to another with consideration, to appear before him with
 decency, and humility, is to honour him; as signes of fear to offend.
 to speak to him rashly, to do anything before him obscenely, slovenly,
 impudently, is to dishonour.
 
to believe, to trust, to rely on another, is to honour him; signe of
 opinion of his vertue and power. to distrust, or not believe, is to
 dishonour.
 
to hearken to mans counsell, or discourse of what kind soever, is to
 honour; as signe we think him wise, or eloquent, or witty. to sleep,
 or go forth, or talk the while, is to dishonour.
 
to do those things to another, which takes for signes of honour, or
 which the law or custome makes so, is to honour; because in approving
 the honour done by others, acknowledgeth the power which others
 acknowledge. to refuse to do them, is to dishonour.
 
to agree with in opinion, is to honour; as being signe of approving
 his judgement, and wisdome. to dissent, is dishonour; and an upbraiding
 of errour; and (if the dissent be in many things) of folly.
 
to imitate, is to honour; for it is vehemently to approve. to imitate
 ones enemy, is to dishonour.
 
to honour those another honours, is to honour him; as signe of
 approbation of his judgement. to honour his enemies, is to dishonour
 him.
 
to employ in counsell, or in actions of difficulty, is to honour; as a
 signe of opinion of his wisdome, or other power. to deny employment in
 the same cases, to those that seek it, is to dishonour.
 
all these wayes of honouring, are naturall; and as well within, as
 without common-wealths. but in common-wealths, where he, or they that
 have the supreme authority, can make whatsoever they please, to stand
 for signes of honour, there be other honours.
 
soveraigne doth honour subject, with whatsoever title, or office, or
 employment, or action, that himselfe will have taken for signe of
 his will to honour him.
 
the king of persia, honoured mordecay, when appointed should be
 conducted through the streets in the kings garment, upon one of the
 kings horses, with crown on his head, and prince before him,
 proclayming, "thus shall it be done to him that the king will honour."
 and yet another king of persia, or the same another time, to one that
 demanded for some great service, to weare one of the kings robes, gave
 him leave so to do; but with his addition, that should weare it as
 the kings foole; and then it was dishonour. so that of civill honour;
 such as are magistracy, offices, titles; and in some places coats, and
 scutchions painted: and men honour such as have them, as having so many
 signes of favour in the common-wealth; which favour is power.
 
honourable is whatsoever possession, action, or quality, is an argument
 and signe of power.
 
and therefore to be honoured, loved, or feared of many, is honourable;
 as arguments of power. to be honoured of few or none, dishonourable.
 
good fortune (if lasting,) honourable; as signe of the favour of god.
 ill fortune, and losses, dishonourable. riches, are honourable; for
 they are power. poverty, dishonourable. magnanimity, liberality,
 hope, courage, confidence, are honourable; for they proceed from the
 conscience of power. pusillanimity, parsimony, fear, diffidence, are
 dishonourable.
 
timely resolution, or determination of what man is to do, is
 honourable; as being the contempt of small difficulties, and dangers.
 and irresolution, dishonourable; as signe of too much valuing of
 little impediments, and little advantages: for when man has weighed
 things as long as the time permits, and resolves not, the difference
 of weight is but little; and therefore if resolve not, overvalues
 little things, which is pusillanimity.
 
all actions, and speeches, that proceed, or seem to proceed from much
 experience, science, discretion, or wit, are honourable; for all these
 are powers. actions, or words that proceed from errour, ignorance, or
 folly, dishonourable.
 
gravity, as farre forth as it seems to proceed from mind employed on
 some thing else, is honourable; because employment is signe of
 power. but if it seem to proceed from purpose to appear grave, it is
 dishonourable. for the gravity of the former, is like the steddinesse of
 ship laden with merchandise; but of the later, like the steddinesse of
 ship ballasted with sand, and other trash.
 
to be conspicuous, that is to say, to be known, for wealth, office,
 great actions, or any eminent good, is honourable; as signe of the
 power for which is conspicuous. on the contrary, obscurity, is
 dishonourable.
 
to be descended from conspicuous parents, is honourable; because they
 the more easily attain the aydes, and friends of their ancestors. on the
 contrary, to be descended from obscure parentage, is dishonourable.
 
actions proceeding from equity, joyned with losse, are honourable;
 as signes of magnanimity: for magnanimity is signe of power. on the
 contrary, craft, shifting, neglect of equity, is dishonourable.
 
nor does it alter the case of honour, whether an action (so it be great
 and difficult, and consequently signe of much power,) be just or
 unjust: for honour consisteth onely in the opinion of power. therefore
 the ancient heathen did not thinke they dishonoured, but greatly
 honoured the gods, when they introduced them in their poems, committing
 rapes, thefts, and other great, but unjust, or unclean acts: in so much
 as nothing is so much celebrated in jupiter, as his adulteries; nor
 in mercury, as his frauds, and thefts: of whose praises, in hymne
 of homer, the greatest is this, that being born in the morning, had
 invented musique at noon, and before night, stolen away the cattell of
 appollo, from his herdsmen.
 
also amongst men, till there were constituted great common-wealths,
 it was thought dishonour to be pyrate, or high-way theefe; but
 rather lawfull trade, not onely amongst the greeks, but also amongst
 all other nations; as is manifest by the histories of antient time. and
 at this day, in this part of the world, private duels are, and alwayes
 will be honourable, though unlawfull, till such time as there shall be
 honour ordained for them that refuse, and ignominy for them that make
 the challenge. for duels also are many times effects of courage; and the
 ground of courage is alwayes strength or skill, which are power; though
 for the most part they be effects of rash speaking, and of the fear of
 dishonour, in one, or both the combatants; who engaged by rashnesse, are
 driven into the lists to avoyd disgrace.
 
scutchions, and coats of armes haereditary, where they have any eminent
 priviledges, are honourable; otherwise not: for their power consisteth
 either in such priviledges, or in riches, or some such thing as is
 equally honoured in other men. this kind of honour, commonly called
 gentry, has been derived from the antient germans. for there never was
 any such thing known, where the german customes were unknown. nor is it
 now any where in use, where the germans have not inhabited. the antient
 greek commanders, when they went to war, had their shields painted with
 such devises as they pleased; insomuch as an unpainted buckler was a
 signe of poverty, and of common souldier: but they transmitted not the
 inheritance of them. the romans transmitted the marks of their families:
 but they were the images, not the devises of their ancestors. amongst
 the people of asia, afrique, and america, there is not, nor was ever,
 any such thing. the germans onely had that custome; from whom it has
 been derived into england, france, spain, and italy, when in great
 numbers they either ayded the romans, or made their own conquests in
 these westerne parts of the world.
 
for germany, being antiently, as all other countries, in their
 beginnings, divided amongst an infinite number of little lords, or
 masters of families, that continually had wars one with another; those
 masters, or lords, principally to the end they might, when they were
 covered with arms, be known by their followers; and partly for ornament,
 both painted their armor, or their scutchion, or coat, with the picture
 of some beast, or other thing; and also put some eminent and visible
 mark upon the crest of their helmets. and his ornament both of the
 armes, and crest, descended by inheritance to their children; to the
 eldest pure, and to the rest with some note of diversity, such as the
 old master, that is to say in dutch, the here-alt thought fit. but when
 many such families, joyned together, made greater monarchy, this duty
 of the herealt, to distinguish scutchions, was made private office
 part. and the issue of these lords, is the great and antient gentry;
 which for the most part bear living creatures, noted for courage, and
 rapine; or castles, battlements, belts, weapons, bars, palisadoes, and
 other notes of war; nothing being then in honour, but vertue military.
 afterwards, not onely kings, but popular common-wealths, gave divers
 manners of scutchions, to such as went forth to the war, or returned
 from it, for encouragement, or recompence to their service. all which,
 by an observing reader, may be found in such ancient histories, greek
 and latine, as make mention of the german nation, and manners, in their
 times.
 



titles of honour
 
titles of honour, such as are duke, count, marquis, and baron, are
 honourable; as signifying the value set upon them by the soveraigne
 power of the common-wealth: which titles, were in old time titles
 of office, and command, derived some from the romans, some from the
 germans, and french. dukes, in latine duces, being generalls in war:
 counts, comites, such as bare the generall company out of friendship;
 and were left to govern and defend places conquered, and pacified:
 marquises, marchiones, were counts that governed the marches, or bounds
 of the empire. which titles of duke, count, and marquis, came into the
 empire, about the time of constantine the great, from the customes of
 the german militia. but baron, seems to have been title of the gaules,
 and signifies great man; such as were the kings, or princes men, whom
 they employed in war about their persons; and seems to be derived from
 vir, to ber, and bar, that signified the same in the language of the
 gaules, that vir in latine; and thence to bero, and baro: so that such
 men were called berones, and after barones; and (in spanish) varones.
 but that would know more particularly the originall of titles of
 honour, may find it, as i have done this, in mr. seldens most excellent
 treatise of that subject. in processe of time these offices of honour,
 by occasion of trouble, and for reasons of good and peacable government,
 were turned into meer titles; serving for the most part, to distinguish
 the precedence, place, and order of subjects in the common-wealth: and
 men were made dukes, counts, marquises, and barons of places, wherein
 they had neither possession, nor command: and other titles also, were
 devised to the same end.
 



worthinesse fitnesse
 
worthinesse, is thing different from the worth, or value of man; and
 also from his merit, or desert; and consisteth in particular power,
 or ability for that, whereof is said to be worthy: which particular
 ability, is usually named fitnesse, or aptitude.
 
for is worthiest to be commander, to be judge, or to have any
 other charge, that is best fitted, with the qualities required to the
 well discharging of it; and worthiest of riches, that has the qualities
 most requisite for the well using of them: any of which qualities being
 absent, one may neverthelesse be worthy man, and valuable for
 some thing else. again, man may be worthy of riches, office, and
 employment, that neverthelesse, can plead right to have it before
 another; and therefore cannot be said to merit or deserve it. for merit,
 praesupposeth right, and that the thing deserved is due by promise: of
 which i shall say more hereafter, when i shall speak of contracts.
 



chapter xi. of the difference of manners
 



what is here meant by manners
 
by manners, i mean not here, decency of behaviour; as how one man should
 salute another, or how man should wash his mouth, or pick his teeth
 before company, and such other points of the small morals; but those
 qualities of man-kind, that concern their living together in peace, and
 unity. to which end we are to consider, that the felicity of this life,
 consisteth not in the repose of mind satisfied. for there is such
 finis ultimus, (utmost ayme,) nor summum bonum, (greatest good,) as is
 spoken of in the books of the old morall philosophers. nor can man
 any more live, whose desires are at an end, than he, whose senses and
 imaginations are at stand. felicity is continuall progresse of the
 desire, from one object to another; the attaining of the former, being
 still but the way to the later. the cause whereof is, that the object
 of mans desire, is not to enjoy once onely, and for one instant of time;
 but to assure for ever, the way of his future desire. and therefore the
 voluntary actions, and inclinations of all men, tend, not only to the
 procuring, but also to the assuring of contented life; and differ
 onely in the way: which ariseth partly from the diversity of passions,
 in divers men; and partly from the difference of the knowledge, or
 opinion each one has of the causes, which produce the effect desired.
 



restlesse desire of power, in all men
 
so that in the first place, i put for generall inclination of all
 mankind, perpetuall and restlesse desire of power after power, that
 ceaseth onely in death. and the cause of this, is not alwayes that man
 hopes for more intensive delight, than has already attained to; or
 that cannot be content with moderate power: but because cannot
 assure the power and means to live well, which hath present, without
 the acquisition of more. and from hence it is, that kings, whose power
 is greatest, turn their endeavours to the assuring it home by lawes,
 or abroad by wars: and when that is done, there succeedeth new desire;
 in some, of fame from new conquest; in others, of ease and sensuall
 pleasure; in others, of admiration, or being flattered for excellence in
 some art, or other ability of the mind.
 



love of contention from competition
 
competition of riches, honour, command, or other power, enclineth to
 contention, enmity, and war: because the way of one competitor, to the
 attaining of his desire, is to kill, subdue, supplant, or repell the
 other. particularly, competition of praise, enclineth to reverence of
 antiquity. for men contend with the living, not with the dead; to these
 ascribing more than due, that they may obscure the glory of the other.
 



civil obedience from love of ease
 
desire of ease, and sensuall delight, disposeth men to obey common
 power: because by such desires, man doth abandon the protection might
 be hoped for from his own industry, and labour.
 



from feare of death or wounds
 
fear of death, and wounds, disposeth to the same; and for the same
 reason. on the contrary, needy men, and hardy, not contented with their
 present condition; as also, all men that are ambitious of military
 command, are enclined to continue the causes of warre; and to stirre up
 trouble and sedition: for there is honour military but by warre; nor
 any such hope to mend an ill game, as by causing new shuffle.
 



and from love of arts
 
desire of knowledge, and arts of peace, enclineth men to obey common
 power: for such desire, containeth desire of leasure; and consequently
 protection from some other power than their own.
 



love of vertue, from love of praise
 
desire of praise, disposeth to laudable actions, such as please them
 whose judgement they value; for of these men whom we contemn, we contemn
 also the praises. desire of fame after death does the same. and though
 after death, there be sense of the praise given us on earth, as being
 joyes, that are either swallowed up in the unspeakable joyes of heaven,
 or extinguished in the extreme torments of hell: yet is not such fame
 vain; because men have present delight therein, from the foresight
 of it, and of the benefit that may rebound thereby to their posterity:
 which though they now see not, yet they imagine; and any thing that is
 pleasure in the sense, the same also is pleasure in the imagination.
 



hate, from difficulty of requiting great benefits
 
to have received from one, to whom we think our selves equall, greater
 benefits than there is hope to requite, disposeth to counterfiet love;
 but really secret hatred; and puts man into the estate of desperate
 debtor, that in declining the sight of his creditor, tacitely wishes
 him there, where might never see him more. for benefits oblige; and
 obligation is thraldome; which is to ones equall, hateful. but to have
 received benefits from one, whom we acknowledge our superiour, enclines
 to love; because the obligation is new depession: and cheerfull
 acceptation, (which men call gratitude,) is such an honour done to
 the obliger, as is taken generally for retribution. also to receive
 benefits, though from an equall, or inferiour, as long as there is hope
 of requitall, disposeth to love: for in the intention of the receiver,
 the obligation is of ayd, and service mutuall; from whence proceedeth
 an emulation of who shall exceed in benefiting; the most noble and
 profitable contention possible; wherein the victor is pleased with his
 victory, and the other revenged by confessing it.
 



and from conscience of deserving to be hated
 
to have done more hurt to man, than can, or is willing to expiate,
 enclineth the doer to hate the sufferer. for must expect revenge, or
 forgivenesse; both which are hatefull.
 



promptnesse to hurt, from fear
 
feare of oppression, disposeth man to anticipate, or to seek ayd by
 society: for there is other way by which man can secure his life
 and liberty.
 



and from distrust of their own wit
 
men that distrust their own subtilty, are in tumult, and sedition,
 better disposed for victory, than they that suppose themselves wise,
 or crafty. for these love to consult, the other (fearing to be
 circumvented,) to strike first. and in sedition, men being alwayes in
 the procincts of battell, to hold together, and use all advantages of
 force, is better stratagem, than any that can proceed from subtilty of
 wit.
 



vain undertaking from vain-glory
 
vain-glorious men, such as without being conscious to themselves of
 great sufficiency, delight in supposing themselves gallant men, are
 enclined onely to ostentation; but not to attempt: because when
 danger or difficulty appears, they look for nothing but to have their
 insufficiency discovered.
 
vain-glorious men, such as estimate their sufficiency by the flattery
 of other men, or the fortune of some precedent action, without assured
 ground of hope from the true knowledge of themselves, are enclined to
 rash engaging; and in the approach of danger, or difficulty, to retire
 if they can: because not seeing the way of safety, they will rather
 hazard their honour, which may be salved with an excuse; than their
 lives, for which salve is sufficient.
 



ambition, from opinion of sufficiency
 
men that have strong opinion of their own wisdome in matter of
 government, are disposed to ambition. because without publique
 employment in counsell or magistracy, the honour of their wisdome is
 lost. and therefore eloquent speakers are enclined to ambition; for
 eloquence seemeth wisdome, both to themselves and others
 



irresolution, from too great valuing of small matters
 
pusillanimity disposeth men to irresolution, and consequently to lose
 the occasions, and fittest opportunities of action. for after men have
 been in deliberation till the time of action approach, if it be not
 then manifest what is best to be done, tis signe, the difference of
 motives, the one way and the other, are not great: therefore not to
 resolve then, is to lose the occasion by weighing of trifles; which is
 pusillanimity.
 
frugality,(though in poor men vertue,) maketh man unapt to atchieve
 such actions, as require the strength of many men at once: for it
 weakeneth their endeavour, which is to be nourished and kept in vigor by
 reward.
 
confidence in others from ignorance of the marks of wisdome and
 kindnesse eloquence, with flattery, disposeth men to confide in them
 that have it; because the former is seeming wisdome, the later seeming
 kindnesse. adde to them military reputation, and it disposeth men to
 adhaere, and subject themselves to those men that have them. the two
 former, having given them caution against danger from him; the later
 gives them caution against danger from others.
 



and from the ignorance of naturall causes
 
want of science, that is, ignorance of causes, disposeth, or rather
 constraineth man to rely on the advise, and authority of others. for
 all men whom the truth concernes, if they rely not on their own,
 must rely on the opinion of some other, whom they think wiser than
 themselves, and see not why should deceive them.
 



and from want of understanding
 
ignorance of the signification of words; which is, want of
 understanding, disposeth men to take on trust, not onely the truth they
 know not; but also the errors; and which is more, the non-sense of them
 they trust: for neither error, nor non-sense, can without perfect
 understanding of words, be detected.
 
from the same it proceedeth, that men give different names, to one and
 the same thing, from the difference of their own passions: as they that
 approve private opinion, call it opinion; but they that mislike it,
 haeresie: and yet haeresie signifies more than private opinion; but
 has onely greater tincture of choler.
 
from the same also it proceedeth, that men cannot distinguish, without
 study and great understanding, between one action of many men, and many
 actions of one multitude; as for example, between the one action of
 all the senators of rome in killing catiline, and the many actions of a
 number of senators in killing caesar; and therefore are disposed to take
 for the action of the people, that which is multitude of actions done
 by multitude of men, led perhaps by the perswasion of one.
 
adhaerence to custome, from ignorance of the nature of right and wrong
 ignorance of the causes, and originall constitution of right, equity,
 law, and justice, disposeth man to make custome and example the rule
 of his actions; in such manner, as to think that unjust which it
 hath been the custome to punish; and that just, of the impunity and
 approbation whereof they can produce an example, or (as the lawyers
 which onely use the false measure of justice barbarously call it) a
 precedent; like little children, that have other rule of good and
 evill manners, but the correction they receive from their parents, and
 masters; save that children are constant to their rule, whereas men are
 not so; because grown strong, and stubborn, they appeale from custome
 to reason, and from reason to custome, as it serves their turn; receding
 from custome when their interest requires it, and setting themselves
 against reason, as oft as reason is against them: which is the cause,
 that the doctrine of right and wrong, is perpetually disputed, both by
 the pen and the sword: whereas the doctrine of lines, and figures, is
 not so; because men care not, in that subject what be truth, as thing
 that crosses mans ambition, profit, or lust. for i doubt not, but if
 it had been thing contrary to any mans right of dominion, or to the
 interest of men that have dominion, that the three angles of triangle
 should be equall to two angles of square; that doctrine should have
 been, if not disputed, yet by the burning of all books of geometry,
 suppressed, as farre as whom it concerned was able.
 
adhaerence to private men, from ignorance of the causes of peace
 ignorance of remote causes, disposeth men to attribute all events, to
 the causes immediate, and instrumentall: for these are all the causes
 they perceive. and hence it comes to passe, that in all places, men that
 are grieved with payments to the publique, discharge their anger upon
 the publicans, that is to say, farmers, collectors, and other officers
 of the publique revenue; and adhaere to such as find fault with the
 publike government; and thereby, when they have engaged themselves
 beyond hope of justification, fall also upon the supreme authority, for
 feare of punishment, or shame of receiving pardon.
 



credulity from ignorance of nature
 
ignorance of naturall causes disposeth man to credulity, so as
 to believe many times impossibilities: for such know nothing to
 the contrary, but that they may be true; being unable to detect the
 impossibility. and credulity, because men love to be hearkened unto in
 company, disposeth them to lying: so that ignorance it selfe without
 malice, is able to make man bothe to believe lyes, and tell them; and
 sometimes also to invent them.
 



curiosity to know, from care of future time
 
anxiety for the future time, disposeth men to enquire into the causes
 of things: because the knowledge of them, maketh men the better able to
 order the present to their best advantage.
 



naturall religion, from the same
 
curiosity, or love of the knowledge of causes, draws man from
 consideration of the effect, to seek the cause; and again, the cause of
 that cause; till of necessity must come to this thought at last, that
 there is some cause, whereof there is former cause, but is eternall;
 which is it men call god. so that it is impossible to make any profound
 enquiry into naturall causes, without being enclined thereby to believe
 there is one god eternall; though they cannot have any idea of him in
 their mind, answerable to his nature. for as man that is born blind,
 hearing men talk of warming themselves by the fire, and being brought
 to warm himself by the same, may easily conceive, and assure himselfe,
 there is somewhat there, which men call fire, and is the cause of the
 heat feeles; but cannot imagine what it is like; nor have an idea of
 it in his mind, such as they have that see it: so also, by the visible
 things of this world, and their admirable order, man may conceive
 there is cause of them, which men call god; and yet not have an idea,
 or image of him in his mind.
 
and they that make little, or enquiry into the naturall causes of
 things, yet from the feare that proceeds from the ignorance it selfe,
 of what it is that hath the power to do them much good or harm, are
 enclined to suppose, and feign unto themselves, severall kinds of powers
 invisible; and to stand in awe of their own imaginations; and in time
 of distresse to invoke them; as also in the time of an expected good
 successe, to give them thanks; making the creatures of their own
 fancy, their gods. by which means it hath come to passe, that from the
 innumerable variety of fancy, men have created in the world innumerable
 sorts of gods. and this feare of things invisible, is the naturall seed
 of that, which every one in himself calleth religion; and in them that
 worship, or feare that power otherwise than they do, superstition.
 
and this seed of religion, having been observed by many; some of those
 that have observed it, have been enclined thereby to nourish, dresse,
 and forme it into lawes; and to adde to it of their own invention,
 any opinion of the causes of future events, by which they thought they
 should best be able to govern others, and make unto themselves the
 greatest use of their powers.
 


chapter xii. of religion
 



religion, in man onely
 
seeing there are signes, nor fruit of religion, but in man onely;
 there is cause to doubt, but that the seed of religion, is also onely
 in man; and consisteth in some peculiar quality, or at least in some
 eminent degree thereof, not to be found in other living creatures.
 



first, from his desire of knowing causes
 
and first, it is peculiar to the nature of man, to be inquisitive into
 the causes of the events they see, some more, some lesse; but all men so
 much, as to be curious in the search of the causes of their own good and
 evill fortune.
 



from the consideration of the beginning of things
 
secondly, upon the sight of any thing that hath beginning, to think
 also it had cause, which determined the same to begin, then when it
 did, rather than sooner or later.
 



from his observation of the sequell of things
 
thirdly, whereas there is other felicity of beasts, but the enjoying
 of their quotidian food, ease, and lusts; as having little, or no
 foresight of the time to come, for want of observation, and memory
 of the order, consequence, and dependance of the things they see; man
 observeth how one event hath been produced by another; and remembreth in
 them antecedence and consequence; and when cannot assure himselfe of
 the true causes of things, (for the causes of good and evill fortune for
 the most part are invisible,) supposes causes of them, either such
 as his own fancy suggesteth; or trusteth to the authority of other men,
 such as thinks to be his friends, and wiser than himselfe.
 
the naturall cause of religion, the anxiety of the time to come the
 two first, make anxiety. for being assured that there be causes of all
 things that have arrived hitherto, or shall arrive hereafter; it is
 impossible for man, who continually endeavoureth to secure himselfe
 against the evill feares, and procure the good desireth, not to
 be in perpetuall solicitude of the time to come; so that every man,
 especially those that are over provident, are in an estate like to that
 of prometheus. for as prometheus, (which interpreted, is, the prudent
 man,) was bound to the hill caucasus, place of large prospect, where,
 an eagle feeding on his liver, devoured in the day, as much as was
 repayred in the night: so that man, which looks too far before him, in
 the care of future time, hath his heart all the day long, gnawed on by
 feare of death, poverty, or other calamity; and has repose, nor pause
 of his anxiety, but in sleep.
 



which makes them fear the power of invisible things
 
this perpetuall feare, alwayes accompanying mankind in the ignorance of
 causes, as it were in the dark, must needs have for object something.
 and therefore when there is nothing to be seen, there is nothing to
 accuse, either of their good, or evill fortune, but some power, or agent
 invisible: in which sense perhaps it was, that some of the old poets
 said, that the gods were at first created by humane feare: which spoken
 of the gods, (that is to say, of the many gods of the gentiles) is
 very true. but the acknowledging of one god eternall, infinite, and
 omnipotent, may more easily be derived, from the desire men have to
 know the causes of naturall bodies, and their severall vertues, and
 operations; than from the feare of what was to befall them in time to
 come. for that from any effect hee seeth come to passe, should reason
 to the next and immediate cause thereof, and from thence to the cause
 of that cause, and plonge himselfe profoundly in the pursuit of causes;
 shall at last come to this, that there must be (as even the heathen
 philosophers confessed) one first mover; that is, first, and an
 eternall cause of all things; which is that which men mean by the name
 of god: and all this without thought of their fortune; the solicitude
 whereof, both enclines to fear, and hinders them from the search of the
 causes of other things; and thereby gives occasion of feigning of as
 many gods, as there be men that feigne them.
 



and suppose them incorporeall
 
and for the matter, or substance of the invisible agents, so fancyed;
 they could not by naturall cogitation, fall upon any other conceipt, but
 that it was the same with that of the soule of man; and that the soule
 of man, was of the same substance, with that which appeareth in dream,
 to one that sleepeth; or in looking-glasse, to one that is awake;
 which, men not knowing that such apparitions are nothing else but
 creatures of the fancy, think to be reall, and externall substances;
 and therefore call them ghosts; as the latines called them imagines,
 and umbrae; and thought them spirits, that is, thin aereall bodies; and
 those invisible agents, which they feared, to bee like them; save that
 they appear, and vanish when they please. but the opinion that such
 spirits were incorporeall, or immateriall, could never enter into the
 mind of any man by nature; because, though men may put together words of
 contradictory signification, as spirit, and incorporeall; yet they
 can never have the imagination of any thing answering to them:
 and therefore, men that by their own meditation, arrive to the
 acknowledgement of one infinite, omnipotent, and eternall god,
 choose rather to confesse is incomprehensible, and above their
 understanding; than to define his nature by spirit incorporeall, and
 then confesse their definition to be unintelligible: or if they give him
 such title, it is not dogmatically, with intention to make the divine
 nature understood; but piously, to honour him with attributes, of
 significations, as remote as they can from the grossenesse of bodies
 visible.
 



but know not the way how they effect anything
 
then, for the way by which they think these invisible agents wrought
 their effects; that is to say, what immediate causes they used, in
 bringing things to passe, men that know not what it is that we call
 causing, (that is, almost all men) have other rule to guesse by, but
 by observing, and remembring what they have seen to precede the like
 effect at some other time, or times before, without seeing between the
 antecedent and subsequent event, any dependance or connexion at all:
 and therefore from the like things past, they expect the like things to
 come; and hope for good or evill luck, superstitiously, from things that
 have part at all in the causing of it: as the athenians did for their
 war at lepanto, demand another phormio; the pompeian faction for their
 warre in afrique, another scipio; and others have done in divers other
 occasions since. in like manner they attribute their fortune to a
 stander by, to lucky or unlucky place, to words spoken, especially
 if the name of god be amongst them; as charming, and conjuring (the
 leiturgy of witches;) insomuch as to believe, they have power to turn a
 stone into bread, bread into man, or any thing, into any thing.
 



but honour them as they honour men
 
thirdly, for the worship which naturally men exhibite to powers
 invisible, it can be other, but such expressions of their reverence,
 as they would use towards men; gifts, petitions, thanks, submission
 of body, considerate addresses, sober behaviour, premeditated words,
 swearing (that is, assuring one another of their promises,) by invoking
 them. beyond that reason suggesteth nothing; but leaves them either to
 rest there; or for further ceremonies, to rely on those they believe to
 be wiser than themselves.
 



and attribute to them all extraordinary events
 
lastly, concerning how these invisible powers declare to men the things
 which shall hereafter come to passe, especially concerning their good
 or evill fortune in generall, or good or ill successe in any particular
 undertaking, men are naturally at stand; save that using to conjecture
 of the time to come, by the time past, they are very apt, not onely to
 take casuall things, after one or two encounters, for prognostiques
 of the like encounter ever after, but also to believe the like
 prognostiques from other men, of whom they have once conceived good
 opinion.
 



foure things, naturall seeds of religion
 
and in these foure things, opinion of ghosts, ignorance of second
 causes, devotion towards what men fear, and taking of things casuall for
 prognostiques, consisteth the naturall seed of religion; which by reason
 of the different fancies, judgements, and passions of severall men, hath
 grown up into ceremonies so different, that those which are used by one
 man, are for the most part ridiculous to another.
 



made different by culture
 
for these seeds have received culture from two sorts of men. one sort
 have been they, that have nourished, and ordered them, according to
 their own invention. the other, have done it, by gods commandement, and
 direction: but both sorts have done it, with purpose to make those men
 that relyed on them, the more apt to obedience, lawes, peace, charity,
 and civill society. so that the religion of the former sort, is part
 of humane politiques; and teacheth part of the duty which earthly kings
 require of their subjects. and the religion of the later sort is
 divine politiques; and containeth precepts to those that have yeelded
 themselves subjects in the kingdome of god. of the former sort, were all
 the founders of common-wealths, and the law-givers of the gentiles: of
 the later sort, were abraham, moses, and our blessed saviour; by whom
 have been derived unto us the lawes of the kingdome of god.
 



the absurd opinion of gentilisme
 
and for that part of religion, which consisteth in opinions concerning
 the nature of powers invisible, there is almost nothing that has a
 name, that has not been esteemed amongst the gentiles, in one place or
 another, god, or divell; or by their poets feigned to be inanimated,
 inhabited, or possessed by some spirit or other.
 
the unformed matter of the world, was god, by the name of chaos.
 
the heaven, the ocean, the planets, the fire, the earth, the winds, were
 so many gods.
 
men, women, bird, crocodile, calf, dogge, snake, an onion,
 leeke, deified. besides, that they filled almost all places, with
 spirits called daemons; the plains, with pan, and panises, or satyres;
 the woods, with fawnes, and nymphs; the sea, with tritons, and other
 nymphs; every river, and fountayn, with ghost of his name, and with
 nymphs; every house, with it lares, or familiars; every man, with his
 genius; hell, with ghosts, and spirituall officers, as charon, cerberus,
 and the furies; and in the night time, all places with larvae, lemures,
 ghosts of men deceased, and whole kingdome of fayries, and bugbears.
 they have also ascribed divinity, and built temples to meer accidents,
 and qualities; such as are time, night, day, peace, concord, love,
 contention, vertue, honour, health, rust, fever, and the like; which
 when they prayed for, or against, they prayed to, as if there were
 ghosts of those names hanging over their heads, and letting fall, or
 withholding that good, or evill, for, or against which they prayed. they
 invoked also their own wit, by the name of muses; their own ignorance,
 by the name of fortune; their own lust, by the name of cupid; their
 own rage, by the name furies; their own privy members by the name of
 priapus; and attributed their pollutions, to incubi, and succubae:
 insomuch as there was nothing, which poet could introduce as person
 in his poem, which they did not make either god, or divel.
 
the same authors of the religion of the gentiles, observing the second
 ground for religion, which is mens ignorance of causes; and thereby
 their aptnesse to attribute their fortune to causes, on which there
 was dependence at all apparent, took occasion to obtrude on their
 ignorance, in stead of second causes, kind of second and ministeriall
 gods; ascribing the cause of foecundity, to venus; the cause of arts, to
 apollo; of subtilty and craft, to mercury; of tempests and stormes,
 to aeolus; and of other effects, to other gods: insomuch as there was
 amongst the heathen almost as great variety of gods, as of businesse.
 
and to the worship, which naturally men conceived fit to bee used
 towards their gods, namely oblations, prayers, thanks, and the rest
 formerly named; the same legislators of the gentiles have added their
 images, both in picture, and sculpture; that the more ignorant sort,
 (that is to say, the most part, or generality of the people,) thinking
 the gods for whose representation they were made, were really included,
 and as it were housed within them, might so much the more stand in feare
 of them: and endowed them with lands, and houses, and officers, and
 revenues, set apart from all other humane uses; that is, consecrated,
 and made holy to those their idols; as caverns, groves, woods,
 mountains, and whole ilands; and have attributed to them, not onely
 the shapes, some of men, some of beasts, some of monsters; but also the
 faculties, and passions of men and beasts; as sense, speech, sex, lust,
 generation, (and this not onely by mixing one with another, to propagate
 the kind of gods; but also by mixing with men, and women, to beget
 mongrill gods, and but inmates of heaven, as bacchus, hercules,
 and others;) besides, anger, revenge, and other passions of living
 creatures, and the actions proceeding from them, as fraud, theft,
 adultery, sodomie, and any vice that may be taken for an effect of
 power, or cause of pleasure; and all such vices, as amongst men are
 taken to be against law, rather than against honour.
 
lastly, to the prognostiques of time to come; which are naturally, but
 conjectures upon the experience of time past; and supernaturall, divine
 revelation; the same authors of the religion of the gentiles, partly
 upon pretended experience, partly upon pretended revelation, have
 added innumerable other superstitious wayes of divination; and made men
 believe they should find their fortunes, sometimes in the ambiguous
 or senslesse answers of the priests at delphi, delos, ammon, and other
 famous oracles; which answers, were made ambiguous by designe, to own
 the event both wayes; or absurd by the intoxicating vapour of the place,
 which is very frequent in sulphurous cavernes: sometimes in the leaves
 of the sibills; of whose prophecyes (like those perhaps of nostradamus;
 for the fragments now extant seem to be the invention of later times)
 there were some books in reputation in the time of the roman republique:
 sometimes in the insignificant speeches of mad-men, supposed to
 be possessed with divine spirit; which possession they called
 enthusiasme; and these kinds of foretelling events, were accounted
 theomancy, or prophecy; sometimes in the aspect of the starres at their
 nativity; which was called horoscopy, and esteemed part of judiciary
 astrology: sometimes in their own hopes and feares, called thumomancy,
 or presage: sometimes in the prediction of witches, that pretended
 conference with the dead; which is called necromancy, conjuring, and
 witchcraft; and is but juggling and confederate knavery: sometimes in
 the casuall flight, or feeding of birds; called augury: sometimes in
 the entrayles of sacrificed beast; which was aruspicina: sometimes
 in dreams: sometimes in croaking of ravens, or chattering of birds:
 sometimes in the lineaments of the face; which was called metoposcopy;
 or by palmistry in the lines of the hand; in casuall words, called
 omina: sometimes in monsters, or unusuall accidents; as ecclipses,
 comets, rare meteors, earthquakes, inundations, uncouth births, and the
 like, which they called portenta and ostenta, because they thought them
 to portend, or foreshew some great calamity to come; sometimes, in meer
 lottery, as crosse and pile; counting holes in sive; dipping of verses
 in homer, and virgil; and innumerable other such vaine conceipts. so
 easie are men to be drawn to believe any thing, from such men as have
 gotten credit with them; and can with gentlenesse, and dexterity, take
 hold of their fear, and ignorance.
 
the designes of the authors of the religion of the heathen and therefore
 the first founders, and legislators of common-wealths amongst the
 gentiles, whose ends were only to keep the people in obedience, and
 peace, have in all places taken care; first, to imprint in their minds a
 beliefe, that those precepts which they gave concerning religion, might
 not be thought to proceed from their own device, but from the dictates
 of some god, or other spirit; or else that they themselves were of a
 higher nature than mere mortalls, that their lawes might the more easily
 be received: so numa pompilius pretended to receive the ceremonies he
 instituted amongst the romans, from the nymph egeria: and the first king
 and founder of the kingdome of peru, pretended himselfe and his wife to
 be the children of the sunne: and mahomet, to set up his new religion,
 pretended to have conferences with the holy ghost, in forme of dove.
 secondly, they have had care, to make it believed, that the same
 things were displeasing to the gods, which were forbidden by the
 lawes. thirdly, to prescribe ceremonies, supplications, sacrifices, and
 festivalls, by which they were to believe, the anger of the gods might
 be appeased; and that ill success in war, great contagions of sicknesse,
 earthquakes, and each mans private misery, came from the anger of
 the gods; and their anger from the neglect of their worship, or the
 forgetting, or mistaking some point of the ceremonies required. and
 though amongst the antient romans, men were not forbidden to deny, that
 which in the poets is written of the paines, and pleasures after this
 life; which divers of great authority, and gravity in that state have
 in their harangues openly derided; yet that beliefe was alwaies more
 cherished, than the contrary.
 
and by these, and such other institutions, they obtayned in order to
 their end, (which was the peace of the commonwealth,) that the common
 people in their misfortunes, laying the fault on neglect, or errour in
 their ceremonies, or on their own disobedience to the lawes, were the
 lesse apt to mutiny against their governors. and being entertained with
 the pomp, and pastime of festivalls, and publike gomes, made in
 honour of the gods, needed nothing else but bread, to keep them from
 discontent, murmuring, and commotion against the state. and therefore
 the romans, that had conquered the greatest part of the then known
 world, made scruple of tollerating any religion whatsoever in the
 city of rome it selfe; unlesse it had somthing in it, that could not
 consist with their civill government; nor do we read, that any religion
 was there forbidden, but that of the jewes; who (being the peculiar
 kingdome of god) thought it unlawfull to acknowledge subjection to any
 mortall king or state whatsoever. and thus you see how the religion of
 the gentiles was part of their policy.
 
the true religion, and the lawes of gods kingdome the same but where god
 himselfe, by supernaturall revelation, planted religion; there he
 also made to himselfe peculiar kingdome; and gave lawes, not only of
 behaviour towards himselfe; but also towards one another; and thereby
 in the kingdome of god, the policy, and lawes civill, are part of
 religion; and therefore the distinction of temporall, and spirituall
 domination, hath there place. it is true, that god is king of all the
 earth: yet may be king of peculiar, and chosen nation. for there is
 more incongruity therein, than that that hath the generall command
 of the whole army, should have withall peculiar regiment, or company
 of his own. god is king of all the earth by his power: but of his
 chosen people, is king by covenant. but to speake more largly of the
 kingdome of god, both by nature, and covenant, i have in the following
 discourse assigned an other place.
 



the causes of change in religion
 
from the propagation of religion, it is not hard to understand
 the causes of the resolution of the same into its first seeds, or
 principles; which are only an opinion of deity, and powers invisible,
 and supernaturall; that can never be so abolished out of humane nature,
 but that new religions may againe be made to spring out of them, by the
 culture of such men, as for such purpose are in reputation.
 
for seeing all formed religion, is founded at first, upon the faith
 which multitude hath in some one person, whom they believe not only to
 be wise man, and to labour to procure their happiness, but also to
 be holy man, to whom god himselfe vouchsafeth to declare his will
 supernaturally; it followeth necessarily, when they that have the
 goverment of religion, shall come to have either the wisedome of those
 men, their sincerity, or their love suspected; or that they shall
 be unable to shew any probable token of divine revelation; that the
 religion which they desire to uphold, must be suspected likewise; and
 (without the feare of the civill sword) contradicted and rejected.
 



injoyning beleefe of impossibilities
 
that which taketh away the reputation of wisedome, in him that formeth
 religion, or addeth to it when it is allready formed, is the enjoyning
 of beliefe of contradictories: for both parts of contradiction
 cannot possibly be true: and therefore to enjoyne the beliefe of them,
 is an argument of ignorance; which detects the author in that; and
 discredits him in all things else shall propound as from revelation
 supernaturall: which revelation man may indeed have of many things
 above, but of nothing against naturall reason.
 



doing contrary to the religion they establish
 
that which taketh away the reputation of sincerity, is the doing, or
 saying of such things, as appeare to be signes, that what they require
 other men to believe, is not believed by themselves; all which doings,
 or sayings are therefore called scandalous, because they be stumbling
 blocks, that make men to fall in the way of religion: as injustice,
 cruelty, prophanesse, avarice, and luxury. for who can believe, that he
 that doth ordinarily such actions, as proceed from any of these
 rootes, believeth there is any such invisible power to be feared, as he
 affrighteth other men withall, for lesser faults?
 
that which taketh away the reputation of love, is the being detected of
 private ends: as when the beliefe they require of others, conduceth or
 seemeth to conduce to the acquiring of dominion, riches, dignity, or
 secure pleasure, to themselves onely, or specially. for that which men
 reap benefit by to themselves, they are thought to do for their own
 sakes, and not for love of others
 



want of the testimony of miracles
 
lastly, the testimony that men can render of divine calling, can be no
 other, than the operation of miracles; or true prophecy, (which also is
 miracle;) or extraordinary felicity. and therefore, to those points
 of religion, which have been received from them that did such miracles;
 those that are added by such, as approve not their calling by some
 miracle, obtain greater beliefe, than what the custome, and lawes of
 the places, in which they be educated, have wrought into them. for as
 in naturall things, men of judgement require naturall signes,
 and arguments; so in supernaturall things, they require signes
 supernaturall, (which are miracles,) before they consent inwardly, and
 from their hearts.
 
all which causes of the weakening of mens faith, do manifestly appear
 in the examples following. first, we have the example of the children
 of israel; who when moses, that had approved his calling to them by
 miracles, and by the happy conduct of them out of egypt, was absent but
 40 dayes, revolted from the worship of the true god, recommended to
 them by him; and setting up (exod.32 1,2) golden calfe for their god,
 relapsed into the idolatry of the egyptians; from whom they had been
 so lately delivered. and again, after moses, aaron, joshua, and that
 generation which had seen the great works of god in israel, (judges
 2 11) were dead; another generation arose, and served baal. so that
 miracles fayling, faith also failed.
 
again, when the sons of samuel, (1 sam.8.3) being constituted by their
 father judges in bersabee, received bribes, and judged unjustly, the
 people of israel refused any more to have god to be their king, in other
 manner than was king of other people; and therefore cryed out to
 samuel, to choose them king after the manner of the nations. so that
 justice fayling, faith also fayled: insomuch, as they deposed their god,
 from reigning over them.
 
and whereas in the planting of christian religion, the oracles ceased
 in all parts of the roman empire, and the number of christians encreased
 wonderfully every day, and in every place, by the preaching of the
 apostles, and evangelists; great part of that successe, may reasonably
 be attributed, to the contempt, into which the priests of the gentiles
 of that time, had brought themselves, by their uncleannesse, avarice,
 and jugling between princes. also the religion of the church of rome,
 was partly, for the same cause abolished in england, and many other
 parts of christendome; insomuch, as the fayling of vertue in the
 pastors, maketh faith faile in the people: and partly from bringing
 of the philosophy, and doctrine of aristotle into religion, by the
 schoole-men; from whence there arose so many contradictions, and
 absurdities, as brought the clergy into reputation both of ignorance,
 and of fraudulent intention; and enclined people to revolt from them,
 either against the will of their own princes, as in france, and holland;
 or with their will, as in england.
 
lastly, amongst the points by the church of rome declared necessary for
 salvation, there be so many, manifestly to the advantage of the pope,
 and of his spirituall subjects, residing in the territories of other
 christian princes, that were it not for the mutuall emulation of those
 princes, they might without warre, or trouble, exclude all forraign
 authority, as easily as it has been excluded in england. for who is
 there that does not see, to whose benefit it conduceth, to have it
 believed, that king hath not his authority from christ, unlesse a
 bishop crown him? that king, if be priest, cannot marry? that
 whether prince be born in lawfull marriage, or not, must be judged by
 authority from rome? that subjects may be freed from their alleageance,
 if by the court of rome, the king be judged an heretique? that king
 (as chilperique of france) may be deposed by pope (as pope zachary,)
 for cause; and his kingdome given to one of his subjects? that the
 clergy, and regulars, in what country soever, shall be exempt from the
 jurisdiction of their king, in cases criminall? or who does not see, to
 whose profit redound the fees of private masses, and vales of purgatory;
 with other signes of private interest, enough to mortifie the most
 lively faith, if (as i sayd) the civill magistrate, and custome did not
 more sustain it, than any opinion they have of the sanctity, wisdome,
 or probity of their teachers? so that i may attribute all the changes
 of religion in the world, to one and the some cause; and that is,
 unpleasing priests; and those not onely amongst catholiques, but even in
 that church that hath presumed most of reformation.
 


chapter xiii. of the naturall condition of mankind,
 as concerning their felicity, and misery
 

nature hath made men so equall, in the faculties of body, and mind; as
 that though there bee found one man sometimes manifestly stronger
 in body, or of quicker mind then another; yet when all is reckoned
 together, the difference between man, and man, is not so considerable,
 as that one man can thereupon claim to himselfe any benefit, to which
 another may not pretend, as well as he. for as to the strength of body,
 the weakest has strength enough to kill the strongest, either by secret
 machination, or by confederacy with others, that are in the same danger
 with himselfe.
 
and as to the faculties of the mind, (setting aside the arts grounded
 upon words, and especially that skill of proceeding upon generall, and
 infallible rules, called science; which very few have, and but in few
 things; as being not native faculty, born with us; nor attained,
 (as prudence,) while we look after somewhat els,) i find yet greater
 equality amongst men, than that of strength. for prudence, is but
 experience; which equall time, equally bestowes on all men, in those
 things they equally apply themselves unto. that which may perhaps make
 such equality incredible, is but vain conceipt of ones owne wisdome,
 which almost all men think they have in greater degree, than the
 vulgar; that is, than all men but themselves, and few others, whom by
 fame, or for concurring with themselves, they approve. for such is the
 nature of men, that howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be
 more witty, or more eloquent, or more learned; yet they will hardly
 believe there be many so wise as themselves: for they see their own wit
 at hand, and other mens at distance. but this proveth rather that men
 are in that point equall, than unequall. for there is not ordinarily a
 greater signe of the equall distribution of any thing, than that every
 man is contented with his share.
 



from equality proceeds diffidence
 
from this equality of ability, ariseth equality of hope in the attaining
 of our ends. and therefore if any two men desire the same thing, which
 neverthelesse they cannot both enjoy, they become enemies; and in the
 way to their end, (which is principally their owne conservation, and
 sometimes their delectation only,) endeavour to destroy, or subdue one
 an other. and from hence it comes to passe, that where an invader hath
 more to feare, than an other mans single power; if one plant, sow,
 build, or possesse convenient seat, others may probably be expected to
 come prepared with forces united, to dispossesse, and deprive him, not
 only of the fruit of his labour, but also of his life, or liberty. and
 the invader again is in the like danger of another.
 



from diffidence warre
 
and from this diffidence of one another, there is way for any man to
 secure himselfe, so reasonable, as anticipation; that is, by force, or
 wiles, to master the persons of all men can, so long, till see no
 other power great enough to endanger him: and this is more than his
 own conservation requireth, and is generally allowed. also because there
 be some, that taking pleasure in contemplating their own power in
 the acts of conquest, which they pursue farther than their security
 requires; if others, that otherwise would be glad to be at ease within
 modest bounds, should not by invasion increase their power, they would
 not be able, long time, by standing only on their defence, to subsist.
 and by consequence, such augmentation of dominion over men, being
 necessary to mans conservation, it ought to be allowed him.
 
againe, men have pleasure, (but on the contrary great deale of
 griefe) in keeping company, where there is power able to over-awe
 them all. for every man looketh that his companion should value him, at
 the same rate sets upon himselfe: and upon all signes of contempt,
 or undervaluing, naturally endeavours, as far as dares (which amongst
 them that have common power, to keep them in quiet, is far enough
 to make them destroy each other,) to extort greater value from his
 contemners, by dommage; and from others, by the example.
 
so that in the nature of man, we find three principall causes of
 quarrel. first, competition; secondly, diffidence; thirdly, glory.
 
the first, maketh men invade for gain; the second, for safety; and
 the third, for reputation. the first use violence, to make themselves
 masters of other mens persons, wives, children, and cattell; the second,
 to defend them; the third, for trifles, as word, smile, different
 opinion, and any other signe of undervalue, either direct in their
 persons, or by reflexion in their kindred, their friends, their nation,
 their profession, or their name.
 



out of civil states, there is alwayes warre of every one against every
 one
 
hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without common
 power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is
 called warre; and such warre, as is of every man, against every man.
 for warre, consisteth not in battell onely, or the act of fighting; but
 in tract of time, wherein the will to contend by battell is
 sufficiently known: and therefore the notion of time, is to be
 considered in the nature of warre; as it is in the nature of weather.
 for as the nature of foule weather, lyeth not in showre or two of
 rain; but in an inclination thereto of many dayes together: so the
 nature of war, consisteth not in actuall fighting; but in the known
 disposition thereto, during all the time there is assurance to the
 contrary. all other time is peace.
 



the incommodites of such war
 
whatsoever therefore is consequent to time of warre, where every man
 is enemy to every man; the same is consequent to the time, wherein men
 live without other security, than what their own strength, and their
 own invention shall furnish them withall. in such condition, there is
 place for industry; because the fruit thereof is uncertain; and
 consequently culture of the earth; navigation, nor use of the
 commodities that may be imported by sea; commodious building; no
 instruments of moving, and removing such things as require much force;
 knowledge of the face of the earth; account of time; arts; no
 letters; society; and which is worst of all, continuall feare, and
 danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary, poore, nasty,
 brutish, and short.
 
it may seem strange to some man, that has not well weighed these things;
 that nature should thus dissociate, and render men apt to invade,
 and destroy one another: and may therefore, not trusting to this
 inference, made from the passions, desire perhaps to have the same
 confirmed by experience. let him therefore consider with himselfe, when
 taking journey, armes himselfe, and seeks to go well accompanied;
 when going to sleep, locks his dores; when even in his house he
 locks his chests; and this when knows there bee lawes, and publike
 officers, armed, to revenge all injuries shall bee done him; what
 opinion has of his fellow subjects, when rides armed; of his
 fellow citizens, when locks his dores; and of his children, and
 servants, when locks his chests. does not there as much accuse
 mankind by his actions, as i do by my words? but neither of us accuse
 mans nature in it. the desires, and other passions of man, are in
 themselves sin. more are the actions, that proceed from those
 passions, till they know law that forbids them; which till lawes be
 made they cannot know: nor can any law be made, till they have agreed
 upon the person that shall make it.
 
it may peradventure be thought, there was never such time, nor
 condition of warre as this; and i believe it was never generally so,
 over all the world: but there are many places, where they live so now.
 for the savage people in many places of america, except the government
 of small families, the concord whereof dependeth on naturall lust, have
 government at all; and live at this day in that brutish manner, as
 i said before. howsoever, it may be perceived what manner of life there
 would be, where there were common power to feare; by the manner of
 life, which men that have formerly lived under peacefull government,
 use to degenerate into, in civill warre.
 
but though there had never been any time, wherein particular men were in
 condition of warre one against another; yet in all times, kings, and
 persons of soveraigne authority, because of their independency, are
 in continuall jealousies, and in the state and posture of gladiators;
 having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another;
 that is, their forts, garrisons, and guns upon the frontiers of their
 kingdomes; and continuall spyes upon their neighbours; which is a
 posture of war. but because they uphold thereby, the industry of their
 subjects; there does not follow from it, that misery, which accompanies
 the liberty of particular men.
 



in such warre, nothing is unjust
 
to this warre of every man against every man, this also is consequent;
 that nothing can be unjust. the notions of right and wrong, justice and
 injustice have there place. where there is common power, there is
 law: where law, injustice. force, and fraud, are in warre the
 two cardinall vertues. justice, and injustice are none of the faculties
 neither of the body, nor mind. if they were, they might be in man that
 were alone in the world, as well as his senses, and passions. they
 are qualities, that relate to men in society, not in solitude. it is
 consequent also to the same condition, that there be propriety, no
 dominion, mine and thine distinct; but onely that to be every mans
 that can get; and for so long, as can keep it. and thus much
 for the ill condition, which man by meer nature is actually placed in;
 though with possibility to come out of it, consisting partly in the
 passions, partly in his reason.
 



the passions that incline men to peace
 
the passions that encline men to peace, are feare of death; desire of
 such things as are necessary to commodious living; and hope by their
 industry to obtain them. and reason suggesteth convenient articles of
 peace, upon which men may be drawn to agreement. these articles, are
 they, which otherwise are called the lawes of nature: whereof i shall
 speak more particularly, in the two following chapters.
 


chapter xiv. of the first and second naturall lawes, and of contracts
 



right of nature what
 
the right of nature, which writers commonly call jus naturale, is the
 liberty each man hath, to use his own power, as will himselfe, for
 the preservation of his own nature; that is to say, of his own life;
 and consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own judgement, and
 reason, hee shall conceive to be the aptest means thereunto.
 



liberty what
 
by liberty, is understood, according to the proper signification of the
 word, the absence of externall impediments: which impediments, may oft
 take away part of mans power to do what hee would; but cannot hinder
 him from using the power left him, according as his judgement, and
 reason shall dictate to him.
 



law of nature what
 
law of nature, (lex naturalis,) is precept, or generall rule,
 found out by reason, by which man is forbidden to do, that, which
 is destructive of his life, or taketh away the means of preserving the
 same; and to omit, that, by which thinketh it may be best preserved.
 for though they that speak of this subject, use to confound jus, and
 lex, right and law; yet they ought to be distinguished; because right,
 consisteth in liberty to do, or to forbeare; whereas law, determineth,
 and bindeth to one of them: so that law, and right, differ as much,
 as obligation, and liberty; which in one and the same matter are
 inconsistent.
 



naturally every man has right to everything
 
and because the condition of man, (as hath been declared in the
 precedent chapter) is condition of warre of every one against every
 one; in which case every one is governed by his own reason; and there
 is nothing can make use of, that may not be help unto him, in
 preserving his life against his enemyes; it followeth, that in such a
 condition, every man has right to every thing; even to one anothers
 body. and therefore, as long as this naturall right of every man to
 every thing endureth, there can be security to any man, (how strong
 or wise soever be,) of living out the time, which nature ordinarily
 alloweth men to live.
 



the fundamental law of nature
 
and consequently it is precept, or generall rule of reason, "that
 every man, ought to endeavour peace, as farre as has hope of
 obtaining it; and when cannot obtain it, that may seek, and use,
 all helps, and advantages of warre." the first branch, of which rule,
 containeth the first, and fundamentall law of nature; which is, "to seek
 peace, and follow it." the second, the summe of the right of nature;
 which is, "by all means we can, to defend our selves."
 



the second law of nature
 
from this fundamentall law of nature, by which men are commanded to
 endeavour peace, is derived this second law; "that man be willing,
 when others are so too, as farre-forth, as for peace, and defence of
 himselfe shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all
 things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men, as
 would allow other men against himselfe." for as long as every man
 holdeth this right, of doing any thing liketh; so long are all men in
 the condition of warre. but if other men will not lay down their right,
 as well as he; then there is reason for any one, to devest himselfe
 of his: for that were to expose himselfe to prey, (which man is bound
 to) rather than to dispose himselfe to peace. this is that law of the
 gospell; "whatsoever you require that others should do to you, that do
 ye to them." and that law of all men, "quod tibi feiri non vis, alteri
 ne feceris."
 



what it is to lay down right
 
to lay downe mans right to any thing, is to devest himselfe of the
 liberty, of hindring another of the benefit of his own right to the
 same. for that renounceth, or passeth away his right, giveth not to
 any other man right which had not before; because there is nothing
 to which every man had not right by nature: but onely standeth out of
 his way, that may enjoy his own originall right, without hindrance
 from him; not without hindrance from another. so that the effect which
 redoundeth to one man, by another mans defect of right, is but so much
 diminution of impediments to the use of his own right originall.
 



renouncing (or) transferring right what; obligation duty justice
 
right is layd aside, either by simply renouncing it; or by transferring
 it to another. by simply renouncing; when cares not to whom the
 benefit thereof redoundeth. by transferring; when intendeth the
 benefit thereof to some certain person, or persons. and when man hath
 in either manner abandoned, or granted away his right; then is said
 to be obliged, or bound, not to hinder those, to whom such right is
 granted, or abandoned, from the benefit of it: and that ought, and it
 his duty, not to make voyd that voluntary act of his own: and that such
 hindrance is injustice, and injury, as being sine jure; the right being
 before renounced, or transferred. so that injury, or injustice, in
 the controversies of the world, is somewhat like to that, which in the
 disputations of scholers is called absurdity. for as it is there called
 an absurdity, to contradict what one maintained in the beginning: so in
 the world, it is called injustice, and injury, voluntarily to undo that,
 which from the beginning had voluntarily done. the way by which man
 either simply renounceth, or transferreth his right, is declaration,
 or signification, by some voluntary and sufficient signe, or signes,
 that doth so renounce, or transferre; or hath so renounced, or
 transferred the same, to him that accepteth it. and these signes are
 either words onely, or actions onely; or (as it happeneth most often)
 both words and actions. and the same are the bonds, by which men are
 bound, and obliged: bonds, that have their strength, not from their own
 nature, (for nothing is more easily broken then mans word,) but from
 feare of some evill consequence upon the rupture.
 



not all rights are alienable
 
whensoever man transferreth his right, or renounceth it; it is either
 in consideration of some right reciprocally transferred to himselfe; or
 for some other good hopeth for thereby. for it is voluntary act:
 and of the voluntary acts of every man, the object is some good to
 himselfe. and therefore there be some rights, which man can be
 understood by any words, or other signes, to have abandoned, or
 transferred. as first man cannot lay down the right of resisting them,
 that assault him by force, to take away his life; because cannot be
 understood to ayme thereby, at any good to himselfe. the same may be
 sayd of wounds, and chayns, and imprisonment; both because there is
 benefit consequent to such patience; as there is to the patience of
 suffering another to be wounded, or imprisoned: as also because man
 cannot tell, when seeth men proceed against him by violence, whether
 they intend his death or not. and lastly the motive, and end for which
 this renouncing, and transferring or right is introduced, is nothing
 else but the security of mans person, in his life, and in the means of
 so preserving life, as not to be weary of it. and therefore if man by
 words, or other signes, seem to despoyle himselfe of the end, for which
 those signes were intended; is not to be understood as if meant
 it, or that it was his will; but that was ignorant of how such words
 and actions were to be interpreted.
 



contract what
 
the mutuall transferring of right, is that which men call contract.
 
there is difference, between transferring of right to the thing; and
 transferring, or tradition, that is, delivery of the thing it selfe. for
 the thing may be delivered together with the translation of the right;
 as in buying and selling with ready mony; or exchange of goods, or
 lands: and it may be delivered some time after.
 



covenant what
 
again, one of the contractors, may deliver the thing contracted for on
 his part, and leave the other to perform his part at some determinate
 time after, and in the mean time be trusted; and then the contract on
 his part, is called pact, or covenant: or both parts may contract now,
 to performe hereafter: in which cases, that is to performe in time
 to come, being trusted, his performance is called keeping of promise, or
 faith; and the fayling of performance (if it be voluntary) violation of
 faith.
 



free-gift
 
when the transferring of right, is not mutuall; but one of the parties
 transferreth, in hope to gain thereby friendship, or service from
 another, or from his friends; or in hope to gain the reputation of
 charity, or magnanimity; or to deliver his mind from the pain of
 compassion; or in hope of reward in heaven; this is not contract, but
 gift, freegift, grace: which words signifie one and the same thing.
 



signes of contract expresse
 
signes of contract, are either expresse, or by inference. expresse, are
 words spoken with understanding of what they signifie; and such words
 are either of the time present, or past; as, i give, i grant, i have
 given, i have granted, i will that this be yours: or of the future;
 as, i will give, i will grant; which words of the future, are called
 promise.
 



signes of contract by inference
 
signes by inference, are sometimes the consequence of words; sometimes
 the consequence of silence; sometimes the consequence of actions;
 sometimes the consequence of forbearing an action: and generally signe
 by inference, of any contract, is whatsoever sufficiently argues the
 will of the contractor.
 



free gift passeth by words of the present or past
 
words alone, if they be of the time to come, and contain bare promise,
 are an insufficient signe of free-gift and therefore not obligatory.
 for if they be of the time to come, as, to morrow i will give, they
 are signe i have not given yet, and consequently that my right is not
 transferred, but remaineth till i transferre it by some other act. but
 if the words be of the time present, or past, as, "i have given, or do
 give to be delivered to morrow," then is my to morrows right given away
 to day; and that by the vertue of the words, though there were no
 other argument of my will. and there is great difference in the
 signification of these words, volos hoc tuum esse cras, and cros dabo;
 that is between "i will that this be thine to morrow," and, "i will
 give it to thee to morrow:" for the word i will, in the former manner
 of speech, signifies an act of the will present; but in the later, it
 signifies promise of an act of the will to come: and therefore the
 former words, being of the present, transferre future right; the
 later, that be of the future, transferre nothing. but if there be other
 signes of the will to transferre right, besides words; then, though
 the gift be free, yet may the right be understood to passe by words of
 the future: as if man propound prize to him that comes first to the
 end of race, the gift is free; and though the words be of the
 future, yet the right passeth: for if would not have his words so be
 understood, should not have let them runne.
 
signes of contract are words both of the past, present, and future in
 contracts, the right passeth, not onely where the words are of the time
 present, or past; but also where they are of the future; because all
 contract is mutuall translation, or change of right; and therefore he
 that promiseth onely, because hath already received the benefit for
 which promiseth, is to be understood as if intended the right
 should passe: for unlesse had been content to have his words so
 understood, the other would not have performed his part first. and
 for that cause, in buying, and selling, and other acts of contract, a
 promise is equivalent to covenant; and therefore obligatory.
 



merit what
 
that performeth first in the case of contract, is said to merit
 that which is to receive by the performance of the other; and hath
 it as due. also when prize is propounded to many, which is to be given
 to him onely that winneth; or mony is thrown amongst many, to be enjoyed
 by them that catch it; though this be free gift; yet so to win, or
 so to catch, is to merit, and to have it as due. for the right is
 transferred in the propounding of the prize, and in throwing down the
 mony; though it be not determined to whom, but by the event of the
 contention. but there is between these two sorts of merit, this
 difference, that in contract, i merit by vertue of my own power, and the
 contractors need; but in this case of free gift, i am enabled to
 merit onely by the benignity of the giver; in contract, i merit at the
 contractors hand that hee should depart with his right; in this case of
 gift, i merit not that the giver should part with his right; but that
 when has parted with it, it should be mine, rather than anothers.
 and this i think to be the meaning of that distinction of the schooles,
 between meritum congrui, and meritum condigni. for god almighty, having
 promised paradise to those men (hoodwinkt with carnall desires,) that
 can walk through this world according to the precepts, and limits
 prescribed by him; they say, that shall so walk, shall merit paradise
 ex congruo. but because man can demand right to it, by his own
 righteousnesse, or any other power in himselfe, but by the free grace of
 god onely; they say, man can merit paradise ex condigno. this i say,
 i think is the meaning of that distinction; but because disputers do not
 agree upon the signification of their own termes of art, longer than it
 serves their turn; i will not affirme any thing of their meaning:
 onely this i say; when gift is given indefinitely, as prize to be
 contended for, that winneth meriteth, and may claime the prize as
 due.
 



covenants of mutuall trust, when invalid
 
if covenant be made, wherein neither of the parties performe
 presently, but trust one another; in the condition of meer nature,
 (which is condition of warre of every man against every man,) upon
 any reasonable suspition, it is voyd; but if there be common power set
 over them bothe, with right and force sufficient to compell performance;
 it is not voyd. for that performeth first, has assurance the other
 will performe after; because the bonds of words are too weak to bridle
 mens ambition, avarice, anger, and other passions, without the feare of
 some coerceive power; which in the condition of meer nature, where all
 men are equall, and judges of the justnesse of their own fears cannot
 possibly be supposed. and therefore which performeth first, does
 but betray himselfe to his enemy; contrary to the right (he can never
 abandon) of defending his life, and means of living.
 
but in civill estate, where there is power set up to constrain
 those that would otherwise violate their faith, that feare is more
 reasonable; and for that cause, which by the covenant is to perform
 first, is obliged so to do.
 
the cause of feare, which maketh such covenant invalid, must be
 alwayes something arising after the covenant made; as some new fact,
 or other signe of the will not to performe; else it cannot make the
 covenant voyd. for that which could not hinder man from promising,
 ought not to be admitted as hindrance of performing.
 



right to the end, containeth right to the means
 
that transferreth any right, transferreth the means of enjoying it,
 as farre as lyeth in his power. as that selleth land, is understood
 to transferre the herbage, and whatsoever growes upon it; nor can he
 that sells mill turn away the stream that drives it. and they that
 give to man the right of government in soveraignty, are understood
 to give him the right of levying mony to maintain souldiers; and of
 appointing magistrates for the administration of justice.
 



covenant with beasts
 
to make covenant with bruit beasts, is impossible; because not
 understanding our speech, they understand not, nor accept of any
 translation of right; nor can translate any right to another; and
 without mutuall acceptation, there is covenant.
 



nor with god without speciall revelation
 
to make covenant with god, is impossible, but by mediation of such
 as god speaketh to, either by revelation supernaturall, or by his
 lieutenants that govern under him, and in his name; for otherwise we
 know not whether our covenants be accepted, or not. and therefore they
 that vow any thing contrary to any law of nature, vow in vain; as being
 thing unjust to pay such vow. and if it be thing commanded by the
 law of nature, it is not the vow, but the law that binds them.
 



covenant, but of possible and future
 
the matter, or subject of covenant, is alwayes something that falleth
 under deliberation; (for to covenant, is an act of the will; that is to
 say an act, and the last act, of deliberation;) and is therefore alwayes
 understood to be something to come; and which is judged possible for him
 that covenanteth, to performe.
 
and therefore, to promise that which is known to be impossible, is no
 covenant. but if that prove impossible afterwards, which before was
 thought possible, the covenant is valid, and bindeth, (though not to the
 thing it selfe,) yet to the value; or, if that also be impossible, to
 the unfeigned endeavour of performing as much as is possible; for to
 more man can be obliged.
 



covenants how made voyd
 
men are freed of their covenants two wayes; by performing; or by being
 forgiven. for performance, is the naturall end of obligation; and
 forgivenesse, the restitution of liberty; as being retransferring of
 that right, in which the obligation consisted.
 



covenants extorted by feare are valide
 
covenants entred into by fear, in the condition of meer nature, are
 obligatory. for example, if i covenant to pay ransome, or service for
 my life, to an enemy; i am bound by it. for it is contract, wherein
 one receiveth the benefit of life; the other is to receive mony,
 or service for it; and consequently, where other law (as in the
 condition, of meer nature) forbiddeth the performance, the covenant
 is valid. therefore prisoners of warre, if trusted with the payment of
 their ransome, are obliged to pay it; and if weaker prince, make a
 disadvantageous peace with stronger, for feare; is bound to keep
 it; unlesse (as hath been sayd before) there ariseth some new, and just
 cause of feare, to renew the war. and even in common-wealths, if i be
 forced to redeem my selfe from theefe by promising him mony, i am
 bound to pay it, till the civill law discharge me. for whatsoever i may
 lawfully do without obligation, the same i may lawfully covenant to do
 through feare: and what i lawfully covenant, i cannot lawfully break.
 



the former covenant to one, makes voyd the later to another
 
former covenant, makes voyd later. for man that hath passed away
 his right to one man to day, hath it not to passe to morrow to another:
 and therefore the later promise passeth right, but is null.
 



mans covenant not to defend himselfe, is voyd
 
covenant not to defend my selfe from force, by force, is alwayes voyd.
 for (as i have shewed before) man can transferre, or lay down his
 right to save himselfe from death, wounds, and imprisonment, (the
 avoyding whereof is the onely end of laying down any right,)
 and therefore the promise of not resisting force, in covenant
 transferreth any right; nor is obliging. for though man may covenant
 thus, "unlesse i do so, or so, kill me;" cannot covenant thus "unless
 i do so, or so, i will not resist you, when you come to kill me." for
 man by nature chooseth the lesser evill, which is danger of death in
 resisting; rather than the greater, which is certain and present death
 in not resisting. and this is granted to be true by all men, in
 that they lead criminals to execution, and prison, with armed men,
 notwithstanding that such criminals have consented to the law, by which
 they are condemned.
 



man obliged to accuse himselfe
 
covenant to accuse ones selfe, without assurance of pardon, is
 likewise invalide. for in the condition of nature, where every man is
 judge, there is place for accusation: and in the civill state, the
 accusation is followed with punishment; which being force, man is
 not obliged not to resist. the same is also true, of the accusation of
 those, by whose condemnation man falls into misery; as of father,
 wife, or benefactor. for the testimony of such an accuser, if it be not
 willingly given, is praesumed to be corrupted by nature; and therefore
 not to be received: and where mans testimony is not to be credited,
 his not bound to give it. also accusations upon torture, are not to
 be reputed as testimonies. for torture is to be used but as means of
 conjecture, and light, in the further examination, and search of truth;
 and what is in that case confessed, tendeth to the ease of him that is
 tortured; not to the informing of the torturers: and therefore ought
 not to have the credit of sufficient testimony: for whether deliver
 himselfe by true, or false accusation, does it by the right of
 preserving his own life.
 



the end of an oath; the forme of as oath
 
the force of words, being (as i have formerly noted) too weak to hold
 men to the performance of their covenants; there are in mans nature, but
 two imaginable helps to strengthen it. and those are either feare
 of the consequence of breaking their word; or glory, or pride in
 appearing not to need to breake it. this later is generosity too
 rarely found to be presumed on, especially in the pursuers of wealth,
 command, or sensuall pleasure; which are the greatest part of mankind.
 the passion to be reckoned upon, is fear; whereof there be two very
 generall objects: one, the power of spirits invisible; the other, the
 power of those men they shall therein offend. of these two, though the
 former be the greater power, yet the feare of the later is commonly
 the greater feare. the feare of the former is in every man, his own
 religion: which hath place in the nature of man before civill society.
 the later hath not so; at least not place enough, to keep men to their
 promises; because in the condition of meer nature, the inequality of
 power is not discerned, but by the event of battell. so that before the
 time of civill society, or in the interruption thereof by warre, there
 is nothing can strengthen covenant of peace agreed on, against the
 temptations of avarice, ambition, lust, or other strong desire, but the
 feare of that invisible power, which they every one worship as god; and
 feare as revenger of their perfidy. all therefore that can be done
 between two men not subject to civill power, is to put one another
 to swear by the god feareth: which swearing or oath, is forme of
 speech, added to promise; by which that promiseth, signifieth, that
 unlesse performe, renounceth the mercy of his god, or calleth to
 him for vengeance on himselfe. such was the heathen forme, "let jupiter
 kill else, as i kill this beast." so is our forme, "i shall do thus,
 and thus, so help god." and this, with the rites and ceremonies,
 which every one useth in his own religion, that the feare of breaking
 faith might be the greater.
 



oath, but by god
 
by this it appears, that an oath taken according to any other forme, or
 rite, then his, that sweareth, is in vain; and oath: and there is no
 swearing by any thing which the swearer thinks not god. for though men
 have sometimes used to swear by their kings, for feare, or flattery; yet
 they would have it thereby understood, they attributed to them divine
 honour. and that swearing unnecessarily by god, is but prophaning of his
 name: and swearing by other things, as men do in common discourse, is
 not swearing, but an impious custome, gotten by too much vehemence of
 talking.
 



an oath addes nothing to the obligation
 
it appears also, that the oath addes nothing to the obligation. for a
 covenant, if lawfull, binds in the sight of god, without the oath,
 as much as with it; if unlawfull, bindeth not at all; though it be
 confirmed with an oath.
 


chapter xv. of other lawes of nature
 



the third law of nature, justice
 
from that law of nature, by which we are obliged to transferre to
 another, such rights, as being retained, hinder the peace of mankind,
 there followeth third; which is this, that men performe their
 covenants made: without which, covenants are in vain, and but empty
 words; and the right of all men to all things remaining, wee are still
 in the condition of warre.
 



justice and injustice what
 
and in this law of nature, consisteth the fountain and originall of
 justice. for where covenant hath preceded, there hath right been
 transferred, and every man has right to every thing; and consequently,
 action can be unjust. but when covenant is made, then to break it
 is unjust: and the definition of injustice, is other than the not
 performance of covenant. and whatsoever is not unjust, is just.
 
justice and propriety begin with the constitution of common-wealth
 but because covenants of mutuall trust, where there is feare of not
 performance on either part, (as hath been said in the former chapter,)
 are invalid; though the originall of justice be the making of covenants;
 yet injustice actually there can be none, till the cause of such feare
 be taken away; which while men are in the naturall condition of warre,
 cannot be done. therefore before the names of just, and unjust can have
 place, there must be some coercive power, to compell men equally to
 the performance of their covenants, by the terrour of some punishment,
 greater than the benefit they expect by the breach of their covenant;
 and to make good that propriety, which by mutuall contract men acquire,
 in recompence of the universall right they abandon: and such power there
 is none before the erection of common-wealth. and this is also to be
 gathered out of the ordinary definition of justice in the schooles: for
 they say, that "justice is the constant will of giving to every man his
 own." and therefore where there is own, that is, propriety, there
 is injustice; and where there is coerceive power erected, that is,
 where there is common-wealth, there is propriety; all men having
 right to all things: therefore where there is common-wealth, there
 nothing is unjust. so that the nature of justice, consisteth in keeping
 of valid covenants: but the validity of covenants begins not but with
 the constitution of civill power, sufficient to compell men to keep
 them: and then it is also that propriety begins.
 



justice not contrary to reason
 
the foole hath sayd in his heart, there is such thing as justice;
 and sometimes also with his tongue; seriously alleaging, that every mans
 conservation, and contentment, being committed to his own care, there
 could be reason, why every man might not do what thought conduced
 thereunto; and therefore also to make, or not make; keep, or not keep
 covenants, was not against reason, when it conduced to ones benefit.
 does not therein deny, that there be covenants; and that they are
 sometimes broken, sometimes kept; and that such breach of them may
 be called injustice, and the observance of them justice: but he
 questioneth, whether injustice, taking away the feare of god, (for the
 same foole hath said in his heart there is god,) may not sometimes
 stand with that reason, which dictateth to every man his own good; and
 particularly then, when it conduceth to such benefit, as shall put a
 man in condition, to neglect not onely the dispraise, and revilings,
 but also the power of other men. the kingdome of god is gotten by
 violence; but what if it could be gotten by unjust violence? were it
 against reason so to get it, when it is impossible to receive hurt by
 it? and if it be not against reason, it is not against justice; or else
 justice is not to be approved for good. from such reasoning as this,
 succesfull wickednesse hath obtained the name of vertue; and some that
 in all other things have disallowed the violation of faith; yet have
 allowed it, when it is for the getting of kingdome. and the heathen
 that believed, that saturn was deposed by his jupiter, believed
 neverthelesse the same jupiter to be the avenger of injustice: somewhat
 like to piece of law in cokes commentaries on litleton; where he
 sayes, if the right heire of the crown be attainted of treason; yet the
 crown shall descend to him, and eo instante the atteynder be voyd; from
 which instances man will be very prone to inferre; that when the heire
 apparent of kingdome, shall kill him that is in possession, though his
 father; you may call it injustice, or by what other name you will; yet
 it can never be against reason, seeing all the voluntary actions of
 men tend to the benefit of themselves; and those actions are most
 reasonable, that conduce most to their ends. this specious reasoning is
 nevertheless false.
 
for the question is not of promises mutuall, where there is security
 of performance on either side; as when there is civill power erected
 over the parties promising; for such promises are covenants: but
 either where one of the parties has performed already; or where there
 is power to make him performe; there is the question whether it be
 against reason, that is, against the benefit of the other to performe,
 or not. and i say it is not against reason. for the manifestation
 whereof, we are to consider; first, that when man doth thing, which
 notwithstanding any thing can be foreseen, and reckoned on, tendeth to
 his own destruction, howsoever some accident which could not expect,
 arriving may turne it to his benefit; yet such events do not make it
 reasonably or wisely done. secondly, that in condition of warre,
 wherein every man to every man, for want of common power to keep them
 all in awe, is an enemy, there is man can hope by his own strength,
 or wit, to defend himselfe from destruction, without the help
 of confederates; where every one expects the same defence by the
 confederation, that any one else does: and therefore which declares
 thinks it reason to deceive those that help him, can in reason expect
 other means of safety, than what can be had from his own single
 power. therefore that breaketh his covenant, and consequently
 declareth that thinks may with reason do so, cannot be received
 into any society, that unite themselves for peace and defence, but
 by the errour of them that receive him; nor when is received, be
 retayned in it, without seeing the danger of their errour; which errours
 man cannot reasonably reckon upon as the means of his security; and
 therefore if be left, or cast out of society, perisheth; and if he
 live in society, it is by the errours of other men, which could not
 foresee, nor reckon upon; and consequently against the reason of his
 preservation; and so, as all men that contribute not to his destruction,
 forbear him onely out of ignorance of what is good for themselves.
 
as for the instance of gaining the secure and perpetuall felicity of
 heaven, by any way; it is frivolous: there being but one way imaginable;
 and that is not breaking, but keeping of covenant.
 
and for the other instance of attaining soveraignty by rebellion; it is
 manifest, that though the event follow, yet because it cannot reasonably
 be expected, but rather the contrary; and because by gaining it so,
 others are taught to gain the same in like manner, the attempt thereof
 is against reason. justice therefore, that is to say, keeping of
 covenant, is rule of reason, by which we are forbidden to do any thing
 destructive to our life; and consequently law of nature.
 
there be some that proceed further; and will not have the law of nature,
 to be those rules which conduce to the preservation of mans life on
 earth; but to the attaining of an eternall felicity after death; to
 which they think the breach of covenant may conduce; and consequently
 be just and reasonable; (such are they that think it work of merit
 to kill, or depose, or rebell against, the soveraigne power constituted
 over them by their own consent.) but because there is naturall
 knowledge of mans estate after death; much lesse of the reward that is
 then to be given to breach of faith; but onely beliefe grounded upon
 other mens saying, that they know it supernaturally, or that they know
 those, that knew them, that knew others, that knew it supernaturally;
 breach of faith cannot be called precept of reason, or nature.
 



covenants not discharged by the vice of the person to whom made
 
others, that allow for law of nature, the keeping of faith, do
 neverthelesse make exception of certain persons; as heretiques, and
 such as use not to performe their covenant to others: and this also is
 against reason. for if any fault of man, be sufficient to discharge
 our covenant made; the same ought in reason to have been sufficient to
 have hindred the making of it.
 



justice of men, and justice of actions what
 
the names of just, and unjust, when they are attributed to men, signifie
 one thing; and when they are attributed to actions, another. when they
 are attributed to men, they signifie conformity, or inconformity of
 manners, to reason. but when they are attributed to actions, they
 signifie the conformity, or inconformity to reason, not of manners, or
 manner of life, but of particular actions. just man therefore, is he
 that taketh all the care can, that his actions may be all just: and
 an unjust man, is that neglecteth it. and such men are more often
 in our language stiled by the names of righteous, and unrighteous; then
 just, and unjust; though the meaning be the same. therefore righteous
 man, does not lose that title, by one, or few unjust actions, that
 proceed from sudden passion, or mistake of things, or persons: nor does
 an unrighteous man, lose his character, for such actions, as does,
 of forbeares to do, for feare: because his will is not framed by the
 justice, but by the apparant benefit of what is to do. that which
 gives to humane actions the relish of justice, is certain noblenesse
 or gallantnesse of courage, (rarely found,) by which man scorns to
 be beholding for the contentment of his life, to fraud, or breach of
 promise. this justice of the manners, is that which is meant, where
 justice is called vertue; and injustice vice.
 
but the justice of actions denominates men, not just, but guiltlesse;
 and the injustice of the same, (which is also called injury,) gives them
 but the name of guilty.
 



justice of manners, and justice of actions
 
again, the injustice of manners, is the disposition, or aptitude to
 do injurie; and is injustice before it proceed to act; and without
 supposing any individuall person injured. but the injustice of an
 action, (that is to say injury,) supposeth an individuall person
 injured; namely him, to whom the covenant was made: and therefore many
 times the injury is received by one man, when the dammage redoundeth
 to another. as when the master commandeth his servant to give mony to a
 stranger; if it be not done, the injury is done to the master, whom
 had before covenanted to obey; but the dammage redoundeth to the
 stranger, to whom had obligation; and therefore could not injure
 him. and so also in common-wealths, private men may remit to one another
 their debts; but not robberies or other violences, whereby they are
 endammaged; because the detaining of debt, is an injury to themselves;
 but robbery and violence, are injuries to the person of the
 common-wealth.
 



nothing done to man, by his own consent can be injury
 
whatsoever is done to man, conformable to his own will signified to
 the doer, is injury to him. for if that doeth it, hath not passed
 away his originall right to do what please, by some antecedent
 covenant, there is breach of covenant; and therefore injury done
 him. and if have; then his will to have it done being signified, is a
 release of that covenant; and so again there is injury done him.
 



justice commutative, and distributive
 
justice of actions, is by writers divided into commutative, and
 distributive; and the former they say consisteth in proportion
 arithmeticall; the later in proportion geometricall. commutative
 therefore, they place in the equality of value of the things contracted
 for; and distributive, in the distribution of equall benefit, to men of
 equall merit. as if it were injustice to sell dearer than we buy; or to
 give more to man than merits. the value of all things contracted
 for, is measured by the appetite of the contractors: and therefore the
 just value, is that which they be contented to give. and merit (besides
 that which is by covenant, where the performance on one part, meriteth
 the performance of the other part, and falls under justice commutative,
 not distributive,) is not due by justice; but is rewarded of grace
 onely. and therefore this distinction, in the sense wherein it useth to
 be expounded, is not right. to speak properly, commutative justice,
 is the justice of contractor; that is, performance of covenant,
 in buying, and selling; hiring, and letting to hire; lending, and
 borrowing; exchanging, bartering, and other acts of contract.
 
and distributive justice, the justice of an arbitrator; that is to say,
 the act of defining what is just. wherein, (being trusted by them that
 make him arbitrator,) if performe his trust, is said to distribute
 to every man his own: and his is indeed just distribution, and may
 be called (though improperly) distributive justice; but more properly
 equity; which also is law of nature, as shall be shewn in due place.
 



the fourth law of nature, gratitude
 
as justice dependeth on antecedent covenant; so does gratitude depend
 on antecedent grace; that is to say, antecedent free-gift: and is the
 fourth law of nature; which may be conceived in this forme, "that man
 which receiveth benefit from another of meer grace, endeavour that he
 which giveth it, have reasonable cause to repent him of his good
 will." for man giveth, but with intention of good to himselfe;
 because gift is voluntary; and of all voluntary acts, the object is to
 every man his own good; of which if men see they shall be frustrated,
 there will be beginning of benevolence, or trust; nor consequently of
 mutuall help; nor of reconciliation of one man to another; and therefore
 they are to remain still in the condition of war; which is contrary to
 the first and fundamentall law of nature, which commandeth men to seek
 peace. the breach of this law, is called ingratitude; and hath the same
 relation to grace, that injustice hath to obligation by covenant.
 



the fifth, mutuall accommodation, or compleasance
 
fifth law of nature, is compleasance; that is to say, "that every
 man strive to accommodate himselfe to the rest." for the understanding
 whereof, we may consider, that there is in mens aptnesse to society;
 diversity of nature, rising from their diversity of affections; not
 unlike to that we see in stones brought together for building of an
 aedifice. for as that stone which by the asperity, and irregularity of
 figure, takes more room from others, than it selfe fills; and for
 the hardnesse, cannot be easily made plain, and thereby hindereth the
 building, is by the builders cast away as unprofitable, and troublesome:
 so also, man that by asperity of nature, will strive to retain those
 things which to himselfe are superfluous, and to others necessary; and
 for the stubbornness of his passions, cannot be corrected, is to be
 left, or cast out of society, as combersome thereunto. for seeing every
 man, not onely by right, but also by necessity of nature, is supposed
 to endeavour all can, to obtain that which is necessary for his
 conservation; that shall oppose himselfe against it, for things
 superfluous, is guilty of the warre that thereupon is to follow; and
 therefore doth that, which is contrary to the fundamentall law of
 nature, which commandeth to seek peace. the observers of this law,
 may be called sociable, (the latines call them commodi;) the contrary,
 stubborn, insociable, froward, intractable.
 



the sixth, facility to pardon
 
sixth law of nature is this, "that upon caution of the future time,
 man ought to pardon the offences past of them that repenting, desire
 it." for pardon, is nothing but granting of peace; which though granted
 to them that persevere in their hostility, be not peace, but feare; yet
 not granted to them that give caution of the future time, is signe of an
 aversion to peace; and therefore contrary to the law of nature.
 



the seventh, that in revenges, men respect onely the future good
 
seventh is, " that in revenges, (that is, retribution of evil for
 evil,) men look not at the greatnesse of the evill past, but the
 greatnesse of the good to follow." whereby we are forbidden to inflict
 punishment with any other designe, than for correction of the offender,
 or direction of others. for this law is consequent to the next before
 it, that commandeth pardon, upon security of the future time. besides,
 revenge without respect to the example, and profit to come, is a
 triumph, or glorying in the hurt of another, tending to end; (for the
 end is alwayes somewhat to come;) and glorying to end, is vain-glory,
 and contrary to reason; and to hurt without reason, tendeth to the
 introduction of warre; which is against the law of nature; and is
 commonly stiled by the name of cruelty.
 



the eighth, against contumely
 
and because all signes of hatred, or contempt, provoke to fight;
 insomuch as most men choose rather to hazard their life, than not to be
 revenged; we may in the eighth place, for law of nature set down this
 precept, "that man by deed, word, countenance, or gesture, declare
 hatred, or contempt of another." the breach of which law, is commonly
 called contumely.
 



the ninth, against pride
 
the question who is the better man, has place in the condition of
 meer nature; where, (as has been shewn before,) all men are equall. the
 inequallity that now is, has been introduced by the lawes civill. i know
 that aristotle in the first booke of his politiques, for foundation of
 his doctrine, maketh men by nature, some more worthy to command, meaning
 the wiser sort (such as thought himselfe to be for his philosophy;)
 others to serve, (meaning those that had strong bodies, but were not
 philosophers as he;) as if master and servant were not introduced by
 consent of men, but by difference of wit; which is not only against
 reason; but also against experience. for there are very few so foolish,
 that had not rather governe themselves, than be governed by others:
 nor when the wise in their own conceit, contend by force, with them who
 distrust their owne wisdome, do they alwaies, or often, or almost at any
 time, get the victory. if nature therefore have made men equall, that
 equalitie is to be acknowledged; or if nature have made men unequall;
 yet because men that think themselves equall, will not enter into
 conditions of peace, but upon equall termes, such equalitie must be
 admitted. and therefore for the ninth law of nature, i put this, "that
 every man acknowledge other for his equall by nature." the breach of
 this precept is pride.
 



the tenth against arrogance
 
on this law, dependeth another, "that at the entrance into conditions of
 peace, man require to reserve to himselfe any right, which is not
 content should be reserved to every one of the rest." as it is necessary
 for all men that seek peace, to lay down certaine rights of nature; that
 is to say, not to have libertie to do all they list: so is it necessarie
 for mans life, to retaine some; as right to governe their owne bodies;
 enjoy aire, water, motion, waies to go from place to place; and all
 things else without which man cannot live, or not live well. if in
 this case, at the making of peace, men require for themselves, that
 which they would not have to be granted to others, they do contrary
 to the precedent law, that commandeth the acknowledgement of naturall
 equalitie, and therefore also against the law of nature. the observers
 of this law, are those we call modest, and the breakers arrogant men.
 the greeks call the violation of this law pleonexia; that is, desire
 of more than their share.
 



the eleventh equity
 
also "if man be trusted to judge between man and man," it is precept
 of the law of nature, "that deale equally between them." for without
 that, the controversies of men cannot be determined but by warre.
 therefore that is partiall in judgment, doth what in him lies, to
 deterre men from the use of judges, and arbitrators; and consequently,
 (against the fundamentall lawe of nature) is the cause of warre.
 
the observance of this law, from the equall distribution to each man, of
 that which in reason belongeth to him, is called equity, and (as i have
 sayd before) distributive justice: the violation, acception of persons,
 prosopolepsia.
 



the twelfth, equall use of things common
 
and from this followeth another law, "that such things as cannot be
 divided, be enjoyed in common, if it can be; and if the quantity of the
 thing permit, without stint; otherwise proportionably to the number of
 them that have right." for otherwise the distribution is unequall, and
 contrary to equitie.
 



the thirteenth, of lot
 
but some things there be, that can neither be divided, nor enjoyed in
 common. then, the law of nature, which prescribeth equity, requireth,
 "that the entire right; or else, (making the use alternate,) the first
 possession, be determined by lot." for equall distribution, is of
 the law of nature; and other means of equall distribution cannot be
 imagined.
 



the fourteenth, of primogeniture, and first seising
 
of lots there be two sorts, arbitrary, and naturall. arbitrary, is
 that which is agreed on by the competitors; naturall, is either
 primogeniture, (which the greek calls kleronomia, which signifies, given
 by lot;) or first seisure.
 
and therefore those things which cannot be enjoyed in common, nor
 divided, ought to be adjudged to the first possessor; and is some cases
 to the first-borne, as acquired by lot.
 



the fifteenth, of mediators
 
it is also law of nature, "that all men that mediate peace, be allowed
 safe conduct." for the law that commandeth peace, as the end, commandeth
 intercession, as the means; and to intercession the means is safe
 conduct.
 



the sixteenth, of submission to arbitrement
 
and because, though men be never so willing to observe these lawes,
 there may neverthelesse arise questions concerning mans action; first,
 whether it were done, or not done; secondly (if done) whether against
 the law, or not against the law; the former whereof, is called a
 question of fact; the later question of right; therefore unlesse the
 parties to the question, covenant mutually to stand to the sentence
 of another, they are as farre from peace as ever. this other, to whose
 sentence they submit, is called an arbitrator. and therefore it is of
 the law of nature, "that they that are at controversie, submit their
 right to the judgement of an arbitrator."
 



the seventeenth, man is his own judge
 
and seeing every man is presumed to do all things in order to his own
 benefit, man is fit arbitrator in his own cause: and if were
 never so fit; yet equity allowing to each party equall benefit, if one
 be admitted to be judge, the other is to be admitted also; & so the
 controversie, that is, the cause of war, remains, against the law of
 nature.
 



the eighteenth, man to be judge, that has in him cause of partiality
 
for the same reason man in any cause ought to be received for
 arbitrator, to whom greater profit, or honour, or pleasure apparently
 ariseth out of the victory of one party, than of the other: for hath
 taken (though an unavoydable bribe, yet) bribe; and man can be
 obliged to trust him. and thus also the controversie, and the condition
 of war remaineth, contrary to the law of nature.
 



the nineteenth, of witnesse
 
and in controversie of fact, the judge being to give more credit
 to one, than to the other, (if there be other arguments) must give
 credit to third; or to third and fourth; or more: for else the
 question is undecided, and left to force, contrary to the law of nature.
 
these are the lawes of nature, dictating peace, for means of the
 conservation of men in multitudes; and which onely concern the doctrine
 of civill society. there be other things tending to the destruction of
 particular men; as drunkenness, and all other parts of intemperance;
 which may therefore also be reckoned amongst those things which the law
 of nature hath forbidden; but are not necessary to be mentioned, nor are
 pertinent enough to this place.
 



rule, by which the laws of nature may easily be examined
 
and though this may seem too subtile deduction of the lawes of nature,
 to be taken notice of by all men; whereof the most part are too busie in
 getting food, and the rest too negligent to understand; yet to leave
 all men unexcusable, they have been contracted into one easie sum,
 intelligible even to the meanest capacity; and that is, "do not that to
 another, which thou wouldest not have done to thy selfe;" which sheweth
 him, that has more to do in learning the lawes of nature, but,
 when weighing the actions of other men with his own, they seem too
 heavy, to put them into the other part of the ballance, and his own into
 their place, that his own passions, and selfe-love, may adde nothing to
 the weight; and then there is none of these lawes of nature that will
 not appear unto him very reasonable.
 



the lawes of nature oblige in conscience alwayes,
 
but in effect then onely when there is security the lawes of nature
 oblige in foro interno; that is to say, they bind to desire they
 should take place: but in foro externo; that is, to the putting them
 in act, not alwayes. for that should be modest, and tractable, and
 performe all promises, in such time, and place, where man els
 should do so, should but make himselfe prey to others, and procure his
 own certain ruine, contrary to the ground of all lawes of nature, which
 tend to natures preservation. and again, that shall observe the same
 lawes towards him, observes them not himselfe, seeketh not peace, but
 war; & consequently the destruction of his nature by violence.
 
and whatsoever lawes bind in foro interno, may be broken, not onely by
 fact contrary to the law but also by fact according to it, in case a
 man think it contrary. for though his action in this case, be according
 to the law; which where the obligation is in foro interno, is breach.
 



the laws of nature are eternal;
 
the lawes of nature are immutable and eternall, for injustice,
 ingratitude, arrogance, pride, iniquity, acception of persons, and the
 rest, can never be made lawfull. for it can never be that warre shall
 preserve life, and peace destroy it.
 



and yet easie
 
the same lawes, because they oblige onely to desire, and endeavour, i
 mean an unfeigned and constant endeavour, are easie to be observed. for
 in that they require nothing but endeavour; that endeavoureth their
 performance, fulfilleth them; and that fulfilleth the law, is just.
 



the science of these lawes, is the true morall philosophy
 
and the science of them, is the true and onely moral philosophy. for
 morall philosophy is nothing else but the science of what is good, and
 evill, in the conversation, and society of mankind. good, and evill,
 are names that signifie our appetites, and aversions; which in different
 tempers, customes, and doctrines of men, are different: and divers men,
 differ not onely in their judgement, on the senses of what is pleasant,
 and unpleasant to the tast, smell, hearing, touch, and sight; but also
 of what is conformable, or disagreeable to reason, in the actions of
 common life. nay, the same man, in divers times, differs from himselfe;
 and one time praiseth, that is, calleth good, what another time
 dispraiseth, and calleth evil: from whence arise disputes,
 controversies, and at last war. and therefore so long as man is in the
 condition of meer nature, (which is condition of war,) as private
 appetite is the measure of good, and evill: and consequently all men
 agree on this, that peace is good, and therefore also the way, or
 means of peace, which (as i have shewed before) are justice, gratitude,
 modesty, equity, mercy, & the rest of the laws of nature, are good; that
 is to say, morall vertues; and their contrarie vices, evill. now the
 science of vertue and vice, is morall philosophie; and therfore the true
 doctrine of the lawes of nature, is the true morall philosophie. but the
 writers of morall philosophie, though they acknowledge the same vertues
 and vices; yet not seeing wherein consisted their goodnesse; nor that
 they come to be praised, as the meanes of peaceable, sociable, and
 comfortable living; place them in mediocrity of passions: as if not
 the cause, but the degree of daring, made fortitude; or not the cause,
 but the quantity of gift, made liberality.
 
these dictates of reason, men use to call by the name of lawes; but
 improperly: for they are but conclusions, or theoremes concerning what
 conduceth to the conservation and defence of themselves; whereas law,
 properly is the word of him, that by right hath command over others. but
 yet if we consider the same theoremes, as delivered in the word of
 god, that by right commandeth all things; then are they properly called
 lawes.
 


chapter xvi. of persons, authors, and things personated
 


person what
 
person, is "whose words or actions are considered, either as his
 own, or as representing the words or actions of an other man, or of any
 other thing to whom they are attributed, whether truly or by fiction."
 



person naturall, and artificiall
 
when they are considered as his owne, then is called naturall
 person: and when they are considered as representing the words and
 actions of an other, then is feigned or artificiall person.
 



the word person, whence
 
the word person is latine: instead whereof the greeks have prosopon,
 which signifies the face, as persona in latine signifies the disguise,
 or outward appearance of man, counterfeited on the stage; and somtimes
 more particularly that part of it, which disguiseth the face, as mask
 or visard: and from the stage, hath been translated to any representer
 of speech and action, as well in tribunalls, as theaters. so that a
 person, is the same that an actor is, both on the stage and in common
 conversation; and to personate, is to act, or represent himselfe, or an
 other; and that acteth another, is said to beare his person, or
 act in his name; (in which sence cicero useth it where saies, "unus
 sustineo tres personas; mei, adversarii, & judicis, i beare three
 persons; my own, my adversaries, and the judges;") and is called in
 diverse occasions, diversly; as representer, or representative, a
 lieutenant, vicar, an attorney, deputy, procurator, an actor, and
 the like.
 



actor, author; authority
 
of persons artificiall, some have their words and actions owned by
 those whom they represent. and then the person is the actor; and that
 owneth his words and actions, is the author: in which case the
 actor acteth by authority. for that which in speaking of goods and
 possessions, is called an owner, and in latine dominus, in greeke
 kurios; speaking of actions, is called author. and as the right of
 possession, is called dominion; so the right of doing any action, is
 called authority. so that by authority, is alwayes understood right
 of doing any act: and done by authority, done by commission, or licence
 from him whose right it is.
 



covenants by authority, bind the author
 
from hence it followeth, that when the actor maketh covenant by
 authority, bindeth thereby the author, lesse than if had made
 it himselfe; and lesse subjecteth him to all the consequences of the
 same. and therfore all that hath been said formerly, (chap. 14) of the
 nature of covenants between man and man in their naturall capacity,
 is true also when they are made by their actors, representers, or
 procurators, that have authority from them, so far-forth as is in their
 commission, but farther.
 
and therefore that maketh covenant with the actor, or representer,
 not knowing the authority hath, doth it at his own perill. for man
 is obliged by covenant, whereof is not author; nor consequently by
 covenant made against, or beside the authority gave.
 



but not the actor
 
when the actor doth any thing against the law of nature by command of
 the author, if be obliged by former covenant to obey him, not he, but
 the author breaketh the law of nature: for though the action be against
 the law of nature; yet it is not his: but contrarily; to refuse to do
 it, is against the law of nature, that forbiddeth breach of covenant.
 



the authority is to be shewne
 
and that maketh covenant with the author, by mediation of the
 actor, not knowing what authority hath, but onely takes his word;
 in case such authority be not made manifest unto him upon demand, is
 longer obliged: for the covenant made with the author, is not valid,
 without his counter-assurance. but if that so covenanteth, knew
 before hand was to expect other assurance, than the actors word;
 then is the covenant valid; because the actor in this case maketh
 himselfe the author. and therefore, as when the authority is evident,
 the covenant obligeth the author, not the actor; so when the authority
 is feigned, it obligeth the actor onely; there being author but
 himselfe.
 



things personated, inanimate
 
there are few things, that are uncapable of being represented by
 fiction. inanimate things, as church, an hospital, bridge, may
 be personated by rector, master, or overseer. but things inanimate,
 cannot be authors, nor therefore give authority to their actors: yet the
 actors may have authority to procure their maintenance, given them by
 those that are owners, or governours of those things. and therefore,
 such things cannot be personated, before there be some state of civill
 government.
 



irrational
 
likewise children, fooles, and mad-men that have use of reason, may
 be personated by guardians, or curators; but can be authors (during
 that time) of any action done by them, longer then (when they shall
 recover the use of reason) they shall judge the same reasonable.
 yet during the folly, that hath right of governing them, may give
 authority to the guardian. but this again has place but in state
 civill, because before such estate, there is dominion of persons.
 



false gods
 
an idol, or meer figment of the brain, may be personated; as were the
 gods of the heathen; which by such officers as the state appointed, were
 personated, and held possessions, and other goods, and rights, which men
 from time to time dedicated, and consecrated unto them. but idols cannot
 be authors: for idol is nothing. the authority proceeded from the
 state: and therefore before introduction of civill government, the gods
 of the heathen could not be personated.
 



the true god
 
the true god may be personated. as was; first, by moses; who governed
 the israelites, (that were not his, but gods people,) not in his own
 name, with hoc dicit moses; but in gods name, with hoc dicit dominus.
 secondly, by the of man, his own our blessed saviour jesus
 christ, that came to reduce the jewes, and induce all nations into the
 kingdome of his father; not as of himselfe, but as sent from his father.
 and thirdly, by the holy ghost, or comforter, speaking, and working
 in the apostles: which holy ghost, was comforter that came not of
 himselfe; but was sent, and proceeded from them both.
 



multitude of men, how one person
 
multitude of men, are made one person, when they are by one man, or
 one person, represented; so that it be done with the consent of
 every one of that multitude in particular. for it is the unity of the
 representer, not the unity of the represented, that maketh the person
 one. and it is the representer that beareth the person, and but one
 person: and unity, cannot otherwise be understood in multitude.
 



every one is author
 
and because the multitude naturally is not one, but many; they cannot
 be understood for one; but many authors, of every thing their
 representative faith, or doth in their name; every man giving their
 common representer, authority from himselfe in particular; and owning
 all the actions the representer doth, in case they give him authority
 without stint: otherwise, when they limit him in what, and how farre
 shall represent them, none of them owneth more, than they gave him
 commission to act.
 



an actor may be many men made one by plurality of voyces
 
and if the representative consist of many men, the voyce of the greater
 number, must be considered as the voyce of them all. for if the lesser
 number pronounce (for example) in the affirmative, and the greater in
 the negative, there will be negatives more than enough to destroy
 the affirmatives; and thereby the excesse of negatives, standing
 uncontradicted, are the onely voyce the representative hath.
 



representatives, when the number is even, unprofitable
 
and representative of even number, especially when the number is
 not great, whereby the contradictory voyces are oftentimes equall, is
 therefore oftentimes mute, and uncapable of action. yet in some cases
 contradictory voyces equall in number, may determine question; as in
 condemning, or absolving, equality of votes, even in that they condemne
 not, do absolve; but not on the contrary condemne, in that they absolve
 not. for when cause is heard; not to condemne, is to absolve; but on
 the contrary, to say that not absolving, is condemning, is not true. the
 like it is in deliberation of executing presently, or deferring
 till another time; for when the voyces are equall, the not decreeing
 execution, is decree of dilation.
 



negative voyce
 
or if the number be odde, as three, or more, (men, or assemblies;)
 whereof every one has by negative voice, authority to take away the
 effect of all the affirmative voices of the rest, this number is no
 representative; because by the diversity of opinions, and interests of
 men, it becomes oftentimes, and in cases of the greatest consequence, a
 mute person, and unapt, as for may things else, so for the government of
 multitude, especially in time of warre.
 
of authors there be two sorts. the first simply so called; which i have
 before defined to be him, that owneth the action of another simply.
 the second is he, that owneth an action, or covenant of another
 conditionally; that is to say, undertaketh to do it, if the
 other doth it not, at, or before certain time. and these authors
 conditionall, are generally called suretyes, in latine fidejussores, and
 sponsores; and particularly for debt, praedes; and for appearance before
 judge, or magistrate, vades.
 




part ii.
 of common-wealth
 



chapter xvii. of the causes, generation, and definition of a
 common-wealth
 



the end of common-wealth, particular security
 
the finall cause, end, or designe of men, (who naturally love liberty,
 and dominion over others,) in the introduction of that restraint upon
 themselves, (in which wee see them live in common-wealths,) is the
 foresight of their own preservation, and of more contented life
 thereby; that is to say, of getting themselves out from that miserable
 condition of warre, which is necessarily consequent (as hath been shewn)
 to the naturall passions of men, when there is visible power to keep
 them in awe, and tye them by feare of punishment to the performance of
 their covenants, and observation of these lawes of nature set down in
 the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters.
 



which is not to be had from the law of nature:
 
for the lawes of nature (as justice, equity, modesty, mercy, and (in
 summe) doing to others, as wee would be done to,) if themselves, without
 the terrour of some power, to cause them to be observed, are contrary to
 our naturall passions, that carry us to partiality, pride, revenge, and
 the like. and covenants, without the sword, are but words, and of no
 strength to secure man at all. therefore notwithstanding the lawes of
 nature, (which every one hath then kept, when has the will to keep
 them, when can do it safely,) if there be power erected, or not
 great enough for our security; every man will and may lawfully rely on
 his own strength and art, for caution against all other men. and in all
 places, where men have lived by small families, to robbe and spoyle one
 another, has been trade, and so farre from being reputed against the
 law of nature, that the greater spoyles they gained, the greater was
 their honour; and men observed other lawes therein, but the lawes of
 honour; that is, to abstain from cruelty, leaving to men their lives,
 and instruments of husbandry. and as small familyes did then; so now
 do cities and kingdomes which are but greater families (for their own
 security) enlarge their dominions, upon all pretences of danger, and
 fear of invasion, or assistance that may be given to invaders, endeavour
 as much as they can, to subdue, or weaken their neighbours, by open
 force, and secret arts, for want of other caution, justly; and are
 remembred for it in after ages with honour.
 



nor from the conjunction of few men or familyes
 
nor is it the joyning together of small number of men, that gives them
 this security; because in small numbers, small additions on the one side
 or the other, make the advantage of strength so great, as is sufficient
 to carry the victory; and therefore gives encouragement to an invasion.
 the multitude sufficient to confide in for our security, is not
 determined by any certain number, but by comparison with the enemy we
 feare; and is then sufficient, when the odds of the enemy is not of so
 visible and conspicuous moment, to determine the event of warre, as to
 move him to attempt.
 



nor from great multitude, unlesse directed by one judgement
 
and be there never so great multitude; yet if their actions be
 directed according to their particular judgements, and particular
 appetites, they can expect thereby defence, nor protection, neither
 against common enemy, nor against the injuries of one another. for
 being distracted in opinions concerning the best use and application
 of their strength, they do not help, but hinder one another; and reduce
 their strength by mutuall opposition to nothing: whereby they are
 easily, not onely subdued by very few that agree together; but also
 when there is common enemy, they make warre upon each other, for
 their particular interests. for if we could suppose great multitude of
 men to consent in the observation of justice, and other lawes of nature,
 without common power to keep them all in awe; we might as well suppose
 all man-kind to do the same; and then there neither would be nor need to
 be any civill government, or common-wealth at all; because there would
 be peace without subjection.
 



and that continually
 
nor is it enough for the security, which men desire should last all
 the time of their life, that they be governed, and directed by one
 judgement, for limited time; as in one battell, or one warre. for
 though they obtain victory by their unanimous endeavour against a
 forraign enemy; yet afterwards, when either they have common enemy,
 or that by one part is held for an enemy, is by another part held for
 friend, they must needs by the difference of their interests dissolve,
 and fall again into warre amongst themselves.
 



why certain creatures without reason, or speech,
 



do neverthelesse live in society, without any coercive power
 
it is true, that certain living creatures, as bees, and ants, live
 sociably one with another, (which are therefore by aristotle numbred
 amongst politicall creatures;) and yet have other direction, than
 their particular judgements and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of
 them can signifie to another, what thinks expedient for the common
 benefit: and therefore some man may perhaps desire to know, why man-kind
 cannot do the same. to which i answer,
 
first, that men are continually in competition for honour and dignity,
 which these creatures are not; and consequently amongst men there
 ariseth on that ground, envy and hatred, and finally warre; but amongst
 these not so.
 
secondly, that amongst these creatures, the common good differeth not
 from the private; and being by nature enclined to their private, they
 procure thereby the common benefit. but man, whose joy consisteth
 in comparing himselfe with other men, can relish nothing but what is
 eminent.
 
thirdly, that these creatures, having not (as man) the use of reason,
 do not see, nor think they see any fault, in the administration of their
 common businesse: whereas amongst men, there are very many, that thinke
 themselves wiser, and abler to govern the publique, better than the
 rest; and these strive to reforme and innovate, one this way, another
 that way; and thereby bring it into distraction and civill warre.
 
fourthly, that these creatures, though they have some use of voice, in
 making knowne to one another their desires, and other affections; yet
 they want that art of words, by which some men can represent to others,
 that which is good, in the likenesse of evill; and evill, in the
 likenesse of good; and augment, or diminish the apparent greatnesse of
 good and evill; discontenting men, and troubling their peace at their
 pleasure.
 
fiftly, irrationall creatures cannot distinguish betweene injury, and
 dammage; and therefore as long as they be at ease, they are not offended
 with their fellowes: whereas man is then most troublesome, when is
 most at ease: for then it is that loves to shew his wisdome, and
 controule the actions of them that governe the common-wealth.
 
lastly, the agreement of these creatures is naturall; that of men, is
 by covenant only, which is artificiall: and therefore it is wonder
 if there be somewhat else required (besides covenant) to make their
 agreement constant and lasting; which is common power, to keep them in
 awe, and to direct their actions to the common benefit.
 



the generation of common-wealth
 
the only way to erect such common power, as may be able to defend them
 from the invasion of forraigners, and the injuries of one another, and
 thereby to secure them in such sort, as that by their owne industrie,
 and by the fruites of the earth, they may nourish themselves and live
 contentedly; is, to conferre all their power and strength upon one
 man, or upon one assembly of men, that may reduce all their wills,
 by plurality of voices, unto one will: which is as much as to say, to
 appoint one man, or assembly of men, to beare their person; and every
 one to owne, and acknowledge himselfe to be author of whatsoever he
 that so beareth their person, shall act, or cause to be acted, in those
 things which concerne the common peace and safetie; and therein to
 submit their wills, every one to his will, and their judgements, to his
 judgment. this is more than consent, or concord; it is reall unitie of
 them all, in one and the same person, made by covenant of every man with
 every man, in such manner, as if every man should say to every man, "i
 authorise and give up my right of governing my selfe, to this man, or to
 this assembly of men, on this condition, that thou give up thy right
 to him, and authorise all his actions in like manner." this done, the
 multitude so united in one person, is called common-wealth, in latine
 civitas. this is the generation of that great leviathan, or rather (to
 speake more reverently) of that mortall god, to which wee owe under the
 immortall god, our peace and defence. for by this authoritie, given him
 by every particular man in the common-wealth, hath the use of so
 much power and strength conferred on him, that by terror thereof, is
 inabled to forme the wills of them all, to peace at home, and mutuall
 ayd against their enemies abroad.
 



the definition of common-wealth
 
and in him consisteth the essence of the common-wealth; which (to
 define it,) is "one person, of whose acts great multitude, by mutuall
 covenants one with another, have made themselves every one the author,
 to the end may use the strength and means of them all, as shall
 think expedient, for their peace and common defence."
 



soveraigne, and subject, what
 
and that carryeth this person, as called soveraigne, and said to have
 soveraigne power; and every one besides, his subject.
 
the attaining to this soveraigne power, is by two wayes. one, by
 naturall force; as when man maketh his children, to submit themselves,
 and their children to his government, as being able to destroy them if
 they refuse, or by warre subdueth his enemies to his will, giving them
 their lives on that condition. the other, is when men agree amongst
 themselves, to submit to some man, or assembly of men, voluntarily, on
 confidence to be protected by him against all others. this later, may be
 called politicall common-wealth, or common-wealth by institution; and
 the former, common-wealth by acquisition. and first, i shall speak of
 common-wealth by institution.
 


chapter xviii. of the rights of soveraignes by institution
 



the act of instituting common-wealth, what
 
common-wealth is said to be instituted, when multitude of men do
 agree, and covenant, every one with every one, that to whatsoever man,
 or assembly of men, shall be given by the major part, the right
 to present the person of them all, (that is to say, to be their
 representative;) every one, as well that voted for it, as that
 voted against it, shall authorise all the actions and judgements, of
 that man, or assembly of men, in the same manner, as if they were his
 own, to the end, to live peaceably amongst themselves, and be protected
 against other men.
 



the consequences to such institution, are
 



1. the subjects cannot change the forme of government
 



from this institution of common-wealth are derived all the rights, and
 facultyes of him, or them, on whom the soveraigne power is conferred by
 the consent of the people assembled.
 
first, because they covenant, it is to be understood, they are not
 obliged by former covenant to any thing repugnant hereunto. and
 consequently they that have already instituted common-wealth, being
 thereby bound by covenant, to own the actions, and judgements of one,
 cannot lawfully make new covenant, amongst themselves, to be obedient
 to any other, in any thing whatsoever, without his permission. and
 therefore, they that are subjects to monarch, cannot without his leave
 cast off monarchy, and return to the confusion of disunited multitude;
 nor transferre their person from him that beareth it, to another man,
 or other assembly of men: for they are bound, every man to every man,
 to own, and be reputed author of all, that that already is their
 soveraigne, shall do, and judge fit to be done: so that any one man
 dissenting, all the rest should break their covenant made to that man,
 which is injustice: and they have also every man given the soveraignty
 to him that beareth their person; and therefore if they depose him,
 they take from him that which is his own, and so again it is injustice.
 besides, if that attempteth to depose his soveraign, be killed, or
 punished by him for such attempt, is author of his own punishment,
 as being by the institution, author of all his soveraign shall do: and
 because it is injustice for man to do any thing, for which may be
 punished by his own authority, is also upon that title, unjust.
 and whereas some men have pretended for their disobedience to their
 soveraign, new covenant, made, not with men, but with god; this also
 is unjust: for there is covenant with god, but by mediation of some
 body that representeth gods person; which none doth but gods lieutenant,
 who hath the soveraignty under god. but this pretence of covenant with
 god, is so evident lye, even in the pretenders own consciences, that
 it is not onely an act of an unjust, but also of vile, and unmanly
 disposition.
 



2. soveraigne power cannot be forfeited
 
secondly, because the right of bearing the person of them all, is given
 to him they make soveraigne, by covenant onely of one to another, and
 not of him to any of them; there can happen breach of covenant on the
 part of the soveraigne; and consequently none of his subjects, by any
 pretence of forfeiture, can be freed from his subjection. that which
 is made soveraigne maketh covenant with his subjects beforehand, is
 manifest; because either must make it with the whole multitude, as
 one party to the covenant; or must make severall covenant with
 every man. with the whole, as one party, it is impossible; because as
 yet they are not one person: and if make so many severall covenants
 as there be men, those covenants after hath the soveraignty are voyd,
 because what act soever can be pretended by any one of them for breach
 thereof, is the act both of himselfe, and of all the rest, because done
 in the person, and by the right of every one of them in particular.
 besides, if any one, or more of them, pretend breach of the covenant
 made by the soveraigne at his institution; and others, or one other of
 his subjects, or himselfe alone, pretend there was such breach,
 there is in this case, judge to decide the controversie: it returns
 therefore to the sword again; and every man recovereth the right of
 protecting himselfe by his own strength, contrary to the designe they
 had in the institution. it is therefore in vain to grant soveraignty by
 way of precedent covenant. the opinion that any monarch receiveth his
 power by covenant, that is to say on condition, proceedeth from want
 of understanding this easie truth, that covenants being but words, and
 breath, have force to oblige, contain, constrain, or protect any man,
 but what it has from the publique sword; that is, from the untyed hands
 of that man, or assembly of men that hath the soveraignty, and whose
 actions are avouched by them all, and performed by the strength of them
 all, in him united. but when an assembly of men is made soveraigne; then
 man imagineth any such covenant to have past in the institution; for
 man is so dull as to say, for example, the people of rome, made
 covenant with the romans, to hold the soveraignty on such or such
 conditions; which not performed, the romans might lawfully depose the
 roman people. that men see not the reason to be alike in monarchy, and
 in popular government, proceedeth from the ambition of some, that
 are kinder to the government of an assembly, whereof they may hope to
 participate, than of monarchy, which they despair to enjoy.
 



3. man can without injustice protest against the institution of the
 soveraigne declared by the major part.
 
thirdly, because the major part hath by consenting voices declared a
 soveraigne; that dissented must now consent with the rest; that is,
 be contented to avow all the actions shall do, or else justly be
 destroyed by the rest. for if voluntarily entered into the
 congregation of them that were assembled, sufficiently declared
 thereby his will (and therefore tacitely covenanted) to stand to what
 the major part should ordayne: and therefore if refuse to stand
 thereto, or make protestation against any of their decrees, does
 contrary to his covenant, and therfore unjustly. and whether be of
 the congregation, or not; and whether his consent be asked, or not, he
 must either submit to their decrees, or be left in the condition of
 warre was in before; wherein might without injustice be destroyed
 by any man whatsoever.
 



4. the soveraigns actions cannot be justly accused by the subject
 
fourthly, because every subject is by this institution author of all the
 actions, and judgements of the soveraigne instituted; it followes, that
 whatsoever doth, it can be injury to any of his subjects; nor
 ought to be by any of them accused of injustice. for that doth any
 thing by authority from another, doth therein injury to him by whose
 authority acteth: but by this institution of common-wealth, every
 particular man is author of all the soveraigne doth; and consequently
 that complaineth of injury from his soveraigne, complaineth of that
 whereof himselfe is author; and therefore ought not to accuse any man
 but himselfe; nor himselfe of injury; because to do injury to ones
 selfe, is impossible. it is true that they that have soveraigne
 power, may commit iniquity; but not injustice, or injury in the proper
 signification.
 



5. what soever the soveraigne doth, is unpunishable by the subject
 
fiftly, and consequently to that which was sayd last, man that hath
 soveraigne power can justly be put to death, or otherwise in any manner
 by his subjects punished. for seeing every subject is author of the
 actions of his soveraigne; punisheth another, for the actions
 committed by himselfe.
 



6. the soveraigne is judge of what is necessary for the peace and
 defence of his subjects
 
and because the end of this institution, is the peace and defence of
 them all; and whosoever has right to the end, has right to the means;
 it belongeth of right, to whatsoever man, or assembly that hath the
 soveraignty, to be judge both of the meanes of peace and defence;
 and also of the hindrances, and disturbances of the same; and to do
 whatsoever shall think necessary to be done, both beforehand, for the
 preserving of peace and security, by prevention of discord at home and
 hostility from abroad; and, when peace and security are lost, for the
 recovery of the same. and therefore,
 



and judge of what doctrines are fit to be taught them
 
sixtly, it is annexed to the soveraignty, to be judge of what opinions
 and doctrines are averse, and what conducing to peace; and consequently,
 on what occasions, how farre, and what, men are to be trusted withall,
 in speaking to multitudes of people; and who shall examine the doctrines
 of all bookes before they be published. for the actions of men proceed
 from their opinions; and in the wel governing of opinions, consisteth
 the well governing of mens actions, in order to their peace, and
 concord. and though in matter of doctrine, nothing ought to be regarded
 but the truth; yet this is not repugnant to regulating of the same by
 peace. for doctrine repugnant to peace, can more be true, than peace
 and concord can be against the law of nature. it is true, that in
 common-wealth, where by the negligence, or unskilfullnesse of
 governours, and teachers, false doctrines are by time generally
 received; the contrary truths may be generally offensive; yet the most
 sudden, and rough busling in of new truth, that can be, does never
 breake the peace, but onely somtimes awake the warre. for those men that
 are so remissely governed, that they dare take up armes, to defend, or
 introduce an opinion, are still in warre; and their condition not peace,
 but only cessation of armes for feare of one another; and they live
 as it were, in the procincts of battaile continually. it belongeth
 therefore to him that hath the soveraign power, to be judge, or
 constitute all judges of opinions and doctrines, as thing necessary to
 peace, thereby to prevent discord and civill warre.
 



7. the right of making rules, whereby the subject may every man know
 what is so his owne, as other subject can without injustice take it
 from him
 
seventhly, is annexed to the soveraigntie, the whole power of
 prescribing the rules, whereby every man may know, what goods may
 enjoy and what actions may doe, without being molested by any of
 his fellow subjects: and this is it men call propriety. for before
 constitution of soveraign power (as hath already been shewn) all men had
 right to all things; which necessarily causeth warre: and therefore this
 proprietie, being necessary to peace, and depending on soveraign power,
 is the act of the power, in order to the publique peace. these rules of
 propriety (or meum and tuum) and of good, evill, lawfull and unlawfull
 in the actions of subjects, are the civill lawes, that is to say, the
 lawes of each commonwealth in particular; though the name of civill law
 be now restrained to the antient civill lawes of the city of rome; which
 being the head of great part of the world, her lawes at that time were
 in these parts the civill law.
 



8. to him also belongeth the right of all judicature and decision of
 controversies:
 
eightly, is annexed to the soveraigntie, the right of judicature; that
 is to say, of hearing and deciding all controversies, which may arise
 concerning law, either civill, or naturall, or concerning fact. for
 without the decision of controversies, there is protection of one
 subject, against the injuries of another; the lawes concerning meum and
 tuum are in vaine; and to every man remaineth, from the naturall and
 necessary appetite of his own conservation, the right of protecting
 himselfe by his private strength, which is the condition of warre; and
 contrary to the end for which every common-wealth is instituted.
 



9. and of making war, and peace, as shall think best:
 
ninthly, is annexed to the soveraignty, the right of making warre, and
 peace with other nations, and common-wealths; that is to say, of
 judging when it is for the publique good, and how great forces are to
 be assembled, armed, and payd for that end; and to levy mony upon the
 subjects, to defray the expenses thereof. for the power by which the
 people are to be defended, consisteth in their armies; and the strength
 of an army, in the union of their strength under one command; which
 command the soveraign instituted, therefore hath; because the command
 of the militia, without other institution, maketh him that hath it
 soveraign. and therefore whosoever is made generall of an army, that
 hath the soveraign power is alwayes generallissimo.
 



10. and of choosing all counsellours, and ministers, both of peace, and
 warre:
 
tenthly, is annexed to the soveraignty, the choosing of all
 councellours, ministers, magistrates, and officers, both in peace, and
 war. for seeing the soveraign is charged with the end, which is the
 common peace and defence; is understood to have power to use such
 means, as shall think most fit for his discharge.
 



11. and of rewarding, and punishing, and that (where no
 former law hath determined the measure of it) arbitrary:
 
eleventhly, to the soveraign is committed the power of rewarding
 with riches, or honour; and of punishing with corporall, or pecuniary
 punishment, or with ignominy every subject according to the lawe hath
 formerly made; or if there be law made, according as shall judge
 most to conduce to the encouraging of men to serve the common-wealth, or
 deterring of them from doing dis-service to the same.
 



12. and of honour and order
 
lastly, considering what values men are naturally apt to set upon
 themselves; what respect they look for from others; and how little they
 value other men; from whence continually arise amongst them, emulation,
 quarrells, factions, and at last warre, to the destroying of one
 another, and diminution of their strength against common enemy; it
 is necessary that there be lawes of honour, and publique rate of the
 worth of such men as have deserved, or are able to deserve well of the
 common-wealth; and that there be force in the hands of some or other, to
 put those lawes in execution. but it hath already been shown, that not
 onely the whole militia, or forces of the common-wealth; but also the
 judicature of all controversies, is annexed to the soveraignty. to the
 soveraign therefore it belongeth also to give titles of honour; and to
 appoint what order of place, and dignity, each man shall hold; and what
 signes of respect, in publique or private meetings, they shall give to
 one another.
 



these rights are indivisible
 
these are the rights, which make the essence of soveraignty; and which
 are the markes, whereby man may discern in what man, or assembly
 of men, the soveraign power is placed, and resideth. for these are
 incommunicable, and inseparable. the power to coyn mony; to dispose of
 the estate and persons of infant heires; to have praeemption in
 markets; and all other statute praerogatives, may be transferred by the
 soveraign; and yet the power to protect his subject be retained. but if
 transferre the militia, retains the judicature in vain, for want
 of execution of the lawes; or if grant away the power of raising
 mony; the militia is in vain: or if give away the government of
 doctrines, men will be frighted into rebellion with the feare of
 spirits. and so if we consider any one of the said rights, we shall
 presently see, that the holding of all the rest, will produce no
 effect, in the conservation of peace and justice, the end for which all
 common-wealths are instituted. and this division is it, whereof it is
 said, "a kingdome divided in it selfe cannot stand:" for unlesse this
 division precede, division into opposite armies can never happen. if
 there had not first been an opinion received of the greatest part of
 england, that these powers were divided between the king, and the lords,
 and the house of commons, the people had never been divided, and
 fallen into this civill warre; first between those that disagreed
 in politiques; and after between the dissenters about the liberty of
 religion; which have so instructed men in this point of soveraign right,
 that there be few now (in england,) that do not see, that these rights
 are inseparable, and will be so generally acknowledged, at the next
 return of peace; and so continue, till their miseries are forgotten; and
 longer, except the vulgar be better taught than they have hetherto
 been.
 



and can by grant passe away without direct renouncing of the
 soveraign power
 
and because they are essentiall and inseparable rights, it follows
 necessarily, that in whatsoever, words any of them seem to be granted
 away, yet if the soveraign power it selfe be not in direct termes
 renounced, and the name of soveraign more given by the grantees to
 him that grants them, the grant is voyd: for when has granted all he
 can, if we grant back the soveraignty, all is restored, as inseparably
 annexed thereunto.
 



the power and honour of subjects vanisheth in the presence of the power
 soveraign
 
this great authority being indivisible, and inseparably annexed to the
 soveraignty, there is little ground for the opinion of them, that say of
 soveraign kings, though they be singulis majores, of greater power than
 every one of their subjects, yet they be universis minores, of lesse
 power than them all together. for if by all together, they mean not
 the collective body as one person, then all together, and every one,
 signifie the same; and the speech is absurd. but if by all together,
 they understand them as one person (which person the soveraign bears,)
 then the power of all together, is the same with the soveraigns power;
 and so again the speech is absurd; which absurdity they see well enough,
 when the soveraignty is in an assembly of the people; but in monarch
 they see it not; and yet the power of soveraignty is the same in
 whomsoever it be placed.
 
and as the power, so also the honour of the soveraign, ought to be
 greater, than that of any, or all the subjects. for in the soveraignty
 is the fountain of honour. the dignities of lord, earle, duke, and
 prince are his creatures. as in the presence of the master, the servants
 are equall, and without any honour at all; so are the subjects, in the
 presence of the soveraign. and though they shine some more, some lesse,
 when they are out of his sight; yet in his presence, they shine more
 than the starres in presence of the sun.
 



soveraigne power not hurtfull as the want of it, and the hurt proceeds
 for the greatest part from not submitting readily, to lesse
 
but man may here object, that the condition of subjects is very
 miserable; as being obnoxious to the lusts, and other irregular passions
 of him, or them that have so unlimited power in their hands. and
 commonly they that live under monarch, think it the fault of monarchy;
 and they that live under the government of democracy, or other
 soveraign assembly, attribute all the inconvenience to that forme of
 common-wealth; whereas the power in all formes, if they be perfect
 enough to protect them, is the same; not considering that the estate
 of man can never be without some incommodity or other; and that the
 greatest, that in any forme of government can possibly happen to the
 people in generall, is scarce sensible, in respect of the miseries, and
 horrible calamities, that accompany civill warre; or that dissolute
 condition of masterlesse men, without subjection to lawes, and a
 coercive power to tye their hands from rapine, and revenge: nor
 considering that the greatest pressure of soveraign governours,
 proceedeth not from any delight, or profit they can expect in the
 dammage, or weakening of their subjects, in whose vigor, consisteth
 their own selves, that unwillingly contributing to their own defence,
 make it necessary for their governours to draw from them what they can
 in time of peace, that they may have means on any emergent occasion, or
 sudden need, to resist, or take advantage on their enemies. for all men
 are by nature provided of notable multiplying glasses, (that is their
 passions and self-love,) through which, every little payment appeareth a
 great grievance; but are destitute of those prospective glasses, (namely
 morall and civill science,) to see farre off the miseries that hang
 over them, and cannot without such payments be avoyded.
 



chapter xix. of the severall kinds of common-wealth by institution,
 and of succession to the soveraigne power
 



the different formes of common-wealths but three
 
the difference of common-wealths, consisteth in the difference of the
 soveraign, or the person representative of all and every one of the
 multitude. and because the soveraignty is either in one man, or in an
 assembly of more than one; and into that assembly either every man hath
 right to enter, or not every one, but certain men distinguished from the
 rest; it is manifest, there can be but three kinds of common-wealth. for
 the representative must needs be one man, or more: and if more, then it
 is the assembly of all, or but of part. when the representative is one
 man, then is the common-wealth monarchy: when an assembly of all that
 will come together, then it is democracy, or popular common-wealth:
 when an assembly of part onely, then it is called an aristocracy.
 other kind of common-wealth there can be none: for either one, or
 more, or all must have the soveraign power (which i have shewn to be
 indivisible) entire.
 



tyranny and oligarchy, but different names of monarchy, and aristocracy
 
there be other names of government, in the histories, and books of
 policy; as tyranny, and oligarchy: but they are not the names of other
 formes of government, but of the same formes misliked. for they that
 are discontented under monarchy, call it tyranny; and they that are
 displeased with aristocracy, called it oligarchy: so also, they which
 find themselves grieved under democracy, call it anarchy, (which
 signifies want of government;) and yet i think man believes, that
 want of government, is any new kind of government: nor by the same
 reason ought they to believe, that the government is of one kind, when
 they like it, and another, when they mislike it, or are oppressed by the
 governours.
 



subordinate representatives dangerous
 
it is manifest, that men who are in absolute liberty, may, if they
 please, give authority to one man, to represent them every one; as
 well as give such authority to any assembly of men whatsoever; and
 consequently may subject themselves, if they think good, to monarch,
 as absolutely, as to any other representative. therefore, where there is
 already erected soveraign power, there can be other representative
 of the same people, but onely to certain particular ends, by the
 soveraign limited. for that were to erect two soveraigns; and every
 man to have his person represented by two actors, that by opposing one
 another, must needs divide that power, which (if men will live in peace)
 is indivisible, and thereby reduce the multitude into the condition of
 warre, contrary to the end for which all soveraignty is instituted. and
 therefore as it is absurd, to think that soveraign assembly, inviting
 the people of their dominion, to send up their deputies, with power
 to make known their advise, or desires, should therefore hold such
 deputies, rather than themselves, for the absolute representative of
 the people: so it is absurd also, to think the same in monarchy. and
 i know not how this so manifest truth, should of late be so little
 observed; that in monarchy, that had the soveraignty from descent
 of 600 years, was alone called soveraign, had the title of majesty from
 every one of his subjects, and was unquestionably taken by them
 for their king; was notwithstanding never considered as their
 representative; that name without contradiction passing for the title
 of those men, which at his command were sent up by the people to carry
 their petitions, and give him (if permitted it) their advise. which
 may serve as an admonition, for those that are the true, and absolute
 representative of people, to instruct men in the nature of that
 office, and to take heed how they admit of any other generall
 representation upon any occasion whatsoever, if they mean to discharge
 the truth committed to them.
 



comparison of monarchy, with soveraign assemblyes
 
the difference between these three kindes of common-wealth, consisteth
 not in the difference of power; but in the difference of convenience, or
 aptitude to produce the peace, and security of the people; for which end
 they were instituted. and to compare monarchy with the other two, we may
 observe; first, that whosoever beareth the person of the people, or
 is one of that assembly that bears it, beareth also his own naturall
 person. and though be carefull in his politique person to procure
 the common interest; yet is more, or lesse carefull to procure the
 private good of himselfe, his family, kindred and friends; and for the
 most part, if the publique interest chance to crosse the private, he
 preferrs the private: for the passions of men, are commonly more potent
 than their reason. from whence it follows, that where the publique and
 private interest are most closely united, there is the publique most
 advanced. now in monarchy, the private interest is the same with the
 publique. the riches, power, and honour of monarch arise onely from
 the riches, strength and reputation of his subjects. for king can
 be rich, nor glorious, nor secure; whose subjects are either poore, or
 contemptible, or too weak through want, or dissention, to maintain a
 war against their enemies: whereas in democracy, or aristocracy, the
 publique prosperity conferres not so much to the private fortune of one
 that is corrupt, or ambitious, as doth many times perfidious advice, a
 treacherous action, or civill warre.
 
secondly, that monarch receiveth counsell of whom, when, and where he
 pleaseth; and consequently may heare the opinion of men versed in the
 matter about which deliberates, of what rank or quality soever, and
 as long before the time of action, and with as much secrecy, as will.
 but when soveraigne assembly has need of counsell, none are admitted
 but such as have right thereto from the beginning; which for the
 most part are of those who have beene versed more in the acquisition
 of wealth than of knowledge; and are to give their advice in long
 discourses, which may, and do commonly excite men to action, but
 not governe them in it. for the understanding is by the flame of the
 passions, never enlightned, but dazled: nor is there any place, or time,
 wherein an assemblie can receive counsell with secrecie, because of
 their owne multitude.
 
thirdly, that the resolutions of monarch, are subject to other
 inconstancy, than that of humane nature; but in assemblies, besides that
 of nature, there ariseth an inconstancy from the number. for the absence
 of few, that would have the resolution once taken, continue firme,
 (which may happen by security, negligence, or private impediments,) or
 the diligent appearance of few of the contrary opinion, undoes to day,
 all that was concluded yesterday.
 
fourthly, that monarch cannot disagree with himselfe, out of envy, or
 interest; but an assembly may; and that to such height, as may produce
 civill warre.
 
fifthly, that in monarchy there is this inconvenience; that any subject,
 by the power of one man, for the enriching of favourite or flatterer,
 may be deprived of all possesseth; which i confesse is great and
 inevitable inconvenience. but the same may as well happen, where the
 soveraigne power is in an assembly: for their power is the same; and
 they are as subject to evill counsell, and to be seduced by orators, as
 monarch by flatterers; and becoming one an others flatterers, serve
 one anothers covetousnesse and ambition by turnes. and whereas the
 favorites of an assembly, are many; and the kindred much more numerous,
 than of any monarch. besides, there is favourite of monarch, which
 cannot as well succour his friends, as hurt his enemies: but orators,
 that is to say, favourites of soveraigne assemblies, though they have
 great power to hurt, have little to save. for to accuse, requires lesse
 eloquence (such is mans nature) than to excuse; and condemnation, than
 absolution more resembles justice.
 
sixtly, that it is an inconvenience in monarchie, that the soveraigntie
 may descend upon an infant, or one that cannot discerne between good and
 evill: and consisteth in this, that the use of his power, must be in the
 hand of another man, or of some assembly of men, which are to governe by
 his right, and in his name; as curators, and protectors of his person,
 and authority. but to say there is inconvenience, in putting the use of
 the soveraign power, into the hand of man, or an assembly of men; is
 to say that all government is more inconvenient, than confusion, and
 civill warre. and therefore all the danger that can be pretended, must
 arise from the contention of those, that for an office of so great
 honour, and profit, may become competitors. to make it appear, that
 this inconvenience, proceedeth not from that forme of government we call
 monarchy, we are to consider, that the precedent monarch, hath appointed
 who shall have the tuition of his infant successor, either expressely
 by testament, or tacitly, by not controlling the custome in that
 case received: and then such inconvenience (if it happen) is to be
 attributed, not to the monarchy, but to the ambition, and injustice of
 the subjects; which in all kinds of government, where the people are
 not well instructed in their duty, and the rights of soveraignty, is
 the same. or else the precedent monarch, hath not at all taken order for
 such tuition; and then the law of nature hath provided this sufficient
 rule, that the tuition shall be in him, that hath by nature most
 interest in the preservation of the authority of the infant, and to whom
 least benefit can accrue by his death, or diminution. for seeing every
 man by nature seeketh his own benefit, and promotion; to put an infant
 into the power of those, that can promote themselves by his destruction,
 or dammage, is not tuition, but trechery. so that sufficient provision
 being taken, against all just quarrell, about the government under a
 child, if any contention arise to the disturbance of the publique peace,
 it is not to be attributed to the forme of monarchy, but to the ambition
 of subjects, and ignorance of their duty. on the other side, there is
 great common-wealth, the soveraignty whereof is in great assembly,
 which is not, as to consultations of peace, and warre, and making of
 lawes, in the same condition, as if the government were in child. for
 as child wants the judgement to dissent from counsell given him, and
 is thereby necessitated to take the advise of them, or him, to whom he
 is committed: so an assembly wanteth the liberty, to dissent from the
 counsell of the major part, be it good, or bad. and as child has need
 of tutor, or protector, to preserve his person, and authority: so also
 (in great common-wealths,) the soveraign assembly, in all great dangers
 and troubles, have need of custodes libertatis; that is of dictators, or
 protectors of their authoritie; which are as much as temporary monarchs;
 to whom for time, they may commit the entire exercise of their power;
 and have (at the end of that time) been oftner deprived thereof, than
 infant kings, by their protectors, regents, or any other tutors.
 
though the kinds of soveraigntie be, as i have now shewn, but three;
 that is to say, monarchie, where one man has it; or democracie, where
 the generall assembly of subjects hath it; or aristocracie, where it is
 in an assembly of certain persons nominated, or otherwise distinguished
 from the rest: yet that shall consider the particular common-wealthes
 that have been, and are in the world, will not perhaps easily reduce
 them to three, and may thereby be inclined to think there be other
 formes, arising from these mingled together. as for example, elective
 kingdomes; where kings have the soveraigne power put into their hands
 for time; of kingdomes, wherein the king hath power limited: which
 governments, are nevertheless by most writers called monarchie. likewise
 if popular, or aristocraticall common-wealth, subdue an enemies
 countrie, and govern the same, by president, procurator, or
 other magistrate; this may seeme perhaps at first sight, to be a
 democraticall, or aristocraticall government. but it is not so. for
 elective kings, are not soveraignes, but ministers of the soveraigne;
 nor limited kings soveraignes, but ministers of them that have the
 soveraigne power: nor are those provinces which are in subjection to a
 democracie, or aristocracie of another common-wealth, democratically, or
 aristocratically governed, but monarchically.
 
and first, concerning an elective king, whose power is limited to
 his life, as it is in many places of christendome at this day; or to
 certaine yeares or moneths, as the dictators power amongst the romans;
 if have right to appoint his successor, is more elective but
 hereditary. but if have power to elect his successor, then there
 is some other man, or assembly known, which after his decease may elect
 new, or else the common-wealth dieth, and dissolveth with him, and
 returneth to the condition of warre. if it be known who have the power
 to give the soveraigntie after his death, it is known also that the
 soveraigntie was in them before: for none have right to give that which
 they have not right to possesse, and keep to themselves, if they think
 good. but if there be none that can give the soveraigntie, after the
 decease of him that was first elected; then has power, nay is
 obliged by the law of nature, to provide, by establishing his successor,
 to keep those that had trusted him with the government, from relapsing
 into the miserable condition of civill warre. and consequently was,
 when elected, soveraign absolute.
 
secondly, that king whose power is limited, is not superiour to him, or
 them that have the power to limit it; and that is not superiour, is
 not supreme; that is to say not soveraign. the soveraignty therefore
 was alwaies in that assembly which had the right to limit him; and
 by consequence the government not monarchy, but either democracy, or
 aristocracy; as of old time in sparta; where the kings had priviledge
 to lead their armies; but the soveraignty was in the ephori.
 
thirdly, whereas heretofore the roman people, governed the land of judea
 (for example) by president; yet was not judea therefore democracy;
 because they were not governed by any assembly, into which, any of
 them, had right to enter; nor by an aristocracy; because they were
 not governed by any assembly, into which, any man could enter by their
 election: but they were governed by one person, which though as to the
 people of rome was an assembly of the people, or democracy; yet as to
 the people of judea, which had right at all of participating in the
 government, was monarch. for though where the people are governed
 by an assembly, chosen by themselves out of their own number, the
 government is called democracy, or aristocracy; yet when they are
 governed by an assembly, not of their own choosing, ’tis monarchy; not
 of one man, over another man; but of one people, over another people.
 



of the right of succession
 
of all these formes of government, the matter being mortall, so that not
 onely monarchs, but also whole assemblies dy, it is necessary for the
 conservation of the peace of men, that as there was order taken for
 an artificiall man, so there be order also taken, for an artificiall
 eternity of life; without which, men that are governed by an assembly,
 should return into the condition of warre in every age; and they
 that are governed by one man, as soon as their governour dyeth. this
 artificiall eternity, is that which men call the right of succession.
 
there is perfect forme of government, where the disposing of the
 succession is not in the present soveraign. for if it be in any other
 particular man, or private assembly, it is in person subject, and may
 be assumed by the soveraign at his pleasure; and consequently the right
 is in himselfe. and if it be in particular man, but left to new
 choyce; then is the common-wealth dissolved; and the right is in him
 that can get it; contrary to the intention of them that did institute
 the common-wealth, for their perpetuall, and not temporary security.
 
in democracy, the whole assembly cannot faile, unlesse the multitude
 that are to be governed faile. and therefore questions of the right of
 succession, have in that forme of government place at all.
 
in an aristocracy, when any of the assembly dyeth, the election of
 another into his room belongeth to the assembly, as the soveraign, to
 whom belongeth the choosing of all counsellours, and officers. for that
 which the representative doth, as actor, every one of the subjects doth,
 as author. and though the soveraign assembly, may give power to others,
 to elect new men, for supply of their court; yet it is still by their
 authority, that the election is made; and by the same it may (when the
 publique shall require it) be recalled.
 
the present monarch hath right to dispose of the succession the greatest
 difficultie about the right of succession, is in monarchy: and the
 difficulty ariseth from this, that at first sight, it is not manifest
 who is to appoint the successor; nor many times, who it is whom he
 hath appointed. for in both these cases, there is required more exact
 ratiocination, than every man is accustomed to use. as to the question,
 who shall appoint the successor, of monarch that hath the soveraign
 authority; that is to say, (for elective kings and princes have not the
 soveraign power in propriety, but in use only,) we are to consider, that
 either that is in possession, has right to dispose of the succession,
 or else that right is again in the dissolved multitude. for the death
 of him that hath the soveraign power in propriety, leaves the multitude
 without any soveraign at all; that is, without any representative in
 whom they should be united, and be capable of doing any one action at
 all: and therefore they are incapable of election of any new monarch;
 every man having equall right to submit himselfe to such as thinks
 best able to protect him, or if can, protect himselfe by his owne
 sword; which is returne to confusion, and to the condition of war of
 every man against every man, contrary to the end for which monarchy had
 its first institution. therfore it is manifest, that by the institution
 of monarchy, the disposing of the successor, is alwaies left to the
 judgment and will of the present possessor.
 
and for the question (which may arise sometimes) who it is that the
 monarch in possession, hath designed to the succession and inheritance
 of his power; it is determined by his expresse words, and testament; or
 by other tacite signes sufficient.
 



succession passeth by expresse words;
 
by expresse words, or testament, when it is declared by him in his life
 time, viva voce, or by writing; as the first emperours of rome declared
 who should be their heires. for the word heire does not of it selfe
 imply the children, or nearest kindred of man; but whomsoever man
 shall any way declare, would have to succeed him in his estate.
 if therefore monarch declare expresly, that such man shall be his
 heire, either by word or writing, then is that man immediately after the
 decease of his predecessor, invested in the right of being monarch.
 



or, by not controlling custome;
 
but where testament, and expresse words are wanting, other naturall
 signes of the will are to be followed: whereof the one is custome. and
 therefore where the custome is, that the next of kindred absolutely
 succeedeth, there also the next of kindred hath right to the succession;
 for that, if the will of him that was in posession had been otherwise,
 might easily have declared the same in his life time. and likewise
 where the custome is, that the next of the male kindred succeedeth,
 there also the right of succession is in the next of the kindred male,
 for the same reason. and so it is if the custome were to advance the
 female. for whatsoever custome man may by word controule, and does
 not, it is naturall signe would have that custome stand.
 



or, by presumption of naturall affection
 
but where neither custome, nor testament hath preceded, there it is
 to be understood, first, that monarchs will is, that the government
 remain monarchicall; because hath approved that government in
 himselfe. secondly, that child of his own, male, or female, be
 preferred before any other; because men are presumed to be more enclined
 by nature, to advance their own children, than the children of other
 men; and of their own, rather male than female; because men, are
 naturally fitter than women, for actions of labour and danger. thirdly,
 where his own issue faileth, rather brother than stranger; and so
 still the neerer in bloud, rather than the more remote, because it is
 alwayes presumed that the neerer of kin, is the neerer in affection; and
 ’tis evident that man receives alwayes, by reflexion, the most honour
 from the greatnesse of his neerest kindred.
 



to dispose of the succession, though to king of another nation, not
 unlawfull
 
but if it be lawfull for monarch to dispose of the succession by words
 of contract, or testament, men may perhaps object great inconvenience:
 for may sell, or give his right of governing to stranger; which,
 because strangers (that is, men not used to live under the same
 government, not speaking the same language) do commonly undervalue one
 another, may turn to the oppression of his subjects; which is indeed
 great inconvenience; but it proceedeth not necessarily from the
 subjection to strangers government, but from the unskilfulnesse of the
 governours, ignorant of the true rules of politiques. and therefore
 the romans when they had subdued many nations, to make their government
 digestible, were wont to take away that grievance, as much as they
 thought necessary, by giving sometimes to whole nations, and sometimes
 to principall men of every nation they conquered, not onely the
 privileges, but also the name of romans; and took many of them into the
 senate, and offices of charge, even in the roman city. and this was it
 our most wise king, king james, aymed at, in endeavouring the union of
 his two realms of england and scotland. which if could have obtained,
 had in all likelihood prevented the civill warres, which make both those
 kingdomes at this present, miserable. it is not therefore any injury to
 the people, for monarch to dispose of the succession by will; though
 by the fault of many princes, it hath been sometimes found inconvenient.
 of the lawfulnesse of it, this also is an argument, that whatsoever
 inconvenience can arrive by giving kingdome to stranger, may arrive
 also by so marrying with strangers, as the right of succession may
 descend upon them: yet this by all men is accounted lawfull.
 


chapter xx. of dominion paternall and despoticall
 

common-wealth by acquisition, is that, where the soveraign power is
 acquired by force; and it is acquired by force, when men singly, or
 many together by plurality of voyces, for fear of death, or bonds, do
 authorise all the actions of that man, or assembly, that hath their
 lives and liberty in his power.
 



wherein different from common-wealth by institution
 
and this kind of dominion, or soveraignty, differeth from soveraignty by
 institution, onely in this, that men who choose their soveraign, do it
 for fear of one another, and not of him whom they institute: but in this
 case, they subject themselves, to him they are afraid of. in both cases
 they do it for fear: which is to be noted by them, that hold all such
 covenants, as proceed from fear of death, or violence, voyd: which if
 it were true, man, in any kind of common-wealth, could be obliged
 to obedience. it is true, that in common-wealth once instituted, or
 acquired, promises proceeding from fear of death, or violence, are no
 covenants, nor obliging, when the thing promised is contrary to the
 lawes; but the reason is not, because it was made upon fear, but because
 that promiseth, hath right in the thing promised. also, when he
 may lawfully performe, and doth not, it is not the invalidity of
 the covenant, that absolveth him, but the sentence of the soveraign.
 otherwise, whensoever man lawfully promiseth, unlawfully breaketh:
 but when the soveraign, who is the actor, acquitteth him, then is
 acquitted by him that exorted the promise, as by the author of such
 absolution.
 



the rights of soveraignty the same in both
 
but the rights, and consequences of soveraignty, are the same in both.
 his power cannot, without his consent, be transferred to another: he
 cannot forfeit it: cannot be accused by any of his subjects, of
 injury: cannot be punished by them: is judge of what is necessary
 for peace; and judge of doctrines: is sole legislator; and supreme
 judge of controversies; and of the times, and occasions of warre,
 and peace: to him it belongeth to choose magistrates, counsellours,
 commanders, and all other officers, and ministers; and to determine of
 rewards, and punishments, honour, and order. the reasons whereof, are
 the same which are alledged in the precedent chapter, for the same
 rights, and consequences of soveraignty by institution.
 



dominion paternall how attained not by generation, but by contract
 
dominion is acquired two wayes; by generation, and by conquest. the
 right of dominion by generation, is that, which the parent hath over
 his children; and is called paternall. and is not so derived from the
 generation, as if therefore the parent had dominion over his child
 because begat him; but from the childs consent, either expresse, or
 by other sufficient arguments declared. for as to the generation, god
 hath ordained to man helper; and there be alwayes two that are equally
 parents: the dominion therefore over the child, should belong equally to
 both; and be equally subject to both, which is impossible; for man
 can obey two masters. and whereas some have attributed the dominion to
 the man onely, as being of the more excellent sex; they misreckon in it.
 for there is not always that difference of strength or prudence between
 the man and the woman, as that the right can be determined without war.
 in common-wealths, this controversie is decided by the civill law: and
 for the most part, (but not alwayes) the sentence is in favour of the
 father; because for the most part common-wealths have been erected by
 the fathers, not by the mothers of families. but the question lyeth
 now in the state of meer nature; where there are supposed lawes
 of matrimony; lawes for the education of children; but the law of
 nature, and the naturall inclination of the sexes, one to another, and
 to their children. in this condition of meer nature, either the parents
 between themselves dispose of the dominion over the child by contract;
 or do not dispose thereof at all. if they dispose thereof, the right
 passeth according to the contract. we find in history that the amazons
 contracted with the men of the neighbouring countries, to whom they had
 recourse for issue, that the issue male should be sent back, but the
 female remain with themselves: so that the dominion of the females was
 in the mother.
 



or education;
 
if there be contract, the dominion is in the mother. for in the
 condition of meer nature, where there are matrimoniall lawes, it
 cannot be known who is the father, unlesse it be declared by the mother:
 and therefore the right of dominion over the child dependeth on her
 will, and is consequently hers. again, seeing the infant is first in the
 power of the mother; so as she may either nourish, or expose it, if she
 nourish it, it oweth its life to the mother; and is therefore obliged to
 obey her, rather than any other; and by consequence the dominion over
 it is hers. but if she expose it, and another find, and nourish it, the
 dominion is in him that nourisheth it. for it ought to obey him by whom
 it is preserved; because preservation of life being the end, for which
 one man becomes subject to another, every man is supposed to promise
 obedience, to him, in whose power it is to save, or destroy him.
 



or precedent subjection of one of the parents to the other
 
if the mother be the fathers subject, the child, is in the fathers
 power: and if the father be the mothers subject, (as when soveraign
 queen marrieth one of her subjects,) the child is subject to the mother;
 because the father also is her subject.
 
if man and woman, monarches of two severall kingdomes, have child,
 and contract concerning who shall have the dominion of him, the right of
 the dominion passeth by the contract. if they contract not, the dominion
 followeth the dominion of the place of his residence. for the soveraign
 of each country hath dominion over all that reside therein.
 
that hath the dominion over the child, hath dominion also over their
 childrens children. for that hath dominion over the person of man,
 hath dominion over all that is his; without which, dominion were but a
 title, without the effect.
 



the right of succession followeth the rules of the rights of possession
 
the right of succession to paternall dominion, proceedeth in the same
 manner, as doth the right of succession to monarchy; of which i have
 already sufficiently spoken in the precedent chapter.
 



despoticall dominion, how attained
 
dominion acquired by conquest, or victory in war, is that which some
 writers call despoticall, from despotes, which signifieth lord, or
 master; and is the dominion of the master over his servant. and this
 dominion is then acquired to the victor, when the vanquished, to avoyd
 the present stroke of death, covenanteth either in expresse words, or by
 other sufficient signes of the will, that so long as his life, and
 the liberty of his body is allowed him, the victor shall have the use
 thereof, at his pleasure. and after such covenant made, the vanquished
 is servant, and not before: for by the word servant (whether it be
 derived from servire, to serve, or from servare, to save, which i leave
 to grammarians to dispute) is not meant captive, which is kept in
 prison, or bonds, till the owner of him that took him, or bought him
 of one that did, shall consider what to do with him: (for such men,
 (commonly called slaves,) have obligation at all; but may break their
 bonds, or the prison; and kill, or carry away captive their master,
 justly:) but one, that being taken, hath corporall liberty allowed him;
 and upon promise not to run away, nor to do violence to his master, is
 trusted by him.
 



not by the victory, but by the consent of the vanquished
 
it is not therefore the victory, that giveth the right of dominion over
 the vanquished, but his own covenant. nor is obliged because is
 conquered; that is to say, beaten, and taken, or put to flight; but
 because commeth in, and submitteth to the victor; nor is the victor
 obliged by an enemies rendring himselfe, (without promise of life,) to
 spare him for this his yeelding to discretion; which obliges not the
 victor longer, than in his own discretion hee shall think fit.
 
and that men do, when they demand (as it is now called) quarter, (which
 the greeks called zogria, taking alive,) is to evade the present fury of
 the victor, by submission, and to compound for their life, with ransome,
 or service: and therefore that hath quarter, hath not his life given,
 but deferred till farther deliberation; for it is not an yeelding on
 condition of life, but to discretion. and then onely is his life in
 security, and his service due, when the victor hath trusted him with his
 corporall liberty. for slaves that work in prisons, or fetters, do it
 not of duty, but to avoyd the cruelty of their task-masters.
 
the master of the servant, is master also of all hath; and may exact
 the use thereof; that is to say, of his goods, of his labour, of his
 servants, and of his children, as often as shall think fit. for he
 holdeth his life of his master, by the covenant of obedience; that is,
 of owning, and authorising whatsoever the master shall do. and in case
 the master, if refuse, kill him, or cast him into bonds, or otherwise
 punish him for his disobedience, is himselfe the author of the same;
 and cannot accuse him of injury.
 
in summe the rights and consequences of both paternall and despoticall
 dominion, are the very same with those of soveraign by institution;
 and for the same reasons: which reasons are set down in the precedent
 chapter. so that for man that is monarch of divers nations, whereof he
 hath, in one the soveraignty by institution of the people assembled, and
 in another by conquest, that is by the submission of each particular,
 to avoyd death or bonds; to demand of one nation more than of the other,
 from the title of conquest, as being conquered nation, is an act of
 ignorance of the rights of soveraignty. for the soveraign is absolute
 over both alike; or else there is soveraignty at all; and so every
 man may lawfully protect himselfe, if can, with his own sword, which
 is the condition of war.
 



difference between family and kingdom
 
by this it appears, that great family if it be not part of some
 common-wealth, is of it self, as to the rights of soveraignty, little
 monarchy; whether that family consist of man and his children; or of
 man and his servants; or of man, and his children, and servants
 together: wherein the father of master is the soveraign. but yet a
 family is not properly common-wealth; unlesse it be of that power by
 its own number, or by other opportunities, as not to be subdued without
 the hazard of war. for where number of men are manifestly too weak to
 defend themselves united, every one may use his own reason in time of
 danger, to save his own life, either by flight, or by submission to
 the enemy, as hee shall think best; in the same manner as very small
 company of souldiers, surprised by an army, may cast down their armes,
 and demand quarter, or run away, rather than be put to the sword. and
 thus much shall suffice; concerning what i find by speculation, and
 deduction, of soveraign rights, from the nature, need, and designes
 of men, in erecting of commonwealths, and putting themselves under
 monarchs, or assemblies, entrusted with power enough for their
 protection.
 



the right of monarchy from scripture
 
let us now consider what the scripture teacheth in the same point. to
 moses, the children of israel say thus. (exod. 20. 19) "speak thou to
 us, and we will heare thee; but let not god speak to us, lest we dye."
 this is absolute obedience to moses. concerning the right of kings, god
 himself by the mouth of samuel, saith, (1 sam. 8. 11, 12, &c.) "this
 shall be the right of the king you will have to reigne over you. he
 shall take your sons, and set them to drive his chariots, and to be his
 horsemen, and to run before his chariots; and gather in his harvest; and
 to make his engines of war, and instruments of his chariots; and shall
 take your daughters to make perfumes, to be his cookes, and bakers. he
 shall take your fields, your vine-yards, and your olive-yards, and give
 them to his servants. shall take the tyth of your corne and wine, and
 give it to the men of his chamber, and to his other servants. shall
 take your man-servants, and your maid-servants, and the choice of your
 youth, and employ them in his businesse. shall take the tyth of your
 flocks; and you shall be his servants." this is absolute power, and
 summed up in the last words, "you shall be his servants." againe, when
 the people heard what power their king was to have, yet they consented
 thereto, and say thus, (verse. 19 &c.) "we will be as all other nations,
 and our king shall judge our causes, and goe before us, to conduct our
 wars." here is confirmed the right that soveraigns have, both to the
 militia, and to all judicature; in which is conteined as absolute power,
 as one man can possibly transferre to another. again, the prayer of
 king salomon to god, was this. (1 kings 3. 9) "give to thy servant
 understanding, to judge thy people, and to discerne between good and
 evill." it belongeth therefore to the soveraigne to bee judge, and
 to praescribe the rules of discerning good and evill; which rules are
 lawes; and therefore in him is the legislative power. saul sought
 the life of david; yet when it was in his power to slay saul, and his
 servants would have done it, david forbad them, saying (1 sam. 24. 9)
 "god forbid i should do such an act against my lord, the anoynted of
 god." for obedience of servants st. paul saith, (coll. 3. 20) "servants
 obey your masters in all things," and, (verse. 22) "children obey your
 parents in all things." there is simple obedience in those that are
 subject to paternall, or despoticall dominion. again, (math. 23. 2,3)
 "the scribes and pharisees sit in moses chayre and therefore all that
 they shall bid you observe, that observe and do." there again is simple
 obedience. and st. paul, (tit. 3. 2) "warn them that they subject
 themselves to princes, and to those that are in authority, & obey
 them." this obedience is also simple. lastly, our saviour himselfe
 acknowledges, that men ought to pay such taxes as are by kings imposed,
 where sayes, "give to caesar that which is caesars;" and payed such
 taxes himselfe. and that the kings word, is sufficient to take any thing
 from any subject, when there is need; and that the king is judge of that
 need: for himselfe, as king of the jewes, commanded his disciples to
 take the asse, and asses colt to carry him into jerusalem, saying, (mat.
 21. 2,3) "go into the village over against you, and you shall find a
 shee asse tyed, and her colt with her, unty them, and bring them to me.
 and if any man ask you, what you mean by it, say the lord hath need
 of them: and they will let them go." they will not ask whether his
 necessity be sufficient title; nor whether be judge of that
 necessity; but acquiesce in the will of the lord.
 
to these places may be added also that of genesis, (gen. 3. 5) "you
 shall be as gods, knowing good and evill." and verse 11. "who told thee
 that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten of the tree, of which i commanded
 thee thou shouldest not eat?" for the cognisance of judicature of good
 and evill, being forbidden by the name of the fruit of the tree of
 knowledge, as triall of adams obedience; the divell to enflame the
 ambition of the woman, to whom that fruit already seemed beautifull,
 told her that by tasting it, they should be as gods, knowing good and
 evill. whereupon having both eaten, they did indeed take upon them
 gods office, which is judicature of good and evill; but acquired new
 ability to distinguish between them aright. and whereas it is sayd, that
 having eaten, they saw they were naked; man hath so interpreted that
 place, as if they had formerly blind, as saw not their own skins: the
 meaning is plain, that it was then they first judged their nakednesse
 (wherein it was gods will to create them) to be uncomely; and by being
 ashamed, did tacitely censure god himselfe. and thereupon god saith,
 "hast thou eaten, &c." as if should say, doest thou that owest me
 obedience, take upon thee to judge of my commandements? whereby it is
 cleerly, (though allegorically,) signified, that the commands of
 them that have the right to command, are not by their subjects to be
 censured, nor disputed.
 



soveraign power ought in all common-wealths to be absolute
 
so it appeareth plainly, to my understanding, both from reason, and
 scripture, that the soveraign power, whether placed in one man, as in
 monarchy, or in one assembly of men, as in popular, and aristocraticall
 common-wealths, is as great, as possibly men can be imagined to make
 it. and though of so unlimited power, men may fancy many evill
 consequences, yet the consequences of the want of it, which is
 perpetuall warre of every man against his neighbour, are much worse. the
 condition of man in this life shall never be without inconveniences; but
 there happeneth in common-wealth any great inconvenience, but what
 proceeds from the subjects disobedience, and breach of those covenants,
 from which the common-wealth had its being. and whosoever thinking
 soveraign power too great, will seek to make it lesse; must subject
 himselfe, to the power, that can limit it; that is to say, to greater.
 
the greatest objection is, that of the practise; when men ask, where,
 and when, such power has by subjects been acknowledged. but one may
 ask them again, when, or where has there been kingdome long free from
 sedition and civill warre. in those nations, whose common-wealths have
 been long-lived, and not been destroyed, but by forraign warre, the
 subjects never did dispute of the soveraign power. but howsoever, an
 argument for the practise of men, that have not sifted to the bottom,
 and with exact reason weighed the causes, and nature of common-wealths,
 and suffer daily those miseries, that proceed from the ignorance
 thereof, is invalid. for though in all places of the world, men should
 lay the foundation of their houses on the sand, it could not thence be
 inferred, that so it ought to be. the skill of making, and maintaining
 common-wealths, consisteth in certain rules, as doth arithmetique and
 geometry; not (as tennis-play) on practise onely: which rules, neither
 poor men have the leisure, nor men that have had the leisure, have
 hitherto had the curiosity, or the method to find out.
 


chapter xxi. of the liberty of subjects
 



liberty what
 
liberty, or freedome, signifieth (properly) the absence of opposition;
 (by opposition, i mean externall impediments of motion;) and may
 be applyed lesse to irrational, and inanimate creatures, than to
 rationall. for whatsoever is so tyed, or environed, as it cannot move,
 but within certain space, which space is determined by the opposition
 of some externall body, we say it hath not liberty to go further. and
 so of all living creatures, whilest they are imprisoned, or restrained,
 with walls, or chayns; and of the water whilest it is kept in by banks,
 or vessels, that otherwise would spread it selfe into larger space, we
 use to say, they are not at liberty, to move in such manner, as without
 those externall impediments they would. but when the impediment of
 motion, is in the constitution of the thing it selfe, we use not to
 say, it wants the liberty; but the power to move; as when stone lyeth
 still, or man is fastned to his bed by sicknesse.
 



what it is to be free
 
and according to this proper, and generally received meaning of the
 word, free-man, is "he, that in those things, which by his strength
 and wit is able to do, is not hindred to doe what has will
 to." but when the words free, and liberty, are applyed to any thing but
 bodies, they are abused; for that which is not subject to motion, is not
 subject to impediment: and therefore, when ’tis said (for example) the
 way is free, liberty of the way is signified, but of those that walk
 in it without stop. and when we say guift is free, there is not meant
 any liberty of the guift, but of the giver, that was not bound by any
 law, or covenant to give it. so when we speak freely, it is not the
 liberty of voice, or pronunciation, but of the man, whom law hath
 obliged to speak otherwise then did. lastly, from the use of the
 word freewill, liberty can be inferred to the will, desire, or
 inclination, but the liberty of the man; which consisteth in this, that
 finds stop, in doing what has the will, desire, or inclination
 to doe.
 



feare and liberty consistent
 
feare and liberty are consistent; as when man throweth his goods into
 the for feare the ship should sink, doth it neverthelesse very
 willingly, and may refuse to doe it if will: it is therefore the
 action, of one that was free; so man sometimes pays his debt, only for
 feare of imprisonment, which because body hindred him from detaining,
 was the action of man at liberty. and generally all actions which men
 doe in common-wealths, for feare of the law, or actions, which the doers
 had liberty to omit.
 



liberty and necessity consistent
 
liberty and necessity are consistent: as in the water, that hath not
 only liberty, but necessity of descending by the channel: so likewise
 in the actions which men voluntarily doe; which (because they proceed
 from their will) proceed from liberty; and yet because every act of
 mans will, and every desire, and inclination proceedeth from some cause,
 which causes in continuall chaine (whose first link in the hand of
 god the first of all causes) proceed from necessity. so that to him
 that could see the connexion of those causes, the necessity of all
 mens voluntary actions, would appeare manifest. and therefore god, that
 seeth, and disposeth all things, seeth also that the liberty of man
 in doing what will, is accompanied with the necessity of doing that
 which god will, & more, nor lesse. for though men may do many things,
 which god does not command, nor is therefore author of them; yet they
 can have passion, nor appetite to any thing, of which appetite gods
 will is not the cause. and did not his will assure the necessity of mans
 will, and consequently of all that on mans will dependeth, the liberty
 of men would be contradiction, and impediment to the omnipotence and
 liberty of god. and this shall suffice, (as to the matter in hand) of
 that naturall liberty, which only is properly called liberty.
 



artificiall bonds, or covenants
 
but as men, for the atteyning of peace, and conservation of themselves
 thereby, have made an artificiall man, which we call common-wealth; so
 also have they made artificiall chains, called civill lawes, which they
 themselves, by mutuall covenants, have fastned at one end, to the lips
 of that man, or assembly, to whom they have given the soveraigne power;
 and at the other end to their own ears. these bonds in their own nature
 but weak, may neverthelesse be made to hold, by the danger, though not
 by the difficulty of breaking them.
 



liberty of subjects consisteth in liberty from covenants
 
in relation to these bonds only it is, that i am to speak now, of the
 liberty of subjects. for seeing there is common-wealth in the world,
 for the regulating of all the actions, and words of men, (as being
 thing impossible:) it followeth necessarily, that in all kinds of
 actions, by the laws praetermitted, men have the liberty, of doing what
 their own reasons shall suggest, for the most profitable to themselves.
 for if wee take liberty in the proper sense, for corporall liberty; that
 is to say, freedome from chains, and prison, it were very absurd for men
 to clamor as they doe, for the liberty they so manifestly enjoy. againe,
 if we take liberty, for an exemption from lawes, it is lesse absurd,
 for men to demand as they doe, that liberty, by which all other men may
 be masters of their lives. and yet as absurd as it is, this is it they
 demand; not knowing that the lawes are of power to protect them,
 without sword in the hands of man, or men, to cause those laws to
 be put in execution. the liberty of subject, lyeth therefore only
 in those things, which in regulating their actions, the soveraign hath
 praetermitted; such as is the liberty to buy, and sell, and otherwise
 contract with one another; to choose their own aboad, their own diet,
 their own trade of life, and institute their children as they themselves
 think fit; & the like.
 



liberty of the subject consistent with unlimited power of the soveraign
 
neverthelesse we are not to understand, that by such liberty, the
 soveraign power of life, and death, is either abolished, or limited. for
 it has been already shewn, that nothing the soveraign representative
 can doe to subject, on what pretence soever, can properly be called
 injustice, or injury; because every subject is author of every act the
 soveraign doth; so that never wanteth right to any thing, otherwise,
 than as himself is the subject of god, and bound thereby to observe
 the laws of nature. and therefore it may, and doth often happen in
 common-wealths, that subject may be put to death, by the command of
 the soveraign power; and yet neither doe the other wrong: as when jeptha
 caused his daughter to be sacrificed: in which, and the like cases,
 that so dieth, had liberty to doe the action, for which is
 neverthelesse, without injury put to death. and the same holdeth also
 in soveraign prince, that putteth to death an innocent subject. for
 though the action be against the law of nature, as being contrary to
 equitie, (as was the killing of uriah, by david;) yet it was not an
 injurie to uriah; but to god. not to uriah, because the right to doe
 what pleased, was given him by uriah himself; and yet to god, because
 david was gods subject; and prohibited all iniquitie by the law of
 nature. which distinction, david himself, when repented the fact,
 evidently confirmed, saying, "to thee only have i sinned." in the same
 manner, the people of athens, when they banished the most potent of
 their common-wealth for ten years, thought they committed injustice;
 and yet they never questioned what crime had done; but what hurt he
 would doe: nay they commanded the banishment of they knew not whom; and
 every citizen bringing his oystershell into the market place, written
 with the name of him desired should be banished, without actuall
 accusing him, sometimes banished an aristides, for his reputation of
 justice; and sometimes scurrilous jester, as hyperbolus, to make a
 jest of it. and yet man cannot say, the soveraign people of athens
 wanted right to banish them; or an athenian the libertie to jest, or to
 be just.
 



the liberty which writers praise, is the liberty of soveraigns; not of
 private men
 
the libertie, whereof there is so frequent, and honourable mention, in
 the histories, and philosophy of the antient greeks, and romans, and in
 the writings, and discourse of those that from them have received all
 their learning in the politiques, is not the libertie of particular
 men; but the libertie of the common-wealth: which is the same with
 that, which every man then should have, if there were civil laws,
 nor common-wealth at all. and the effects of it also be the same. for as
 amongst masterlesse men, there is perpetuall war, of every man against
 his neighbour; inheritance, to transmit to the son, nor to expect
 from the father; propriety of goods, or lands; security; but a
 full and absolute libertie in every particular man: so in states, and
 common-wealths not dependent on one another, every common-wealth, (not
 every man) has an absolute libertie, to doe what it shall judge (that is
 to say, what that man, or assemblie that representeth it, shall judge)
 most conducing to their benefit. but withall, they live in the condition
 of perpetuall war, and upon the confines of battel, with their
 frontiers armed, and canons planted against their neighbours
 round about. the athenians, and romanes, were free; that is, free
 common-wealths: not that any particular men had the libertie to resist
 their own representative; but that their representative had the libertie
 to resist, or invade other people. there is written on the turrets of
 the city of luca in great characters at this day, the word libertas; yet
 man can thence inferre, that particular man has more libertie,
 or immunitie from the service of the commonwealth there, than in
 constantinople. whether common-wealth be monarchicall, or popular, the
 freedome is still the same.
 
but it is an easy thing, for men to be deceived, by the specious name
 of libertie; and for want of judgement to distinguish, mistake that for
 their private inheritance, and birth right, which is the right of the
 publique only. and when the same errour is confirmed by the authority of
 men in reputation for their writings in this subject, it is wonder if
 it produce sedition, and change of government. in these westerne
 parts of the world, we are made to receive our opinions concerning the
 institution, and rights of common-wealths, from aristotle, cicero, and
 other men, greeks and romanes, that living under popular states, derived
 those rights, not from the principles of nature, but transcribed them
 into their books, out of the practice of their own common-wealths, which
 were popular; as the grammarians describe the rules of language, out of
 the practise of the time; or the rules of poetry, out of the poems of
 homer and virgil. and because the athenians were taught, (to keep them
 from desire of changing their government,) that they were freemen, and
 all that lived under monarchy were slaves; therefore aristotle puts it
 down in his politiques,(lib.6.cap.2) "in democracy, liberty is to be
 supposed: for ’tis commonly held, that man is free in any other
 government." and as aristotle; so cicero, and other writers have
 grounded their civill doctrine, on the opinions of the romans, who were
 taught to hate monarchy, at first, by them that having deposed their
 soveraign, shared amongst them the soveraignty of rome; and afterwards
 by their successors. and by reading of these greek, and latine authors,
 men from their childhood have gotten habit (under false shew of
 liberty,) of favouring tumults, and of licentious controlling the
 actions of their soveraigns; and again of controlling those controllers,
 with the effusion of so much blood; as i think i may truly say, there
 was never any thing so deerly bought, as these western parts have bought
 the learning of the greek and latine tongues.
 



liberty of the subject how to be measured
 
to come now to the particulars of the true liberty of subject; that is
 to say, what are the things, which though commanded by the soveraign, he
 may neverthelesse, without injustice, refuse to do; we are to consider,
 what rights we passe away, when we make common-wealth; or (which is
 all one,) what liberty we deny our selves, by owning all the actions
 (without exception) of the man, or assembly we make our soveraign. for
 in the act of our submission, consisteth both our obligation, and
 our liberty; which must therefore be inferred by arguments taken from
 thence; there being obligation on any man, which ariseth not from
 some act of his own; for all men equally, are by nature free. and
 because such arguments, must either be drawn from the expresse words, "i
 authorise all his actions," or from the intention of him that submitteth
 himselfe to his power, (which intention is to be understood by the end
 for which so submitteth;) the obligation, and liberty of the subject,
 is to be derived, either from those words, (or others equivalent;) or
 else from the end of the institution of soveraignty; namely, the peace
 of the subjects within themselves, and their defence against common
 enemy.
 



subjects have liberty to defend their own bodies, even against them
 that lawfully invade them
 
first therefore, seeing soveraignty by institution, is by covenant of
 every one to every one; and soveraignty by acquisition, by covenants of
 the vanquished to the victor, or child to the parent; it is manifest,
 that every subject has liberty in all those things, the right whereof
 cannot by covenant be transferred. i have shewn before in the 14.
 chapter, that covenants, not to defend mans own body, are voyd.
 therefore,
 



are not bound to hurt themselves;
 
if the soveraign command man (though justly condemned,) to kill,
 wound, or mayme himselfe; or not to resist those that assault him; or
 to abstain from the use of food, ayre, medicine, or any other thing,
 without which cannot live; yet hath that man the liberty to disobey.
 
if man be interrogated by the soveraign, or his authority, concerning
 crime done by himselfe, is not bound (without assurance of pardon)
 to confesse it; because man (as i have shewn in the same chapter) can
 be obliged by covenant to accuse himselfe.
 
again, the consent of subject to soveraign power, is contained in
 these words, "i authorise, or take upon me, all his actions;" in which
 there is restriction at all, of his own former naturall liberty:
 for by allowing him to kill me, i am not bound to kill my selfe when
 commands me. "’tis one thing to say ‘kill me, or my fellow, if you
 please;’ another thing to say, ‘i will kill my selfe, or my fellow.’" it
 followeth therefore, that
 
man is bound by the words themselves, either to kill himselfe, or
 any other man; and consequently, that the obligation man may sometimes
 have, upon the command of the soveraign to execute any dangerous, or
 dishonourable office, dependeth not on the words of our submission; but
 on the intention; which is to be understood by the end thereof. when
 therefore our refusall to obey, frustrates the end for which the
 soveraignty was ordained; then there is liberty to refuse: otherwise
 there is.
 



nor to warfare, unless they voluntarily undertake it
 
upon this ground, man that is commanded as souldier to fight against
 the enemy, though his soveraign have right enough to punish his refusall
 with death, may neverthelesse in many cases refuse, without injustice;
 as when substituteth sufficient souldier in his place: for in this
 case deserteth not the service of the common-wealth. and there is
 allowance to be made for naturall timorousnesse, not onely to women, (of
 whom such dangerous duty is expected,) but also to men of feminine
 courage. when armies fight, there is on one side, or both, running
 away; yet when they do it not out of trechery, but fear, they are not
 esteemed to do it unjustly, but dishonourably. for the same reason, to
 avoyd battell, is not injustice, but cowardise. but that inrowleth
 himselfe souldier, or taketh imprest mony, taketh away the excuse of
 timorous nature; and is obliged, not onely to go to the battell,
 but also not to run from it, without his captaines leave. and when the
 defence of the common-wealth, requireth at once the help of all that
 are able to bear arms, every one is obliged; because otherwise the
 institution of the common-wealth, which they have not the purpose, or
 courage to preserve, was in vain.
 
to resist the sword of the common-wealth, in defence of another man,
 guilty, or innocent, man hath liberty; because such liberty, takes
 away from the soveraign, the means of protecting us; and is therefore
 destructive of the very essence of government. but in case great many
 men together, have already resisted the soveraign power unjustly, or
 committed some capitall crime, for which every one of them expecteth
 death, whether have they not the liberty then to joyn together, and
 assist, and defend one another? certainly they have: for they but defend
 their lives, which the guilty man may as well do, as the innocent. there
 was indeed injustice in the first breach of their duty; their bearing of
 arms subsequent to it, though it be to maintain what they have done, is
 new unjust act. and if it be onely to defend their persons, it is not
 unjust at all. but the offer of pardon taketh from them, to whom it
 is offered, the plea of self-defence, and maketh their perseverance in
 assisting, or defending the rest, unlawfull.
 



the greatest liberty of subjects, dependeth on the silence of the law
 

as for other lyberties, they depend on the silence of the law. in cases
 where the soveraign has prescribed rule, there the subject hath
 the liberty to do, or forbeare, according to his own discretion. and
 therefore such liberty is in some places more, and in some lesse; and in
 some times more, in other times lesse, according as they that have the
 soveraignty shall think most convenient. as for example, there was
 time, when in england man might enter in to his own land,
 (and dispossesse such as wrongfully possessed it) by force. but in
 after-times, that liberty of forcible entry, was taken away by statute
 made (by the king) in parliament. and is some places of the world, men
 have the liberty of many wives: in other places, such liberty is not
 allowed.
 
if subject have controversie with his soveraigne, of debt, or
 of right of possession of lands or goods, or concerning any service
 required at his hands, or concerning any penalty corporall, or
 pecuniary, grounded on precedent law; hath the same liberty to sue
 for his right, as if it were against subject; and before such judges,
 as are appointed by the soveraign. for seeing the soveraign demandeth
 by force of former law, and not by vertue of his power; declareth
 thereby, that requireth more, than shall appear to be due by that
 law. the sute therefore is not contrary to the will of the soveraign;
 and consequently the subject hath the liberty to demand the hearing of
 his cause; and sentence, according to that law. but if demand, or
 take any thing by pretence of his power; there lyeth, in that case, no
 action of law: for all that is done by him in vertue of his power, is
 done by the authority of every subject, and consequently, that brings
 an action against the soveraign, brings it against himselfe.
 
if monarch, or soveraign assembly, grant liberty to all, or any of
 his subjects; which grant standing, is disabled to provide for their
 safety, the grant is voyd; unlesse directly renounce, or transferre
 the soveraignty to another. for in that might openly, (if it had been
 his will,) and in plain termes, have renounced, or transferred it, and
 did not; it is to be understood it was not his will; but that the grant
 proceeded from ignorance of the repugnancy between such liberty and
 the soveraign power; and therefore the soveraignty is still retayned;
 and consequently all those powers, which are necessary to the exercising
 thereof; such as are the power of warre, and peace, of judicature, of
 appointing officers, and councellours, of levying mony, and the rest
 named in the 18th chapter.
 



in what cases subjects absolved of their obedience to their soveraign
 
the obligation of subjects to the soveraign is understood to last as
 long, and longer, than the power lasteth, by which is able to
 protect them. for the right men have by nature to protect themselves,
 when none else can protect them, can by covenant be relinquished. the
 soveraignty is the soule of the common-wealth; which once departed from
 the body, the members doe more receive their motion from it. the end
 of obedience is protection; which, wheresoever man seeth it, either in
 his own, or in anothers sword, nature applyeth his obedience to it, and
 his endeavour to maintaine it. and though soveraignty, in the intention
 of them that make it, be immortall; yet is it in its own nature, not
 only subject to violent death, by forreign war; but also through
 the ignorance, and passions of men, it hath in it, from the very
 institution, many seeds of naturall mortality, by intestine discord.
 



in case of captivity
 
if subject be taken prisoner in war; or his person, or his means of
 life be within the guards of the enemy, and hath his life and corporall
 libertie given him, on condition to be subject to the victor, hath
 libertie to accept the condition; and having accepted it, is the subject
 of him that took him; because had other way to preserve himselfe.
 the case is the same, if be deteined on the same termes, in a
 forreign country. but if man be held in prison, or bonds, or is not
 trusted with the libertie of his bodie; cannot be understood to be
 bound by covenant to subjection; and therefore may, if can, make his
 escape by any means whatsoever.
 



in case the soveraign cast off the government from himself and heyrs
 
if monarch shall relinquish the soveraignty, both for himself, and
 his heires; his subjects returne to the absolute libertie of nature;
 because, though nature may declare who are his sons, and who are the
 nerest of his kin; yet it dependeth on his own will, (as hath been said
 in the precedent chapter,) who shall be his heyr. if therefore will
 have heyre, there is soveraignty, nor subjection. the case is the
 same, if dye without known kindred, and without declaration of
 his heyre. for then there can heire be known, and consequently no
 subjection be due.
 



in case of banishment
 
if the soveraign banish his subject; during the banishment, is not
 subject. but that is sent on message, or hath leave to travell, is
 still subject; but it is, by contract between soveraigns, not by vertue
 of the covenant of subjection. for whosoever entreth into anothers
 dominion, is subject to all the lawes thereof; unless have a
 privilege by the amity of the soveraigns, or by speciall licence.
 



in case the soveraign render himself subject to another
 
if monarch subdued by war, render himself subject to the victor; his
 subjects are delivered from their former obligation, and become obliged
 to the victor. but if be held prisoner, or have not the liberty
 of his own body; is not understood to have given away the right of
 soveraigntie; and therefore his subjects are obliged to yield obedience
 to the magistrates formerly placed, governing not in their own name,
 but in his. for, his right remaining, the question is only of the
 administration; that is to say, of the magistrates and officers; which,
 if have not means to name, is supposed to approve those, which he
 himself had formerly appointed.
 


chapter xxii. of systemes subject, politicall, and private
 



the divers sorts of systemes of people
 
having spoken of the generation, forme, and power of common-wealth, i
 am in order to speak next of the parts thereof. and first of systemes,
 which resemble the similar parts, or muscles of body naturall. by
 systemes; i understand any numbers of men joyned in one interest, or one
 businesse. of which, some are regular, and some irregular. regular are
 those, where one man, or assembly of men, is constituted representative
 of the whole number. all other are irregular.
 
of regular, some are absolute, and independent, subject to none but
 their own representative: such are only common-wealths; of which i have
 spoken already in the 5. last preceding chapters. others are dependent;
 that is to say, subordinate to some soveraign power, to which every one,
 as also their representative is subject.
 
of systemes subordinate, some are politicall, and some private.
 politicall (otherwise called bodies politique, and persons in law,)
 are those, which are made by authority from the soveraign power of the
 common-wealth. private, are those, which are constituted by subjects
 amongst themselves, or by authoritie from stranger. for authority
 derived from forraign power, within the dominion of another, is publique
 there, but private.
 
and of private systemes, some are lawfull; some unlawfull: lawfull, are
 those which are allowed by the common-wealth: all other are unlawfull.
 irregular systemes, are those which having representative,
 consist only in concourse of people; which if not forbidden by the
 common-wealth, nor made on evill designe, (such as are conflux of people
 to markets, or shews, or any other harmelesse end,) are lawfull. but
 when the intention is evill, or (if the number be considerable) unknown,
 they are unlawfull.
 



in all bodies politique the power of the representative is limited
 
in bodies politique, the power of the representative is alwaies limited:
 and that which prescribeth the limits thereof, is the power soveraign.
 for power unlimited, is absolute soveraignty. and the soveraign, in
 every commonwealth, is the absolute representative of all the subjects;
 and therefore other, can be representative of any part of them,
 but so far forth, as shall give leave; and to give leave to body
 politique of subjects, to have an absolute representative to all
 intents and purposes, were to abandon the government of so much of the
 commonwealth, and to divide the dominion, contrary to their peace and
 defence, which the soveraign cannot be understood to doe, by any grant,
 that does not plainly, and directly discharge them of their subjection.
 for consequences of words, are not the signes of his will, when other
 consequences are signes of the contrary; but rather signes of errour,
 and misreckoning; to which all mankind is too prone.
 
the bounds of that power, which is given to the representative of a
 bodie politique, are to be taken notice of, from two things. one is
 their writt, or letters from the soveraign: the other is the law of the
 common-wealth.
 



by letters patents
 
for though in the institution or acquisition of common-wealth,
 which is independent, there needs writing, because the power of the
 representative has there other bounds, but such as are set out by
 the unwritten law of nature; yet in subordinate bodies, there are such
 diversities of limitation necessary, concerning their businesses, times,
 and places, as can neither be remembred without letters, nor taken
 notice of, unlesse such letters be patent, that they may be read to
 them, and withall sealed, or testified, with the seales, or other
 permanent signes of the authority soveraign.
 



and the lawes
 
and because such limitation is not alwaies easie, or perhaps possible
 to be described in writing; the ordinary lawes, common to all subjects,
 must determine, that the representative may lawfully do, in all cases,
 where the letters themselves are silent. and therefore
 



when the representative is one man, his unwarranted acts his own onely
 
in body politique, if the representative be one man, whatsoever he
 does in the person of the body, which is not warranted in his letters,
 nor by the lawes, is his own act, and not the act of the body, nor of
 any other member thereof besides himselfe: because further than his
 letters, or the lawes limit, representeth mans person, but his
 own. but what does according to these, is the act of every one: for
 of the act of the soveraign every one is author, because is their
 representative unlimited; and the act of him that recedes not from the
 letters of the soveraign, is the act of the soveraign, and therefore
 every member of the body is author of it.
 



when it is an assembly, it is the act of them that assented onely
 
but if the representative be an assembly, whatsoever that assembly shall
 decree, not warranted by their letters, or the lawes, is the act of the
 assembly, or body politique, and the act of every one by whose vote the
 decree was made; but not the act of any man that being present voted to
 the contrary; nor of any man absent, unlesse voted it by procuration.
 it is the act of the assembly, because voted by the major part; and if
 it be crime, the assembly may be punished, as farre-forth as it is
 capable, as by dissolution, or forfeiture of their letters (which is to
 such artificiall, and fictitious bodies, capitall,) or (if the
 assembly have common stock, wherein none of the innocent members have
 propriety,) by pecuniary mulct. for from corporall penalties nature hath
 exempted all bodies politique. but they that gave not their vote, are
 therefore innocent, because the assembly cannot represent any man in
 things unwarranted by their letters, and consequently are not involved
 in their votes.
 
when the representative is one man, if borrow mony, or owe it, by
 contract; is lyable onely, the members not if the person of the body
 politique being in one man, borrow mony of stranger, that is, of one
 that is not of the same body, (for letters need limit borrowing,
 seeing it is left to mens own inclinations to limit lending) the debt is
 the representatives. for if should have authority from his letters,
 to make the members pay what borroweth, should have by consequence
 the soveraignty of them; and therefore the grant were either voyd,
 as proceeding from errour, commonly incident to humane nature, and an
 unsufficient signe of the will of the granter; or if it be avowed
 by him, then is the representer soveraign, and falleth not under the
 present question, which is onely of bodies subordinate. member
 therefore is obliged to pay the debt so borrowed, but the representative
 himselfe: because that lendeth it, being stranger to the letters,
 and to the qualification of the body, understandeth those onely for
 his debtors, that are engaged; and seeing the representer can ingage
 himselfe, and none else, has him onely for debtor; who must therefore
 pay him, out of the common stock (if there be any), or (if there be
 none) out of his own estate.
 
if come into debt by contract, or mulct, the case is the same.
 



when it is an assembly, they onely are liable that have assented
 
but when the representative is an assembly, and the debt to stranger;
 all they, and onely they are responsible for the debt, that gave their
 votes to the borrowing of it, or to the contract that made it due, or to
 the fact for which the mulct was imposed; because every one of those in
 voting did engage himselfe for the payment: for that is author of
 the borrowing, is obliged to the payment, even of the whole debt, though
 when payd by any one, be discharged.
 



if the debt be to one of the assembly, the body onely is obliged
 
but if the debt be to one of the assembly, the assembly onely is obliged
 to the payment, out of their common stock (if they have any:) for having
 liberty of vote, if vote the mony, shall be borrowed, votes it
 shall be payd; if vote it shall not be borrowed, or be absent, yet
 because in lending, voteth the borrowing, contradicteth his former
 vote, and is obliged by the later, and becomes both borrower and lender,
 and consequently cannot demand payment from any particular man, but
 from the common treasure onely; which fayling hath remedy, nor
 complaint, but against himselfe, that being privy to the acts of
 the assembly, and their means to pay, and not being enforced, did
 neverthelesse through his own folly lend his mony.
 



protestation against the decrees of bodies politique
 
sometimes lawful; but against soveraign power never it is manifest by
 this, that in bodies politique subordinate, and subject to soveraign
 power, it is sometimes not onely lawfull, but expedient, for a
 particular man to make open protestation against the decrees of the
 representative assembly, and cause their dissent to be registred, or to
 take witnesse of it; because otherwise they may be obliged to pay debts
 contracted, and be responsible for crimes committed by other men: but in
 soveraign assembly, that liberty is taken away, both because that
 protesteth there, denies their soveraignty; and also because whatsoever
 is commanded by the soveraign power, is as to the subject (though not
 so alwayes in the sight of god) justified by the command; for of such
 command every subject is the author.
 



bodies politique for government of province, colony, or town
 
the variety of bodies politique, is almost infinite; for they are
 not onely distinguished by the severall affaires, for which they are
 constituted, wherein there is an unspeakable diversitie; but also by the
 times, places, and numbers, subject to many limitations. and as to their
 affaires, some are ordained for government; as first, the government
 of province may be committed to an assembly of men, wherein all
 resolutions shall depend on the votes of the major part; and then this
 assembly is body politique, and their power limited by commission.
 this word province signifies charge, or care of businesse, which he
 whose businesse it is, committeth to another man, to be administred for,
 and under him; and therefore when in one common-wealth there be divers
 countries, that have their lawes distinct one from another, or are farre
 distant in place, the administration of the government being committed
 to divers persons, those countries where the soveraign is not resident,
 but governs by commission, are called provinces. but of the government
 of province, by an assembly residing in the province it selfe, there
 be few examples. the romans who had the soveraignty of many provinces;
 yet governed them alwaies by presidents, and praetors; and not by
 assemblies, as they governed the city of rome, and territories adjacent.
 in like manner, when there were colonies sent from england, to plant
 virginia, and sommer-ilands; though the government of them here, were
 committed to assemblies in london, yet did those assemblies never
 commit the government under them to any assembly there; but did to each
 plantation send one governour; for though every man, where can be
 present by nature, desires to participate of government; yet where
 they cannot be present, they are by nature also enclined, to commit the
 government of their common interest rather to monarchicall, then a
 popular form of government: which is also evident in those men that have
 great private estates; who when they are unwilling to take the paines of
 administring the businesse that belongs to them, choose rather to trust
 one servant, than assembly either of their friends or servants.
 but howsoever it be in fact, yet we may suppose the government of a
 province, or colony committed to an assembly: and when it is, that which
 in this place i have to say, is this; that whatsoever debt is by that
 assembly contracted; or whatsoever unlawfull act is decreed, is the act
 onely of those that assented, and not of any that dissented, or were
 absent, for the reasons before alledged. also that an assembly residing
 out of the bounds of that colony whereof they have the government,
 cannot execute any power over the persons, or goods of any of the
 colonie, to seize on them for debt, or other duty, in any place
 without the colony it selfe, as having jurisdiction, nor authoritie
 elsewhere, but are left to the remedie, which the law of the place
 alloweth them. and though the assembly have right, to impose mulct
 upon any of their members, that shall break the lawes they make; yet
 out of the colonie it selfe, they have right to execute the same.
 and that which is said here, of the rights of an assembly, for the
 government of province, or colony, is appliable also to an assembly
 for the government of town, or university, or college, or church,
 or for any other government over the persons of men.
 
and generally, in all bodies politique, if any particular member
 conceive himself injured by the body it self, the cognisance of his
 cause belongeth to the soveraign, and those the soveraign hath ordained
 for judges in such causes, or shall ordaine for that particular cause;
 and not to the body it self. for the whole body is in this case his
 fellow subject, which in soveraign assembly, is otherwise: for there,
 if the soveraign be not judge, though in his own cause, there can be no
 judge at all.
 



bodies politique for ordering of trade
 
in bodie politique, for the well ordering of forraigne traffique, the
 most commodious representative is an assembly of all the members; that
 is to say, such one, as every one that adventureth his mony, may be
 present at all the deliberations, and resolutions of the body, if they
 will themselves. for proof whereof, we are to consider the end, for
 which men that are merchants, and may buy and sell, export, and import
 their merchandise, according to their own discretions, doe neverthelesse
 bind themselves up in one corporation. it is true, there be few
 merchants, that with the merchandise they buy at home, can fraight a
 ship, to export it; or with that they buy abroad, to bring it home; and
 have therefore need to joyn together in one society; where every man
 may either participate of the gaine, according to the proportion of his
 adventure; or take his own; and sell what transports, or imports, at
 such prices as thinks fit. but this is body politique, there being
 common representative to oblige them to any other law, than that
 which is common to all other subjects. the end of their incorporating,
 is to make their gaine the greater; which is done two wayes; by sole
 buying, and sole selling, both at home, and abroad. so that to grant
 to company of merchants to be corporation, or body politique, is to
 grant them double monopoly, whereof one is to be sole buyers; another
 to be sole sellers. for when there is company incorporate for any
 particular forraign country, they only export the commodities vendible
 in that country; which is sole buying at home, and sole selling abroad.
 for at home there is but one buyer, and abroad but one that selleth:
 both which is gainfull to the merchant, because thereby they buy at home
 at lower, and sell abroad at higher rates: and abroad there is but one
 buyer of forraign merchandise, and but one that sels them at home; both
 which againe are gainfull to the adventurers.
 
of this double monopoly one part is disadvantageous to the people at
 home, the other to forraigners. for at home by their sole exportation
 they set what price they please on the husbandry and handy-works of
 the people; and by the sole importation, what price they please on all
 forraign commodities the people have need of; both which are ill for the
 people. on the contrary, by the sole selling of the native commodities
 abroad, and sole buying the forraign commodities upon the place,
 they raise the price of those, and abate the price of these, to
 the disadvantage of the forraigner: for where but one selleth, the
 merchandise is the dearer; and where but one buyeth the cheaper: such
 corporations therefore are other then monopolies; though they would
 be very profitable for common-wealth, if being bound up into one body
 in forraigne markets they were at liberty at home, every man to buy, and
 sell at what price could.
 
the end then of these bodies of merchants, being not common benefit
 to the whole body, (which have in this case common stock, but what
 is deducted out of the particular adventures, for building, buying,
 victualling and manning of ships,) but the particular gaine of
 every adventurer, it is reason that every one be acquainted with the
 employment of his own; that is, that every one be of the assembly, that
 shall have the power to order the same; and be acquainted with their
 accounts. and therefore the representative of such body must be
 an assembly, where every member of the body may be present at the
 consultations, if will.
 
if body politique of merchants, contract debt to stranger by the
 act of their representative assembly, every member is lyable by himself
 for the whole. for stranger can take notice of their private lawes,
 but considereth them as so many particular men, obliged every one to the
 whole payment, till payment made by one dischargeth all the rest: but if
 the debt be to one of the company, the creditor is debter for the whole
 to himself, and cannot therefore demand his debt, but only from the
 common stock, if there be any.
 
if the common-wealth impose tax upon the body, it is understood to be
 layd upon every member proportionably to his particular adventure in the
 company. for there is in this case other common stock, but what is
 made of their particular adventures.
 
if mulct be layd upon the body for some unlawfull act, they only are
 lyable by whose votes the act was decreed, or by whose assistance it was
 executed; for in none of the rest is there any other crime but being
 of the body; which if crime, (because the body was ordeyned by the
 authority of the common-wealth,) is not his.
 
if one of the members be indebted to the body, may be sued by the
 body; but his goods cannot be taken, nor his person imprisoned by the
 authority of the body; but only by authority of the common-wealth:
 for if they can doe it by their own authority, they can by their own
 authority give judgement that the debt is due, which is as much as to be
 judge in their own cause.
 



bodie politique for counsel to be give to the soveraign
 
these bodies made for the government of men, or of traffique, be either
 perpetuall, or for time prescribed by writing. but there be bodies
 also whose times are limited, and that only by the nature of their
 businesse. for example, if soveraign monarch, or soveraign assembly,
 shall think fit to give command to the towns, and other severall parts
 of their territory, to send to him their deputies, to enforme him of the
 condition, and necessities of the subjects, or to advise with him for
 the making of good lawes, or for any other cause, as with one person
 representing the whole country, such deputies, having place and time
 of meeting assigned them, are there, and at that time, body politique,
 representing every subject of that dominion; but it is onely for such
 matters as shall be propounded unto them by that man, or assembly, that
 by the soveraign authority sent for them; and when it shall be declared
 that nothing more shall be propounded, nor debated by them, the body is
 dissolved. for if they were the absolute representative of the people,
 then were it the soveraign assembly; and so there would be two soveraign
 assemblies, or two soveraigns, over the same people; which cannot
 consist with their peace. and therefore where there is once a
 soveraignty, there can be absolute representation of the people, but
 by it. and for the limits of how farre such body shall represent the
 whole people, they are set forth in the writing by which they were sent
 for. for the people cannot choose their deputies to other intent, than
 is in the writing directed to them from their soveraign expressed.
 



regular private body, lawfull, as family
 
private bodies regular, and lawfull, are those that are constituted
 without letters, or other written authority, saving the lawes common
 to all other subjects. and because they be united in one person
 representative, they are held for regular; such as are all families, in
 which the father, or master ordereth the whole family. for obligeth
 his children, and servants, as farre as the law permitteth, though not
 further, because none of them are bound to obedience in those actions,
 which the law hath forbidden to be done. in all other actions, during
 the time they are under domestique government, they are subject to their
 fathers, and masters, as to their immediate soveraigns. for the father,
 and master being before the institution of common-wealth, absolute
 soveraigns in their own families, they lose afterward more of their
 authority, than the law of the common-wealth taketh from them.
 



private bodies regular, but unlawfull
 
private bodies regular, but unlawfull, are those that unite themselves
 into one person representative, without any publique authority at all;
 such as are the corporations of beggars, theeves and gipsies, the better
 to order their trade of begging, and stealing; and the corporations of
 men, that by authority from any forraign person, unite themselves in
 anothers dominion, for easier propagation of doctrines, and for making a
 party, against the power of the common-wealth.
 



systemes irregular, such as are private leagues
 
irregular systemes, in their nature, but leagues, or sometimes meer
 concourse of people, without union to any particular designe, not by
 obligation of one to another, but proceeding onely from similitude of
 wills and inclinations, become lawfull, or unlawfull, according to the
 lawfulnesse, or unlawfulnesse of every particular mans design therein:
 and his designe is to be understood by the occasion.
 
the leagues of subjects, (because leagues are commonly made for mutuall
 defence,) are in common-wealth (which is more than league of
 all the subjects together) for the most part unnecessary, and savour of
 unlawfull designe; and are for that cause unlawfull, and go commonly by
 the name of factions, or conspiracies. for league being connexion of
 men by covenants, if there be power given to any one man or assembly,
 (as in the condition of meer nature) to compell them to performance,
 is so long onely valid, as there ariseth just cause of distrust: and
 therefore leagues between common-wealths, over whom there is humane
 power established, to keep them all in awe, are not onely lawfull, but
 also profitable for the time they last. but leagues of the subjects of
 one and the same common-wealth, where every one may obtain his right
 by means of the soveraign power, are unnecessary to the maintaining of
 peace and justice, and (in case the designe of them be evill, or unknown
 to the common-wealth) unlawfull. for all uniting of strength by private
 men, is, if for evill intent, unjust; if for intent unknown, dangerous
 to the publique, and unjustly concealed.
 



secret cabals
 
if the soveraign power be in great assembly, and number of men,
 part of the assembly, without authority, consult part, to contrive
 the guidance of the rest; this is faction, or conspiracy unlawfull,
 as being fraudulent seducing of the assembly for their particular
 interest. but if he, whose private interest is to be debated, and
 judged in the assembly, make as many friends as can; in him it is
 injustice; because in this case is part of the assembly. and
 though hire such friends with mony, (unlesse there be an expresse law
 against it,) yet it is not injustice. for sometimes, (as mens manners
 are,) justice cannot be had without mony; and every man may think his
 own cause just, till it be heard, and judged.
 



feuds of private families
 
in all common-wealths, if private man entertain more servants, than
 the government of his estate, and lawfull employment has for them
 requires, it is faction, and unlawfull. for having the protection of the
 common-wealth, needeth not the defence of private force. and whereas
 in nations not throughly civilized, severall numerous families have
 lived in continuall hostility, and invaded one another with private
 force; yet it is evident enough, that they have done unjustly; or else
 that they had common-wealth.
 



factions for government
 
and as factions for kindred, so also factions for government of
 religion, as of papists, protestants, &c. or of state, as patricians,
 and plebeians of old time in rome, and of aristocraticalls and
 democraticalls of old time in greece, are unjust, as being contrary to
 the peace and safety of the people, and taking of the sword out of the
 hand of the soveraign.
 
concourse of people, is an irregular systeme, the lawfulnesse, or
 unlawfulnesse, whereof dependeth on the occasion, and on the number of
 them that are assembled. if the occasion be lawfull, and manifest, the
 concourse is lawfull; as the usuall meeting of men at church, or at a
 publique shew, in usuall numbers: for if the numbers be extraordinarily
 great, the occasion is not evident; and consequently that cannot
 render particular and good account of his being amongst them, is to
 be judged conscious of an unlawfull, and tumultuous designe. it may be
 lawfull for thousand men, to joyn in petition to be delivered to a
 judge, or magistrate; yet if thousand men come to present it, it is
 tumultuous assembly; because there needs but one or two for that
 purpose. but in such cases as these, it is not set number that makes
 the assembly unlawfull, but such number, as the present officers are
 not able to suppresse, and bring to justice.
 
when an unusuall number of men, assemble against man whom they accuse;
 the assembly is an unlawfull tumult; because they may deliver their
 accusation to the magistrate by few, or by one man. such was the case
 of st. paul at ephesus; where demetrius, and great number of other
 men, brought two of pauls companions before the magistrate, saying with
 one voyce, "great is diana of the ephesians;" which was their way of
 demanding justice against them for teaching the people such doctrine,
 as was against their religion, and trade. the occasion here, considering
 the lawes of that people, was just; yet was their assembly judged
 unlawfull, and the magistrate reprehended them for it, in these
 words,(acts 19. 40) "if demetrius and the other work-men can accuse any
 man, of any thing, there be pleas, and deputies, let them accuse one
 another. and if you have any other thing to demand, your case may
 be judged in an assembly lawfully called. for we are in danger to be
 accused for this dayes sedition, because, there is cause by which any
 man can render any reason of this concourse of people." where calleth
 an assembly, whereof men can give just account, sedition, and such
 as they could not answer for. and this is all i shall say concerning
 systemes, and assemblyes of people, which may be compared (as i said,)
 to the similar parts of mans body; such as be lawfull, to the muscles;
 such as are unlawfull, to wens, biles, and apostemes, engendred by the
 unnaturall conflux of evill humours.
 


chapter xxiii. of the publique ministers of soveraign power
 

in the last chapter i have spoken of the similar parts of a
 common-wealth; in this i shall speak of the parts organicall, which are
 publique ministers.
 



publique minister who
 
publique minister, is he, that by the soveraign, (whether monarch,
 or an assembly,) is employed in any affaires, with authority to
 represent in that employment, the person of the common-wealth. and
 whereas every man, or assembly that hath soveraignty, representeth
 two persons, or (as the more common phrase is) has two capacities, one
 naturall, and another politique, (as monarch, hath the person not
 onely of the common-wealth, but also of man; and soveraign assembly
 hath the person not onely of the common-wealth, but also of the
 assembly); they that be servants to them in their naturall capacity,
 are not publique ministers; but those onely that serve them in the
 administration of the publique businesse. and therefore neither ushers,
 nor sergeants, nor other officers that waite on the assembly, for
 other purpose, but for the commodity of the men assembled, in an
 aristocracy, or democracy; nor stewards, chamberlains, cofferers, or any
 other officers of the houshold of monarch, are publique ministers in a
 monarchy.
 



ministers for the generall administration
 
of publique ministers, some have charge committed to them of general
 administration, either of the whole dominion, or of part thereof.
 of the whole, as to protector, or regent, may bee committed by
 the predecessor of an infant king, during his minority, the whole
 administration of his kingdome. in which case, every subject is so far
 obliged to obedience, as the ordinances shall make, and the commands
 shall give be in the kings name, and not inconsistent with his
 soveraigne power. of part, or province; as when either monarch, or
 soveraign assembly, shall give the generall charge thereof to a
 governour, lieutenant, praefect, or vice-roy: and in this case also,
 every one of that province, is obliged to all shall doe in the name
 of the soveraign, and that not incompatible with the soveraigns right.
 for such protectors, vice-roys, and governours, have other right, but
 what depends on the soveraigns will; and commission that can be given
 them, can be interpreted for declaration of the will to transferre the
 soveraignty, without expresse and perspicuous words to that purpose. and
 this kind of publique ministers resembleth the nerves, and tendons that
 move the severall limbs of body naturall.
 



for speciall administration, as for oeconomy
 
others have speciall administration; that is to say, charges of some
 speciall businesse, either at home, or abroad: as at home, first, for
 the oeconomy of common-wealth, they that have authority concerning the
 treasure, as tributes, impositions, rents, fines, or whatsoever publique
 revenue, to collect, receive, issue, or take the accounts thereof,
 are publique ministers: ministers, because they serve the person
 representative, and can doe nothing against his command, nor without his
 authority: publique, because they serve him in his politicall capacity.
 
secondly, they that have authority concerning the militia; to have the
 custody of armes, forts, ports; to levy, pay, or conduct souldiers; or
 to provide for any necessary thing for the use of war, either by land or
 sea, are publique ministers. but souldier without command, though he
 fight for the common-wealth, does not therefore represent the person of
 it; because there is none to represent it to. for every one that hath
 command, represents it to them only whom commandeth.
 



for instruction of the people
 
they also that have authority to teach, or to enable others to teach
 the people their duty to the soveraign power, and instruct them in the
 knowledge of what is just, and unjust, thereby to render them more apt
 to live in godlinesse, and in peace among themselves, and resist the
 publique enemy, are publique ministers: ministers, in that they doe it
 not by their own authority, but by anothers; and publique, because they
 doe it (or should doe it) by authority, but that of the soveraign.
 the monarch, or the soveraign assembly only hath immediate authority
 from god, to teach and instruct the people; and man but the
 soveraign, receiveth his power dei gratia simply; that is to say, from
 the favour of none but god: all other, receive theirs from the favour
 and providence of god, and their soveraigns; as in monarchy dei gratia
 & regis; or dei providentia & voluntate regis.
 



for judicature
 
they also to whom jurisdiction is given, are publique ministers. for in
 their seats of justice they represent the person of the soveraign; and
 their sentence, is his sentence; for (as hath been before declared) all
 judicature is essentially annexed to the soveraignty; and therefore all
 other judges are but ministers of him, or them that have the soveraign
 power. and as controversies are of two sorts, namely of fact, and of
 law; so are judgements, some of fact, some of law: and consequently in
 the same controversie, there may be two judges, one of fact, another of
 law.
 
and in both these controversies, there may arise controversie between
 the party judged, and the judge; which because they be both subjects to
 the soveraign, ought in equity to be judged by men agreed on by consent
 of both; for man can be judge in his own cause. but the soveraign
 is already agreed on for judge by them both, and is therefore either to
 heare the cause, and determine it himself, or appoint for judge such as
 they shall both agree on. and this agreement is then understood to be
 made between them divers wayes; as first, if the defendant be allowed
 to except against such of his judges, whose interest maketh him suspect
 them, (for as to the complaynant hath already chosen his own judge,)
 those which excepteth not against, are judges himself agrees on.
 secondly, if appeale to any other judge, can appeale further;
 for his appeale is his choice. thirdly, if appeale to the soveraign
 himself, and by himself, or by delegates which the parties shall
 agree on, give sentence; that sentence is finall: for the defendant is
 judged by his own judges, that is to say, by himself.
 
these properties of just and rationall judicature considered, i cannot
 forbeare to observe the excellent constitution of the courts of justice,
 established both for common, and also for publique pleas in england. by
 common pleas, i meane those, where both the complaynant and defendant
 are subjects: and by publique, (which are also called pleas of the
 crown) those, where the complaynant is the soveraign. for whereas there
 were two orders of men, whereof one was lords, the other commons; the
 lords had this priviledge, to have for judges in all capitall crimes,
 none but lords; and of them, as many as would be present; which being
 ever acknowledged as priviledge of favour, their judges were none but
 such as they had themselves desired. and in all controversies, every
 subject (as also in civill controversies the lords) had for judges, men
 of the country where the matter in controversie lay; against which he
 might make his exceptions, till at last twelve men without exception
 being agreed on, they were judged by those twelve. so that having
 his own judges, there could be nothing alledged by the party, why the
 sentence should not be finall, these publique persons, with authority
 from the soveraign power, either to instruct, or judge the people,
 are such members of the common-wealth, as may fitly be compared to the
 organs of voice in body naturall.
 



for execution
 
publique ministers are also all those, that have authority from the
 soveraign, to procure the execution of judgements given; to publish the
 soveraigns commands; to suppresse tumults; to apprehend, and imprison
 malefactors; and other acts tending to the conservation of the
 peace. for every act they doe by such authority, is the act of the
 common-wealth; and their service, answerable to that of the hands, in a
 bodie naturall.
 
publique ministers abroad, are those that represent the person of their
 own soveraign, to forraign states. such are ambassadors, messengers,
 agents, and heralds, sent by publique authoritie, and on publique
 businesse.
 
but such as are sent by authoritie only of some private partie of a
 troubled state, though they be received, are neither publique, nor
 private ministers of the common-wealth; because none of their actions
 have the common-wealth for author. likewise, an ambassador sent from a
 prince, to congratulate, condole, or to assist at solemnity, though
 authority be publique; yet because the businesse is private, and
 belonging to him in his naturall capacity; is private person. also if
 man be sent into another country, secretly to explore their counsels,
 and strength; though both the authority, and the businesse be publique;
 yet because there is none to take notice of any person in him, but
 his own; is but private minister; but yet minister of the
 common-wealth; and may be compared to an eye in the body naturall. and
 those that are appointed to receive the petitions or other informations
 of the people, and are as it were the publique eare, are publique
 ministers, and represent their soveraign in that office.
 



counsellers without other employment then to advise are not publique
 ministers
 
neither counsellor, nor councell of state, if we consider it with
 authority of judicature or command, but only of giving advice to
 the soveraign when it is required, or of offering it when it is not
 required, is publique person. for the advice is addressed to the
 soveraign only, whose person cannot in his own presence, be represented
 to him, by another. but body of counsellors, are never without some
 other authority, either of judicature, or of immediate administration:
 as in monarchy, they represent the monarch, in delivering his commands
 to the publique ministers: in democracy, the councell, or senate
 propounds the result of their deliberations to the people, as a
 councell; but when they appoint judges, or heare causes, or give
 audience to ambassadors, it is in the quality of minister of the
 people: and in an aristocracy the councell of state is the soveraign
 assembly it self; and gives counsell to none but themselves.
 


chapter xxiv. of the nutrition, and procreation of common-wealth
 


the nourishment of common-wealth consisteth in the commodities
 
of and land
 
the nutrition of common-wealth consisteth, in the plenty, and
 distribution of materials conducing to life: in concoction, or
 preparation; and (when concocted) in the conveyance of it, by convenient
 conduits, to the publique use.
 
as for the plenty of matter, it is thing limited by nature, to those
 commodities, which from (the two breasts of our common mother) land,
 and sea, god usually either freely giveth, or for labour selleth to
 man-kind.
 
for the matter of this nutriment, consisting in animals, vegetals, and
 minerals, god hath freely layd them before us, in or neer to the face of
 the earth; so as there needeth more but the labour, and industry
 of receiving them. insomuch as plenty dependeth (next to gods favour)
 meerly on the labour and industry of men.
 
this matter, commonly called commodities, is partly native, and partly
 forraign: native, that which is to be had within the territory of
 the common-wealth; forraign, that which is imported from without. and
 because there is territory under the dominion of one common-wealth,
 (except it be of very vast extent,) that produceth all things needfull
 for the maintenance, and motion of the whole body; and few that produce
 not something more than necessary; the superfluous commodities to be had
 within, become more superfluous, but supply these wants at home, by
 importation of that which may be had abroad, either by exchange, or
 by just warre, or by labour: for mans labour also, is commodity
 exchangeable for benefit, as well as any other thing: and there have
 been common-wealths that having more territory, than hath served
 them for habitation, have neverthelesse, not onely maintained, but also
 encreased their power, partly by the labour of trading from one place to
 another, and partly by selling the manifactures, whereof the materials
 were brought in from other places.
 



and the right of distribution of them
 
the distribution of the materials of this nourishment, is the
 constitution of mine, and thine, and his, that is to say, in one word
 propriety; and belongeth in all kinds of common-wealth to the soveraign
 power. for where there is common-wealth, there is, (as hath been
 already shewn) perpetuall warre of every man against his neighbour;
 and therefore every thing is his that getteth it, and keepeth it by
 force; which is neither propriety nor community; but uncertainty. which
 is so evident, that even cicero, (a passionate defender of liberty,) in
 publique pleading, attributeth all propriety to the law civil, "let
 the civill law," saith he, "be once abandoned, or but negligently
 guarded, (not to say oppressed,) and there is nothing, that any man can
 be sure to receive from his ancestor, or leave to his children." and
 again; "take away the civill law, and man knows what is his own, and
 what another mans." seeing therefore the introduction of propriety is
 an effect of common-wealth; which can do nothing but by the person that
 represents it, it is the act onely of the soveraign; and consisteth in
 the lawes, which none can make that have not the soveraign power. and
 this they well knew of old, who called that nomos, (that is to say,
 distribution,) which we call law; and defined justice, by distributing
 to every man his own.
 



all private estates of land proceed originally from the arbitrary
 distribution of the soveraign
 
in this distribution, the first law, is for division of the land it
 selfe: wherein the soveraign assigneth to every man portion, according
 as he, and not according as any subject, or any number of them, shall
 judge agreeable to equity, and the common good. the children of israel,
 were common-wealth in the wildernesse; but wanted the commodities
 of the earth, till they were masters of the land of promise; which
 afterward was divided amongst them, not by their own discretion, but
 by the discretion of eleazar the priest, and joshua their generall: who
 when there were twelve tribes, making them thirteen by subdivision of
 the tribe of joseph; made neverthelesse but twelve portions of the land;
 and ordained for the tribe of levi land; but assigned them the tenth
 part of the whole fruits; which division was therefore arbitrary. and
 though people comming into possession of land by warre, do not
 alwaies exterminate the antient inhabitants, (as did the jewes,) but
 leave to many, or most, or all of them their estates; yet it is manifest
 they hold them afterwards, as of the victors distribution; as the people
 of england held all theirs of william the conquerour.
 



propriety of subject excludes not the dominion of the soveraign, but
 onely of another subject
 
from whence we may collect, that the propriety which subject hath in
 his lands, consisteth in right to exclude all other subjects from the
 use of them; and not to exclude their soveraign, be it an assembly, or
 monarch. for seeing the soveraign, that is to say, the common-wealth
 (whose person representeth,) is understood to do nothing but in order
 to the common peace and security, this distribution of lands, is to be
 understood as done in order to the same: and consequently, whatsoever
 distribution shall make in prejudice thereof, is contrary to the
 will of every subject, that committed his peace, and safety to his
 discretion, and conscience; and therefore by the will of every one of
 them, is to be reputed voyd. it is true, that soveraign monarch, or
 the greater part of soveraign assembly, may ordain the doing of many
 things in pursuit of their passions, contrary to their own consciences,
 which is breach of trust, and of the law of nature; but this is not
 enough to authorise any subject, either to make warre upon, or so much
 as to accuse of injustice, or any way to speak evill of their soveraign;
 because they have authorised all his actions, and in bestowing the
 soveraign power, made them their own. but in what cases the commands
 of soveraigns are contrary to equity, and the law of nature, is to be
 considered hereafter in another place.
 



the publique is not to be dieted
 
in the distribution of land, the common-wealth it selfe, may be
 conceived to have portion, and possesse, and improve the same by
 their representative; and that such portion may be made sufficient, to
 susteine the whole expence to the common peace, and defence necessarily
 required: which were very true, if there could be any representative
 conceived free from humane passions, and infirmities. but the nature
 of men being as it is, the setting forth of publique land, or of any
 certaine revenue for the common-wealth, is in vaine; and tendeth to the
 dissolution of government, and to the condition of meere nature, and
 war, assoon as ever the soveraign power falleth into the hands of a
 monarch, or of an assembly, that are either too negligent of mony, or
 too hazardous in engaging the publique stock, into long, or costly
 war. common-wealths can endure diet: for seeing their expence is
 not limited by their own appetite, but by externall accidents, and the
 appetites of their neighbours, the publique riches cannot be limited by
 other limits, than those which the emergent occasions shall require. and
 whereas in england, there were by the conquerour, divers lands
 reserved to his own use, (besides forrests, and chases, either for his
 recreation, or for preservation of woods,) and divers services reserved
 on the land gave his subjects; yet it seems they were not reserved
 for his maintenance in his publique, but in his naturall capacity: for
 he, and his successors did for all that, lay arbitrary taxes on all
 subjects land, when they judged it necessary. or if those publique
 lands, and services, were ordained as sufficient maintenance of the
 common-wealth, it was contrary to the scope of the institution; being
 (as it appeared by those ensuing taxes) insufficient, and (as it
 appeares by the late revenue of the crown) subject to alienation,
 and diminution. it is therefore in vaine, to assign portion to the
 common-wealth; which may sell, or give it away; and does sell, and give
 it away when tis done by their representative.
 



the places and matter of traffique depend, as their distribution, on
 the soveraign
 
as the distribution of lands at home; so also to assigne in what places,
 and for what commodities, the subject shall traffique abroad, belongeth
 to the soveraign. for if it did belong to private persons to use their
 own discretion therein, some of them would bee drawn for gaine, both
 to furnish the enemy with means to hurt the common-wealth, and hurt it
 themselves, by importing such things, as pleasing mens appetites, be
 neverthelesse noxious, or at least unprofitable to them. and therefore
 it belongeth to the common-wealth, (that is, to the soveraign only,)
 to approve, or disapprove both of the places, and matter of forraign
 traffique.
 



the laws of transferring property belong also to the soveraign
 
further, seeing it is not enough to the sustentation of common-wealth,
 that every man have propriety in portion of land, or in some few
 commodities, or naturall property in some usefull art, and there is no
 art in the world, but is necessary either for the being, or well being
 almost of every particular man; it is necessary, that men distribute
 that which they can spare, and transferre their propriety therein,
 mutually one to another, by exchange, and mutuall contract. and
 therefore it belongeth to the common-wealth, (that is to say, to the
 soveraign,) to appoint in what manner, all kinds of contract between
 subjects, (as buying, selling, exchanging, borrowing, lending, letting,
 and taking to hire,) are to bee made; and by what words, and signes they
 shall be understood for valid. and for the matter, and distribution of
 the nourishment, to the severall members of the common-wealth, thus much
 (considering the modell of the whole worke) is sufficient.
 



mony the bloud of common-wealth
 
by concoction, i understand the reducing of all commodities, which are
 not presently consumed, but reserved for nourishment in time to come, to
 some thing of equal value, and withall so portably, as not to hinder
 the motion of men from place to place; to the end man may have in
 what place soever, such nourishment as the place affordeth. and this is
 nothing else but gold, and silver, and mony. for gold and silver, being
 (as it happens) almost in all countries of the world highly valued, is a
 commodious measure for the value of all things else between nations; and
 mony (of what matter soever coyned by the soveraign of common-wealth,)
 is sufficient measure of the value of all things else, between the
 subjects of that common-wealth. by the means of which measures, all
 commodities, moveable, and immoveable, are made to accompany man, to
 all places of his resort, within and without the place of his
 ordinary residence; and the same passeth from man to man, within the
 common-wealth; and goes round about, nourishing (as it passeth)
 every part thereof; in so much as this concoction, is as it were the
 sanguification of the common-wealth: for naturall bloud is in like
 manner made of the fruits of the earth; and circulating, nourisheth by
 the way, every member of the body of man.
 
and because silver and gold, have their value from the matter it self;
 they have first this priviledge, that the value of them cannot be
 altered by the power of one, nor of few common-wealths; as being a
 common measure of the commodities of all places. but base mony, may
 easily be enhanced, or abased. secondly, they have the priviledge to
 make common-wealths, move, and stretch out their armes, when need is,
 into forraign countries; and supply, not only private subjects that
 travell, but also whole armies with provision. but that coyne, which is
 not considerable for the matter, but for the stamp of the place, being
 unable to endure change of ayr, hath its effect at home only; where
 also it is subject to the change of laws, and thereby to have the value
 diminished, to the prejudice many times of those that have it.
 



the conduits and way of mony to the publique use
 
the conduits, and wayes by which it is conveyed to the publique use, are
 of two sorts; one, that conveyeth it to the publique coffers; the other,
 that issueth the same out againe for publique payments. of the first
 sort, are collectors, receivers, and treasurers; of the second are the
 treasurers againe, and the officers appointed for payment of severall
 publique or private ministers. and in this also, the artificiall man
 maintains his resemblance with the naturall; whose veins receiving the
 bloud from the severall parts of the body, carry it to the heart; where
 being made vitall, the heart by the arteries sends it out again, to
 enliven, and enable for motion all the members of the same.
 



the children of common-wealth colonies
 
the procreation, or children of common-wealth, are those we call
 plantations, or colonies; which are numbers of men sent out from the
 common-wealth, under conductor, or governour, to inhabit forraign
 country, either formerly voyd of inhabitants, or made voyd then, by
 warre. and when colony is setled, they are either common-wealth of
 themselves, discharged of their subjection to their soveraign that sent
 them, (as hath been done by many common-wealths of antient time,) in
 which case the common-wealth from which they went was called their
 metropolis, or mother, and requires more of them, then fathers
 require of the children, whom they emancipate, and make free from their
 domestique government, which is honour, and friendship; or else they
 remain united to their metropolis, as were the colonies of the people of
 rome; and then they are common-wealths themselves, but provinces, and
 parts of the common-wealth that sent them. so that the right of colonies
 (saving honour, and league with their metropolis,) dependeth wholly on
 their licence, or letters, by which their soveraign authorised them to
 plant.
 


chapter xxv. of counsell
 



counsell what
 
how fallacious it is to judge of the nature of things, by the ordinary
 and inconstant use of words, appeareth in nothing more, than in the
 confusion of counsels, and commands, arising from the imperative manner
 of speaking in them both, and in many other occasions besides. for the
 words "doe this," are the words not onely of him that commandeth; but
 also of him that giveth counsell; and of him that exhorteth; and yet
 there are but few, that see not, that these are very different things;
 or that cannot distinguish between them, when they perceive who it
 is that speaketh, and to whom the speech is directed, and upon what
 occasion. but finding those phrases in mens writings, and being not
 able, or not willing to enter into consideration of the circumstances,
 they mistake sometimes the precepts of counsellours, for the precepts
 of them that command; and sometimes the contrary; according as it best
 agreeth with the conclusions they would inferre, or the actions
 they approve. to avoyd which mistakes, and render to those termes
 of commanding, counselling, and exhorting, their proper and distinct
 significations, i define them thus.
 



differences between command and counsell
 
command is, where man saith, "doe this," or "doe this not," without
 expecting other reason than the will of him that sayes it. from this it
 followeth manifestly, that that commandeth, pretendeth thereby his
 own benefit: for the reason of his command is his own will onely, and
 the proper object of every mans will, is some good to himselfe.
 
counsell, is where man saith, "doe" or "doe not this," and deduceth
 his own reasons from the benefit that arriveth by it to him to whom he
 saith it. and from this it is evident, that that giveth counsell,
 pretendeth onely (whatsoever intendeth) the good of him, to whom he
 giveth it.
 
therefore between counsell and command, one great difference is, that
 command is directed to mans own benefit; and counsell to the benefit
 of another man. and from this ariseth another difference, that man
 may be obliged to do what is commanded; as when hath covenanted
 to obey: but cannot be obliged to do as is counselled, because the
 hurt of not following it, is his own; or if should covenant to follow
 it, then is the counsell turned into the nature of command. third
 difference between them is, that man can pretend right to be of
 another mans counsell; because is not to pretend benefit by it to
 himselfe; but to demand right to counsell another, argues will to know
 his designes, or to gain some other good to himselfe; which (as i said
 before) is of every mans will the proper object.
 
this also is incident to the nature of counsell; that whatsoever it be,
 that asketh it, cannot in equity accuse, or punish it: for to ask
 counsell of another, is to permit him to give such counsell as shall
 think best; and consequently, that giveth counsell to his soveraign,
 (whether monarch, or an assembly) when asketh it, cannot in equity
 be punished for it, whether the same be conformable to the opinion of
 the most, or not, so it be to the proposition in debate. for if the
 sense of the assembly can be taken notice of, before the debate be
 ended, they should neither ask, nor take any further counsell; for the
 sense of the assembly, is the resolution of the debate, and end of all
 deliberation. and generally that demandeth counsell, is author of it;
 and therefore cannot punish it; and what the soveraign cannot, man
 else can. but if one subject giveth counsell to another, to do any
 thing contrary to the lawes, whether that counsell proceed from
 evill intention, or from ignorance onely, it is punishable by the
 common-wealth; because ignorance of the law, is good excuse, where
 every man is bound to take notice of the lawes to which is subject.
 



exhortation and dehortation what
 
exhortation, and dehortation, is counsell, accompanied with signes in
 him that giveth it, of vehement desire to have it followed; or to say it
 more briefly, counsell vehemently pressed. for that exhorteth, doth
 not deduce the consequences of what adviseth to be done, and tye
 himselfe therein to the rigour of true reasoning; but encourages him he
 counselleth, to action: as that dehorteth, deterreth him from it. and
 therefore they have in their speeches, regard to the common passions,
 and opinions of men, in deducing their reasons; and make use of
 similitudes, metaphors, examples, and other tooles of oratory, to
 perswade their hearers of the utility, honour, or justice of following
 their advise.
 
from whence may be inferred, first, that exhortation and dehortation,
 is directed to the good of him that giveth the counsell, not of him that
 asketh it, which is contrary to the duty of counsellour; who (by the
 definition of counsell) ought to regard, not his own benefits, but his
 whom adviseth. and that directeth his counsell to his own
 benefit, is manifest enough, by the long and vehement urging, or by
 the artificial giving thereof; which being not required of him, and
 consequently proceeding from his own occasions, is directed principally
 to his own benefit, and but accidentarily to the good of him that is
 counselled, or not at all.
 
secondly, that the use of exhortation and dehortation lyeth onely, where
 man is to speak to multitude; because when the speech is addressed
 to one, may interrupt him, and examine his reasons more rigorously,
 than can be done in multitude; which are too many to enter into
 dispute, and dialogue with him that speaketh indifferently to them
 all at once. thirdly, that they that exhort and dehort, where they are
 required to give counsell, are corrupt counsellours, and as it were
 bribed by their own interest. for though the counsell they give be never
 so good; yet that gives it, is more good counsellour, than he
 that giveth just sentence for reward, is just judge. but where a
 man may lawfully command, as father in his family, or leader in an
 army, his exhortations and dehortations, are not onely lawfull, but
 also necessary, and laudable: but then they are more counsells, but
 commands; which when they are for execution of soure labour; sometimes
 necessity, and alwayes humanity requireth to be sweetned in the
 delivery, by encouragement, and in the tune and phrase of counsell,
 rather then in harsher language of command.
 
examples of the difference between command and counsell, we may take
 from the formes of speech that expresse them in holy scripture. "have no
 other gods but me; make to thy selfe graven image; take not gods name
 in vain; sanctifie the sabbath; honour thy parents; kill not; steale
 not," &c. are commands; because the reason for which we are to obey
 them, is drawn from the will of god our king, whom we are obliged to
 obey. but these words, "sell all thou hast; give it to the poore; and
 follow me," are counsell; because the reason for which we are to do
 so, is drawn from our own benefit; which is this, that we shall have
 "treasure in heaven." these words, "go into the village over against
 you, and you shall find an asse tyed, and her colt; loose her, and bring
 her to me," are command: for the reason of their fact is drawn from
 the will of their master: but these words, "repent, and be baptized in
 the name of jesus," are counsell; because the reason why we should so
 do, tendeth not to any benefit of god almighty, who shall still be king
 in what manner soever we rebell; but of our selves, who have other
 means of avoyding the punishment hanging over us for our sins.
 



differences of fit and unfit counsellours
 
as the difference of counsell from command, hath been now deduced from
 the nature of counsell, consisting in deducing of the benefit, or
 hurt that may arise to him that is to be counselled, by the necessary
 or probable consequences of the action propoundeth; so may also the
 differences between apt, and inept counsellours be derived from the
 same. for experience, being but memory of the consequences of like
 actions formerly observed, and counsell but the speech whereby that
 experience is made known to another; the vertues, and defects of
 counsell, are the same with the vertues, and defects intellectuall:
 and to the person of common-wealth, his counsellours serve him in the
 place of memory, and mentall discourse. but with this resemblance of the
 common-wealth, to naturall man, there is one dissimilitude joyned,
 of great importance; which is, that naturall man receiveth his
 experience, from the naturall objects of sense, which work upon him
 without passion, or interest of their own; whereas they that give
 counsell to the representative person of common-wealth, may have,
 and have often their particular ends, and passions, that render their
 counsells alwayes suspected, and many times unfaithfull. and therefore
 we may set down for the first condition of good counsellour, that his
 ends, and interest, be not inconsistent with the ends and interest of
 him counselleth.
 
secondly, because the office of counsellour, when an action comes
 into deliberation, is to make manifest the consequences of it, in such
 manner, as that is counselled may be truly and evidently informed; he
 ought to propound his advise, in such forme of speech, as may make
 the truth most evidently appear; that is to say, with as firme
 ratiocination, as significant and proper language, and as briefly, as
 the evidence will permit. and therefore rash, and unevident inferences;
 (such as are fetched onely from examples, or authority of books, and are
 not arguments of what is good, or evill, but witnesses of fact, or
 of opinion,) obscure, confused, and ambiguous expressions, also all
 metaphoricall speeches, tending to the stirring up of passion, (because
 such reasoning, and such expressions, are usefull onely to deceive, or
 to lead him we counsell towards other ends than his own) are repugnant
 to the office of counsellour.
 
thirdly, because the ability of counselling proceedeth from experience,
 and long study; and man is presumed to have experience in all those
 things that to the administration of great common-wealth are necessary
 to be known, man is presumed to be good counsellour, but in such
 businesse, as hath not onely been much versed in, but hath also
 much meditated on, and considered. for seeing the businesse of a
 common-wealth is this, to preserve the people at home, and defend them
 against forraign invasion, we shall find, it requires great knowledge
 of the disposition of man-kind, of the rights of government, and of the
 nature of equity, law, justice, and honour, not to be attained without
 study; and of the strength, commodities, places, both of their own
 country, and their neighbours; as also of the inclinations, and designes
 of all nations that may any way annoy them. and this is not attained to,
 without much experience. of which things, not onely the whole summe, but
 every one of the particulars requires the age, and observation of man
 in years, and of more than ordinary study. the wit required for counsel,
 as i have said before is judgement. and the differences of men in that
 point come from different education, of some to one kind of study, or
 businesse, and of others to another. when for the doing of any thing,
 there be infallible rules, (as in engines, and edifices, the rules of
 geometry,) all the experience of the world cannot equall his counsell,
 that has learnt, or found out the rule. and when there is such rule,
 that hath most experience in that particular kind of businesse, has
 therein the best judgement, and is the best counsellour.
 
fourthly, to be able to give counsell to common-wealth, in businesse
 that hath reference to another common-wealth, it is necessary to be
 acquainted with the intelligences, and letters that come from thence,
 and with all the records of treaties, and other transactions of state
 between them; which none can doe, but such as the representative
 shall think fit. by which we may see, that they who are not called to
 counsell, can have good counsell in such cases to obtrude.
 
fifthly, supposing the number of counsellors equall, man is better
 counselled by hearing them apart, then in an assembly; and that for many
 causes. first, in hearing them apart, you have the advice of every man;
 but in an assembly may of them deliver their advise with i, or no, or
 with their hands, or feet, not moved by their own sense, but by the
 eloquence of another, or for feare of displeasing some that have spoken,
 or the whole assembly, by contradiction; or for feare of appearing
 duller in apprehension, than those that have applauded the contrary
 opinion. secondly, in an assembly of many, there cannot choose but be
 some whose interests are contrary to that of the publique; and these
 their interests make passionate, and passion eloquent, and eloquence
 drawes others into the same advice. for the passions of men, which
 asunder are moderate, as the heat of one brand; in assembly are like
 many brands, that enflame one another, (especially when they blow one
 another with orations) to the setting of the common-wealth on fire,
 under pretence of counselling it. thirdly, in hearing every man apart,
 one may examine (when there is need) the truth, or probability of
 his reasons, and of the grounds of the advise gives, by frequent
 interruptions, and objections; which cannot be done in an assembly,
 where (in every difficult question) man is rather astonied, and dazled
 with the variety of discourse upon it, than informed of the course he
 ought to take. besides, there cannot be an assembly of many, called
 together for advice, wherein there be not some, that have the ambition
 to be thought eloquent, and also learned in the politiques; and give not
 their advice with care of the businesse propounded, but of the applause
 of their motly orations, made of the divers colored threds, or shreds of
 authors; which is an impertinence at least, that takes away the time
 of serious consultation, and in the secret way of counselling apart, is
 easily avoided. fourthly, in deliberations that ought to be kept secret,
 (whereof there be many occasions in publique businesse,) the counsells
 of many, and especially in assemblies, are dangerous; and therefore
 great assemblies are necessitated to commit such affaires to lesser
 numbers, and of such persons as are most versed, and in whose fidelity
 they have most confidence.
 
to conclude, who is there that so far approves the taking of counsell
 from great assembly of counsellours, that wisheth for, or would accept
 of their pains, when there is question of marrying his children,
 disposing of his lands, governing his household, or managing his
 private estate, especially if there be amongst them such as wish not
 his prosperity? man that doth his businesse by the help of many and
 prudent counsellours, with every one consulting apart in his proper
 element, does it best, as that useth able seconds at tennis play,
 placed in their proper stations. does next best, that useth his own
 judgement only; as that has second at all. but that is carried
 up and down to his businesse in framed counsell, which cannot move
 but by the plurality of consenting opinions, the execution whereof is
 commonly (out of envy, or interest) retarded by the part dissenting,
 does it worst of all, and like one that is carried to the ball, though
 by good players, yet in wheele-barrough, or other frame, heavy of it
 self, and retarded also by the inconcurrent judgements, and endeavours
 of them that drive it; and so much the more, as they be more that set
 their hands to it; and most of all, when there is one, or more amongst
 them, that desire to have him lose. and though it be true, that many eys
 see more then one; yet it is not to be understood of many counsellours;
 but then only, when the finall resolution is in one man. otherwise,
 because many eyes see the same thing in divers lines, and are apt to
 look asquint towards their private benefit; they that desire not to
 misse their marke, though they look about with two eyes, yet they never
 ayme but with one; and therefore great popular common-wealth was
 ever kept up; but either by forraign enemy that united them; or by
 the reputation of some one eminent man amongst them; or by the secret
 counsell of few; or by the mutuall feare of equall factions; and
 not by the open consultations of the assembly. and as for very little
 common-wealths, be they popular, or monarchicall, there is humane
 wisdome can uphold them, longer then the jealousy lasteth of their
 potent neighbours.
 


chapter xxvi. of civill lawes
 



civill law what
 
by civill lawes, i understand the lawes, that men are therefore bound to
 observe, because they are members, not of this, or that common-wealth
 in particular, but of common-wealth. for the knowledge of particular
 lawes belongeth to them, that professe the study of the lawes of their
 severall countries; but the knowledge of civill law in generall, to any
 man. the antient law of rome was called their civil law, from the word
 civitas, which signifies common-wealth; and those countries, which
 having been under the roman empire, and governed by that law, retaine
 still such part thereof as they think fit, call that part the civill
 law, to distinguish it from the rest of their own civill lawes. but that
 is not it i intend to speak of here; my designe being not to shew what
 is law here, and there; but what is law; as plato, aristotle, cicero,
 and divers others have done, without taking upon them the profession of
 the study of the law.
 
and first it manifest, that law in generall, is not counsell, but
 command; nor command of any man to any man; but only of him, whose
 command is addressed to one formerly obliged to obey him. and as for
 civill law, it addeth only the name of the person commanding, which is
 persona civitatis, the person of the common-wealth.
 
which considered, i define civill law in this manner. "civill law, is to
 every subject, those rules, which the common-wealth hath commanded him,
 by word, writing, or other sufficient sign of the will, to make use
 of, for the distinction of right, and wrong; that is to say, of what is
 contrary, and what is not contrary to the rule."
 
in which definition, there is nothing that is not at first sight
 evident. for every man seeth, that some lawes are addressed to all the
 subjects in generall; some to particular provinces; some to particular
 vocations; and some to particular men; and are therefore lawes, to every
 of those to whom the command is directed; and to none else. as also,
 that lawes are the rules of just, and unjust; nothing being reputed
 unjust, that is not contrary to some law. likewise, that none can
 make lawes but the common-wealth; because our subjection is to the
 common-wealth only: and that commands, are to be signified by sufficient
 signs; because man knows not otherwise how to obey them. and
 therefore, whatsoever can from this definition by necessary consequence
 be deduced, ought to be acknowledged for truth. now i deduce from it
 this that followeth.
 



the soveraign is legislator
 
1. the legislator in all common-wealths, is only the soveraign, be he
 one man, as in monarchy, or one assembly of men, as in democracy,
 or aristocracy. for the legislator, is that maketh the law. and the
 common-wealth only, praescribes, and commandeth the observation of those
 rules, which we call law: therefore the common-wealth is the legislator.
 but the common-wealth is person, nor has capacity to doe any thing,
 but by the representative, (that is, the soveraign;) and therefore the
 soveraign is the sole legislator. for the same reason, none can abrogate
 law made, but the soveraign; because law is not abrogated, but by
 another law, that forbiddeth it to be put in execution.
 



and not subject to civill law
 
2. the soveraign of common-wealth, be it an assembly, or one man, is
 not subject to the civill lawes. for having power to make, and repeale
 lawes, may when pleaseth, free himselfe from that subjection,
 by repealing those lawes that trouble him, and making of new; and
 consequently was free before. for is free, that can be free when
 will: nor is it possible for any person to be bound to himselfe;
 because that can bind, can release; and therefore that is bound to
 himselfe onely, is not bound.
 



use, law not by vertue of time, but of the soveraigns consent
 
3. when long use obtaineth the authority of law, it is not the
 length of time that maketh the authority, but the will of the soveraign
 signified by his silence, (for silence is sometimes an argument of
 consent;) and it is longer law, then the soveraign shall be silent
 therein. and therefore if the soveraign shall have question of right
 grounded, not upon his present will, but upon the lawes formerly
 made; the length of time shal bring prejudice to his right; but the
 question shal be judged by equity. for many unjust actions, and unjust
 sentences, go uncontrolled longer time, than any man can remember.
 and our lawyers account customes law, but such as are reasonable, and
 that evill customes are to be abolished; but the judgement of what is
 reasonable, and of what is to be abolished, belongeth to him that maketh
 the law, which is the soveraign assembly, or monarch.
 



the law of nature, and the civill law contain each other
 
4. the law of nature, and the civill law, contain each other, and are
 of equall extent. for the lawes of nature, which consist in equity,
 justice, gratitude, and other morall vertues on these depending, in the
 condition of meer nature (as i have said before in the end of the 15th
 chapter,) are not properly lawes, but qualities that dispose men to
 peace, and to obedience. when common-wealth is once settled, then are
 they actually lawes, and not before; as being then the commands of the
 common-wealth; and therefore also civill lawes: for it is the soveraign
 power that obliges men to obey them. for in the differences of private
 men, to declare, what is equity, what is justice, and what is morall
 vertue, and to make them binding, there is need of the ordinances of
 soveraign power, and punishments to be ordained for such as shall break
 them; which ordinances are therefore part of the civill law. the law of
 nature therefore is part of the civill law in all common-wealths of
 the world. reciprocally also, the civill law is part of the dictates
 of nature. for justice, that is to say, performance of covenant, and
 giving to every man his own, is dictate of the law of nature. but
 every subject in common-wealth, hath covenanted to obey the civill
 law, (either one with another, as when they assemble to make common
 representative, or with the representative it selfe one by one, when
 subdued by the sword they promise obedience, that they may receive
 life;) and therefore obedience to the civill law is part also of the
 law of nature. civill, and naturall law are not different kinds, but
 different parts of law; whereof one part being written, is called
 civill, the other unwritten, naturall. but the right of nature, that
 is, the naturall liberty of man, may by the civill law be abridged,
 and restrained: nay, the end of making lawes, is other, but such
 restraint; without the which there cannot possibly be any peace. and law
 was brought into the world for nothing else, but to limit the naturall
 liberty of particular men, in such manner, as they might not hurt, but
 assist one another, and joyn together against common enemy.
 



provinciall lawes are not made by custome, but by the soveraign power
 
5. if the soveraign of one common-wealth, subdue people that have
 lived under other written lawes, and afterwards govern them by the
 same lawes, by which they were governed before; yet those lawes are the
 civill lawes of the victor, and not of the vanquished common-wealth, for
 the legislator is he, not by whose authority the lawes were first made,
 but by whose authority they now continue to be lawes. and therefore
 where there be divers provinces, within the dominion of common-wealth,
 and in those provinces diversity of lawes, which commonly are called the
 customes of each severall province, we are not to understand that such
 customes have their force, onely from length of time; but that they were
 antiently lawes written, or otherwise made known, for the constitutions,
 and statutes of their soveraigns; and are now lawes, not by vertue of
 the praescription of time, but by the constitutions of their present
 soveraigns. but if an unwritten law, in all the provinces of dominion,
 shall be generally observed, and iniquity appear in the use thereof;
 that law can be other but law of nature, equally obliging all
 man-kind.
 



some foolish opinions of lawyers concerning the making of lawes
 
6. seeing then all lawes, written, and unwritten, have their authority,
 and force, from the will of the common-wealth; that is to say, from the
 will of the representative; which in monarchy is the monarch, and
 in other common-wealths the soveraign assembly; man may wonder from
 whence proceed such opinions, as are found in the books of lawyers of
 eminence in severall common-wealths, directly, or by consequence making
 the legislative power depend on private men, or subordinate judges.
 as for example, "that the common law, hath controuler but the
 parlament;" which is true onely where parlament has the soveraign
 power, and cannot be assembled, nor dissolved, but by their own
 discretion. for if there be right in any else to dissolve them, there
 is right also to controule them, and consequently to controule their
 controulings. and if there be such right, then the controuler of
 lawes is not parlamentum, but rex in parlamento. and where parlament
 is soveraign, if it should assemble never so many, or so wise men, from
 the countries subject to them, for whatsoever cause; yet there is man
 will believe, that such an assembly hath thereby acquired to themselves
 legislative power. item, that the two arms of common-wealth,
 are force, and justice; the first whereof is in the king; the other
 deposited in the hands of the parlament. as if common-wealth could
 consist, where the force were in any hand, which justice had not the
 authority to command and govern.
 
7. that law can never be against reason, our lawyers are agreed; and
 that not the letter,(that is, every construction of it,) but that which
 is according to the intention of the legislator, is the law. and it is
 true: but the doubt is, of whose reason it is, that shall be received
 for law. it is not meant of any private reason; for then there would be
 as much contradiction in the lawes, as there is in the schooles; nor yet
 (as sr. ed, coke makes it (sir edward coke, upon littleton lib.2. ch.6
 fol 97.b),) an artificiall perfection of reason, gotten by long study,
 observation, and experience, (as his was.) for it is possible long study
 may encrease, and confirm erroneous sentences: and where men build on
 false grounds, the more they build, the greater is the ruine; and of
 those that study, and observe with equall time, and diligence, the
 reasons and resolutions are, and must remain discordant: and therefore
 it is not that juris prudentia, or wisedome of subordinate judges;
 but the reason of this our artificiall man the common-wealth, and
 his command, that maketh law: and the common-wealth being in
 their representative but one person, there cannot easily arise any
 contradiction in the lawes; and when there doth, the same reason is
 able, by interpretation, or alteration, to take it away. in all courts
 of justice, the soveraign (which is the person of the common-wealth,)
 is that judgeth: the subordinate judge, ought to have regard to the
 reason, which moved his soveraign to make such law, that his sentence
 may be according thereunto; which then is his soveraigns sentence;
 otherwise it is his own, and an unjust one.
 



law made, if not also made known, is law
 
8. from this, that the law is command, and command consisteth in
 declaration, or manifestation of the will of him that commandeth, by
 voyce, writing, or some other sufficient argument of the same, we may
 understand, that the command of the common-wealth, is law onely to
 those, that have means to take notice of it. over naturall fooles,
 children, or mad-men there is law, more than over brute beasts;
 nor are they capable of the title of just, or unjust; because they had
 never power to make any covenant, or to understand the consequences
 thereof; and consequently never took upon them to authorise the
 actions of any soveraign, as they must do that make to themselves a
 common-wealth. and as those from whom nature, or accident hath taken
 away the notice of all lawes in generall; so also every man, from whom
 any accident, not proceeding from his own default, hath taken away the
 means to take notice of any particular law, is excused, if observe it
 not; and to speak properly, that law is law to him. it is therefore
 necessary, to consider in this place, what arguments, and signes be
 sufficient for the knowledge of what is the law; that is to say, what is
 the will of the soveraign, as well in monarchies, as in other formes of
 government.
 



unwritten lawes are all of them lawes of nature
 
and first, if it be law that obliges all the subjects without
 exception, and is not written, nor otherwise published in such places as
 they may take notice thereof, it is law of nature. for whatsoever men
 are to take knowledge of for law, not upon other mens words, but every
 one from his own reason, must be such as is agreeable to the reason of
 all men; which law can be, but the law of nature. the lawes of nature
 therefore need not any publishing, nor proclamation; as being contained
 in this one sentence, approved by all the world, "do not that to
 another, which thou thinkest unreasonable to be done by another to thy
 selfe."
 
secondly, if it be law that obliges only some condition of men, or one
 particular man and be not written, nor published by word, then also it
 is law of nature; and known by the same arguments, and signs,
 that distinguish those in such condition, from other subjects. for
 whatsoever law is not written, or some way published by him that makes
 it law, can be known way, but by the reason of him that is to obey
 it; and is therefore also law not only civill, but naturall. for
 example, if the soveraign employ publique minister, without written
 instructions what to doe; is obliged to take for instructions the
 dictates of reason; as if make judge, the judge is to take notice,
 that his sentence ought to be according to the reason of his soveraign,
 which being alwaies understood to be equity, is bound to it by the
 law of nature: or if an ambassador, is (in things not conteined
 in his written instructions) to take for instruction that which reason
 dictates to be most conducing to his soveraigns interest; and so of
 all other ministers of the soveraignty, publique and private. all which
 instructions of naturall reason may be comprehended under one name of
 fidelity; which is branch of naturall justice.
 
the law of nature excepted, it belongeth to the essence of all other
 lawes, to be made known, to every man that shall be obliged to obey
 them, either by word, or writing, or some other act, known to proceed
 from the soveraign authority. for the will of another, cannot be
 understood, but by his own word, or act, or by conjecture taken from his
 scope and purpose; which in the person of the common-wealth, is to be
 supposed alwaies consonant to equity and reason. and in antient time,
 before letters were in common use, the lawes were many times put into
 verse; that the rude people taking pleasure in singing, or reciting
 them, might the more easily reteine them in memory. and for the same
 reason solomon adviseth man, to bind the ten commandements (prov. 7.
 3) upon his ten fingers. and for the law which moses gave to the people
 of israel at the renewing of the covenant, (deut. 11. 19) biddeth
 them to teach it their children, by discoursing of it both at home, and
 upon the way; at going to bed, and at rising from bed; and to write
 it upon the posts, and dores of their houses; and (deut. 31. 12) to
 assemble the people, man, woman, and child, to heare it read.
 



nothing is law where the legislator cannot be known
 
nor is it enough the law be written, and published; but also that there
 be manifest signs, that it proceedeth from the will of the soveraign.
 for private men, when they have, or think they have force enough to
 secure their unjust designes, and convoy them safely to their ambitious
 ends, may publish for lawes what they please, without, or against
 the legislative authority. there is therefore requisite, not only a
 declaration of the law, but also sufficient signes of the author, and
 authority. the author, or legislator is supposed in every common-wealth
 to be evident, because is the soveraign, who having been constituted
 by the consent of every one, is supposed by every one to be sufficiently
 known. and though the ignorance, and security of men be such, for the
 most part, as that when the memory of the first constitution of their
 common-wealth is worn out, they doe not consider, by whose power they
 use to be defended against their enemies, and to have their industry
 protected, and to be righted when injury is done them; yet because no
 man that considers, can make question of it, excuse can be derived
 from the ignorance of where the soveraignty is placed. and it is a
 dictate of naturall reason, and consequently an evident law of nature,
 that man ought to weaken that power, the protection whereof hath
 himself demanded, or wittingly received against others. therefore of
 who is soveraign, man, but by his own fault, (whatsoever evill men
 suggest,) can make any doubt. the difficulty consisteth in the evidence
 of the authority derived from him; the removing whereof, dependeth on
 the knowledge of the publique registers, publique counsels, publique
 ministers, and publique seales; by which all lawes are sufficiently
 verified.
 



difference between verifying and authorising
 
verifyed, i say, not authorised: for the verification, is but the
 testimony and record; not the authority of the law; which consisteth in
 the command of the soveraign only.
 



the law verifyed by the subordinate judge
 
if therefore man have question of injury, depending on the law of
 nature; that is to say, on common equity; the sentence of the judge,
 that by commission hath authority to take cognisance of such causes, is
 sufficient verification of the law of nature in that individuall case.
 for though the advice of one that professeth the study of the law, be
 usefull for the avoyding of contention; yet it is but advice; tis the
 judge must tell men what is law, upon the hearing of the controversy.
 



by the publique registers
 
but when the question is of injury, or crime, upon written law; every
 man by recourse to the registers, by himself, or others, may (if he
 will) be sufficiently enformed, before doe such injury, or commit the
 crime, whither it be an injury, or not: nay ought to doe so: for when
 man doubts whether the act goeth about, be just, or injust; and may
 informe himself, if will; the doing is unlawfull. in like manner, he
 that supposeth himself injured, in case determined by the written law,
 which may by himself, or others see and consider; if complaine
 before consults with the law, does unjustly, and bewrayeth a
 disposition rather to vex other men, than to demand his own right.
 



by letters patent, and publique seale
 
if the question be of obedience to publique officer; to have seen his
 commission, with the publique seale, and heard it read; or to have
 had the means to be informed of it, if man would, is sufficient
 verification of his authority. for every man is obliged to doe his best
 endeavour, to informe himself of all written lawes, that may concerne
 his own future actions.
 



the interpretation of the law dependeth on the soveraign power
 
the legislator known; and the lawes, either by writing, or by the
 light of nature, sufficiently published; there wanteth yet another
 very materiall circumstance to make them obligatory. for it is not the
 letter, but the intendment, or meaning; that is to say, the authentique
 interpretation of the law (which is the sense of the legislator,) in
 which the nature of the law consisteth; and therefore the interpretation
 of all lawes dependeth on the authority soveraign; and the interpreters
 can be none but those, which the soveraign, (to whom only the
 subject oweth obedience) shall appoint. for else, by the craft of an
 interpreter, the law my be made to beare sense, contrary to that of
 the soveraign; by which means the interpreter becomes the legislator.
 



all lawes need interpretation
 
all laws, written, and unwritten, have need of interpretation.
 the unwritten law of nature, though it be easy to such, as without
 partiality, and passion, make use of their naturall reason, and
 therefore leaves the violators thereof without excuse; yet considering
 there be very few, perhaps none, that in some cases are not blinded by
 self love, or some other passion, it is now become of all laws the most
 obscure; and has consequently the greatest need of able interpreters.
 the written laws, if they be short, are easily mis-interpreted, from the
 divers significations of word, or two; if long, they be more obscure
 by the diverse significations of many words: in so much as written
 law, delivered in few, or many words, can be well understood, without a
 perfect understanding of the finall causes, for which the law was
 made; the knowledge of which finall causes is in the legislator. to him
 therefore there can not be any knot in the law, insoluble; either by
 finding out the ends, to undoe it by; or else by making what ends he
 will, (as alexander did with his sword in the gordian knot,) by the
 legislative power; which other interpreter can doe.
 



the authenticall interpretation of law is not that of writers
 
the interpretation of the lawes of nature, in common-wealth, dependeth
 not on the books of morall philosophy. the authority of writers, without
 the authority of the common-wealth, maketh not their opinions law,
 be they never so true. that which i have written in this treatise,
 concerning the morall vertues, and of their necessity, for the
 procuring, and maintaining peace, though it bee evident truth, is not
 therefore presently law; but because in all common-wealths in the world,
 it is part of the civill law: for though it be naturally reasonable; yet
 it is by the soveraigne power that it is law: otherwise, it were great
 errour, to call the lawes of nature unwritten law; whereof wee see
 so many volumes published, and in them so many contradictions of one
 another, and of themselves.
 



the interpreter of the law is the judge giving sentence vivâ voce in
 every particular case
 
the interpretation of the law of nature, is the sentence of the judge
 constituted by the soveraign authority, to heare and determine such
 controversies, as depend thereon; and consisteth in the application of
 the law to the present case. for in the act of judicature, the judge
 doth more but consider, whither the demand of the party, be consonant
 to naturall reason, and equity; and the sentence giveth, is therefore
 the interpretation of the law of nature; which interpretation is
 authentique; not because it is his private sentence; but because
 giveth it by authority of the soveraign, whereby it becomes the
 soveraigns sentence; which is law for that time, to the parties
 pleading.
 



the sentence of judge, does not bind him, or another judge to give
 like sentence in like cases ever after
 
but because there is judge subordinate, nor soveraign, but may erre
 in judgement of equity; if afterward in another like case find it
 more consonant to equity to give contrary sentence, is obliged to
 doe it. mans error becomes his own law; nor obliges him to persist
 in it. neither (for the same reason) becomes it law to other judges,
 though sworn to follow it. for though wrong sentence given by
 authority of the soveraign, if know and allow it, in such lawes as
 are mutable, be constitution of new law, in cases, in which every
 little circumstance is the same; yet in lawes immutable, such as are the
 lawes of nature, they are lawes to the same, or other judges, in the
 like cases for ever after. princes succeed one another; and one judge
 passeth, another commeth; nay, heaven and earth shall passe; but not one
 title of the law of nature shall passe; for it is the eternall law of
 god. therefore all the sentences of precedent judges that have ever
 been, cannot all together make law contrary to naturall equity: nor
 any examples of former judges, can warrant an unreasonable sentence, or
 discharge the present judge of the trouble of studying what is equity
 (in the case is to judge,) from the principles of his own naturall
 reason. for example sake, ’tis against the law of nature, to punish the
 innocent; and innocent is that acquitteth himselfe judicially, and is
 acknowledged for innocent by the judge. put the case now, that man is
 accused of capitall crime, and seeing the powers and malice of some
 enemy, and the frequent corruption and partiality of judges, runneth
 away for feare of the event, and afterwards is taken, and brought to a
 legall triall, and maketh it sufficiently appear, was not guilty of
 the crime, and being thereof acquitted, is neverthelesse condemned to
 lose his goods; this is manifest condemnation of the innocent. i say
 therefore, that there is place in the world, where this can be an
 interpretation of law of nature, or be made law by the sentences of
 precedent judges, that had done the same. for that judged it first,
 judged unjustly; and injustice can be pattern of judgement to
 succeeding judges. written law may forbid innocent men to fly, and
 they may be punished for flying: but that flying for feare of injury,
 should be taken for presumption of guilt, after man is already
 absolved of the crime judicially, is contrary to the nature of a
 presumption, which hath place after judgement given. yet this is set
 down by great lawyer for the common law of england. "if man," saith
 he, "that is innocent, be accused of felony, and for feare flyeth for
 the same; albeit judicially acquitteth himselfe of the felony; yet
 if it be found that fled for the felony, shall notwithstanding his
 innocency, forfeit all his goods, chattels, debts, and duties. for as
 to the forfeiture of them, the law will admit proofe against the
 presumption in law, grounded upon his flight." here you see, an innocent
 man, judicially acquitted, notwithstanding his innocency, (when no
 written law forbad him to fly) after his acquitall, upon presumption
 in law, condemned to lose all the goods hath. if the law ground upon
 his flight presumption of the fact, (which was capitall,) the sentence
 ought to have been capitall: if the presumption were not of the fact,
 for what then ought to lose his goods? this therefore is law of
 england; nor is the condemnation grounded upon presumption of law, but
 upon the presumption of the judges. it is also against law, to say
 that proofe shall be admitted against presumption of law. for
 all judges, soveraign and subordinate, if they refuse to heare proofe,
 refuse to do justice: for though the sentence be just, yet the judges
 that condemn without hearing the proofes offered, are unjust judges; and
 their presumption is but prejudice; which man ought to bring with him
 to the seat of justice, whatsoever precedent judgements, or examples he
 shall pretend to follow. there be other things of this nature, wherein
 mens judgements have been perverted, by trusting to precedents: but this
 is enough to shew, that though the sentence of the judge, be law to
 the party pleading, yet it is law to any judge, that shall succeed
 him in that office.
 
in like manner, when question is of the meaning of written lawes, is
 not the interpreter of them, that writeth commentary upon them. for
 commentaries are commonly more subject to cavill, than the text; and
 therefore need other commentaries; and so there will be end of such
 interpretation. and therefore unlesse there be an interpreter authorised
 by the soveraign, from which the subordinate judges are not to recede,
 the interpreter can be other than the ordinary judges, in the some
 manner, as they are in cases of the unwritten law; and their sentences
 are to be taken by them that plead, for lawes in that particular case;
 but not to bind other judges, in like cases to give like judgements.
 for judge may erre in the interpretation even of written lawes; but no
 errour of subordinate judge, can change the law, which is the generall
 sentence of the soveraigne.
 



the difference between the letter and sentence of the law
 
in written lawes, men use to make difference between the letter, and
 the sentence of the law: and when by the letter, is meant whatsoever
 can be gathered from the bare words, ’tis well distinguished. for the
 significations of almost all words, are either in themselves, or in the
 metaphoricall use of them, ambiguous; and may be drawn in argument, to
 make many senses; but there is onely one sense of the law. but if by the
 letter, be meant the literall sense, then the letter, and the sentence
 or intention of the law, is all one. for the literall sense is that,
 which the legislator is alwayes supposed to be equity: for it were a
 great contumely for judge to think otherwise of the soveraigne.
 ought therefore, if the word of the law doe not fully authorise a
 reasonable sentence, to supply it with the law of nature; or if the
 case be difficult, to respit judgement till have received more ample
 authority. for example, written law ordaineth, that which is thrust
 out of his house by force, shall be restored by force: it happens that
 man by negligence leaves his house empty, and returning is kept out by
 force, in which case there is speciall law ordained. it is evident,
 that this case is contained in the same law: for else there is remedy
 for him at all; which is to be supposed against the intention of the
 legislator. again, the word of the law, commandeth to judge according
 to the evidence: man is accused falsly of fact, which the judge saw
 himself done by another; and not by him that is accused. in this case
 neither shall the letter of the law be followed to the condemnation of
 the innocent, nor shall the judge give sentence against the evidence
 of the witnesses; because the letter of the law is to the contrary:
 but procure of the soveraign that another be made judge, and himselfe
 witnesse. so that the incommodity that follows the bare words of a
 written law, may lead him to the intention of the law, whereby to
 interpret the same the better; though incommodity can warrant a
 sentence against the law. for every judge of right, and wrong, is not
 judge of what is commodious, or incommodious to the common-wealth.
 



the abilities required in judge
 
the abilities required in good interpreter of the law, that is to say,
 in good judge, are not the same with those of an advocate; namely the
 study of the lawes. for judge, as ought to take notice of the fact,
 from none but the witnesses; so also ought to take notice of the
 law, from nothing but the statutes, and constitutions of the soveraign,
 alledged in the pleading, or declared to him by some that have authority
 from the soveraign power to declare them; and need not take care
 before-hand, what hee shall judge; for it shall bee given him what hee
 shall say concerning the fact, by witnesses; and what hee shall say in
 point of law, from those that shall in their pleadings shew it, and by
 authority interpret it upon the place. the lords of parlament in england
 were judges, and most difficult causes have been heard and determined
 by them; yet few of them were much versed in the study of the lawes,
 and fewer had made profession of them: and though they consulted with
 lawyers, that were appointed to be present there for that purpose; yet
 they alone had the authority of giving sentence. in like manner, in
 the ordinary trialls of right, twelve men of the common people, are the
 judges, and give sentence, not onely of the fact, but of the right; and
 pronounce simply for the complaynant, or for the defendant; that is to
 say, are judges not onely of the fact, but also of the right: and in a
 question of crime, not onely determine whether done, or not done; but
 also whether it be murder, homicide, felony, assault, and the like,
 which are determinations of law: but because they are not supposed to
 know the law of themselves, there is one that hath authority to enforme
 them of it, in the particular case they are to judge of. but yet if they
 judge not according to that tells them, they are not subject thereby
 to any penalty; unlesse it be made appear, they did it against their
 consciences, or had been corrupted by reward. the things that make
 good judge, or good interpreter of the lawes, are, first right
 understanding of that principall law of nature called equity; which
 depending not on the reading of other mens writings, but on the
 goodnesse of mans own naturall reason, and meditation, is presumed
 to be in those most, that have had most leisure, and had the most
 inclination to meditate thereon. secondly, contempt of unnecessary
 riches, and preferments. thirdly, to be able in judgement to devest
 himselfe of all feare, anger, hatred, love, and compassion. fourthly,
 and lastly, patience to heare; diligent attention in hearing; and memory
 to retain, digest and apply what hath heard.
 



divisions of law
 
the difference and division of the lawes, has been made in divers
 manners, according to the different methods, of those men that have
 written of them. for it is thing that dependeth not on nature, but on
 the scope of the writer; and is subservient to every mans proper method.
 in the institutions of justinian, we find seven sorts of civill lawes.
 
1. the edicts, constitutions, and epistles of the prince, that is, of
 the emperour; because the whole power of the people was in him. like
 these, are the proclamations of the kings of england.
 
2. the decrees of the whole people of rome (comprehending the senate,)
 when they were put to the question by the senate. these were lawes, at
 first, by the vertue of the soveraign power residing in the people; and
 such of them as by the emperours were not abrogated, remained lawes by
 the authority imperiall. for all lawes that bind, are understood to be
 lawes by his authority that has power to repeale them. somewhat like to
 these lawes, are the acts of parliament in england.
 
3. the decrees of the common people (excluding the senate,) when they
 were put to the question by the tribune of the people. for such of them
 as were not abrogated by the emperours, remained lawes by the authority
 imperiall. like to these, were the orders of the house of commons in
 england.
 
4. senatus consulta, the orders of the senate; because when the people
 of rome grew so numerous, as it was inconvenient to assemble them; it
 was thought fit by the emperour, that men should consult the senate in
 stead of the people: and these have some resemblance with the acts of
 counsell.
 
5. the edicts of praetors, and (in some cases) of the aediles: such as
 are the chiefe justices in the courts of england.
 
6. responsa prudentum; which were the sentences, and opinions of those
 lawyers, to whom the emperour gave authority to interpret the law, and
 to give answer to such as in matter of law demanded their advice;
 which answers, the judges in giving judgement were obliged by the
 constitutions of the emperour to observe; and should be like the reports
 of cases judged, if other judges be by the law of england bound to
 observe them. for the judges of the common law of england, are not
 properly judges, but juris consulti; of whom the judges, who are either
 the lords, or twelve men of the country, are in point of law to ask
 advice.
 
7. also, unwritten customes, (which in their own nature are an imitation
 of law,) by the tacite consent of the emperour, in case they be not
 contrary to the law of nature, are very lawes.
 
another division of lawes, is into naturall and positive. naturall are
 those which have been lawes from all eternity; and are called not onely
 naturall, but also morall lawes; consisting in the morall vertues, as
 justice, equity, and all habits of the mind that conduce to peace, and
 charity; of which i have already spoken in the fourteenth and fifteenth
 chapters.
 
positive, are those which have not been for eternity; but have been
 made lawes by the will of those that have had the soveraign power over
 others; and are either written, or made known to men, by some other
 argument of the will of their legislator.
 



another division of law
 
again, of positive lawes some are humane, some divine; and of humane
 positive lawes, some are distributive, some penal. distributive are
 those that determine the rights of the subjects, declaring to every man
 what it is, by which acquireth and holdeth propriety in lands,
 or goods, and right or liberty of action; and these speak to all
 the subjects. penal are those, which declare, what penalty shall be
 inflicted on those that violate the law; and speak to the ministers
 and officers ordained for execution. for though every one ought to be
 informed of the punishments ordained beforehand for their transgression;
 neverthelesse the command is not addressed to the delinquent, (who
 cannot be supposed will faithfully punish himselfe,) but to publique
 ministers appointed to see the penalty executed. and these penal lawes
 are for the most part written together with the lawes distributive; and
 are sometimes called judgements. for all lawes are generall judgements,
 or sentences of the legislator; as also every particular judgement, is a
 law to him, whose case is judged.
 



divine positive law how made known to be law
 
divine positive lawes (for naturall lawes being eternall, and
 universall, are all divine,) are those, which being the commandements of
 god, (not from all eternity, nor universally addressed to all men, but
 onely to certain people, or to certain persons,) are declared for
 such, by those whom god hath authorised to declare them. but this
 authority of man to declare what be these positive lawes of god, how can
 it be known? god may command man by supernaturall way, to deliver
 lawes to other men. but because it is of the essence of law, that who
 is to be obliged, be assured of the authority of him that declareth
 it, which we cannot naturally take notice to be from god, how can man
 without supernaturall revelation be assured of the revelation received
 by the declarer? and how can be bound to obey them? for the first
 question, how man can be assured of the revelation of another, without
 revelation particularly to himselfe, it is evidently impossible:
 for though man may be induced to believe such revelation, from the
 miracles they see him doe, or from seeing the extraordinary sanctity of
 his life, or from seeing the extraordinary wisedome, or extraordinary
 felicity of his actions, all which are marks of gods extraordinary
 favour; yet they are not assured evidence of speciall revelation.
 miracles are marvellous workes: but that which is marvellous to one,
 may not be so to another. sanctity may be feigned; and the visible
 felicities of this world, are most often the work of god by naturall,
 and ordinary causes. and therefore man can infallibly know by
 naturall reason, that another has had supernaturall revelation of gods
 will; but only beliefe; every one (as the signs thereof shall appear
 greater, or lesser) firmer, or weaker belief.
 
but for the second, how can be bound to obey them; it is not so hard.
 for if the law declared, be not against the law of nature (which is
 undoubtedly gods law) and undertake to obey it, is bound by his
 own act; bound i say to obey it, but not bound to believe it: for mens
 beliefe, and interiour cogitations, are not subject to the commands,
 but only to the operation of god, ordinary, or extraordinary. faith of
 supernaturall law, is not fulfilling, but only an assenting to the
 same; and not duty that we exhibite to god, but gift which god
 freely giveth to whom pleaseth; as also unbelief is not breach
 of any of his lawes; but rejection of them all, except the lawes
 naturall. but this that i say, will be made yet cleerer, by the
 examples, and testimonies concerning this point in holy scripture. the
 covenant god made with abraham (in supernaturall manner) was thus,
 (gen. 17. 10) "this is the covenant which thou shalt observe between
 and thee and thy seed after thee." abrahams seed had not this
 revelation, nor were yet in being; yet they are party to the covenant,
 and bound to obey what abraham should declare to them for gods law;
 which they could not be, but in vertue of the obedience they owed to
 their parents; who (if they be subject to other earthly power, as
 here in the case of abraham) have soveraign power over their children,
 and servants. againe, where god saith to abraham, "in thee shall all
 nations of the earth be blessed: for i know thou wilt command thy
 children, and thy house after thee to keep the way of the lord, and to
 observe righteousnesse and judgement," it is manifest, the obedience of
 his family, who had revelation, depended on their former obligation
 to obey their soveraign. at mount sinai moses only went up to god; the
 people were forbidden to approach on paine of death; yet were they bound
 to obey all that moses declared to them for gods law. upon what ground,
 but on this submission of their own, "speak thou to us, and we will
 heare thee; but let not god speak to us, lest we dye?" by which two
 places it sufficiently appeareth, that in common-wealth, subject
 that has certain and assured revelation particularly to himself
 concerning the will of god, is to obey for such, the command of
 the common-wealth: for if men were at liberty, to take for gods
 commandements, their own dreams, and fancies, or the dreams and
 fancies of private men; scarce two men would agree upon what is gods
 commandement; and yet in respect of them, every man would despise the
 commandements of the common-wealth. i conclude therefore, that in all
 things not contrary to the morall law, (that is to say, to the law of
 nature,) all subjects are bound to obey that for divine law, which is
 declared to be so, by the lawes of the common-wealth. which also is
 evident to any mans reason; for whatsoever is not against the law of
 nature, may be made law in the name of them that have the soveraign
 power; and there is reason men should be the lesse obliged by it,
 when tis propounded in the name of god. besides, there is place in
 the world where men are permitted to pretend other commandements of god,
 than are declared for such by the common-wealth. christian states punish
 those that revolt from christian religion, and all other states, those
 that set up any religion by them forbidden. for in whatsoever is not
 regulated by the common-wealth, tis equity (which is the law of nature,
 and therefore an eternall law of god) that every man equally enjoy his
 liberty.
 



another division of lawes
 
there is also another distinction of laws, into fundamentall, and not
 fundamentall: but i could never see in any author, what fundamentall
 law signifieth. neverthelesse one may very reasonably distinguish laws
 in that manner.
 



fundamentall law what
 
for fundamentall law in every common-wealth is that, which being taken
 away, the common-wealth faileth, and is utterly dissolved; as building
 whose foundation is destroyed. and therefore fundamentall law is that,
 by which subjects are bound to uphold whatsoever power is given to the
 soveraign, whether monarch, or soveraign assembly, without which the
 common-wealth cannot stand, such as is the power of war and peace, of
 judicature, of election of officers, and of doing whatsoever shall
 think necessary for the publique good. not fundamentall is that
 the abrogating whereof, draweth not with it the dissolution of the
 common-wealth; such as are the lawes concerning controversies between
 subject and subject. thus much of the division of lawes.
 



difference between law and right
 
i find the words lex civilis, and jus civile, that is to say, law and
 right civil, promiscuously used for the same thing, even in the most
 learned authors; which neverthelesse ought not to be so. for right is
 liberty, namely that liberty which the civil law leaves us: but civill
 law is an obligation; and takes from us the liberty which the law of
 nature gave us. nature gave right to every man to secure himselfe
 by his own strength, and to invade suspected neighbour, by way of
 prevention; but the civill law takes away that liberty, in all cases
 where the protection of the lawe may be safely stayd for. insomuch as
 lex and jus, are as different as obligation and liberty.
 



and between law and charter
 
likewise lawes and charters are taken promiscuously for the same
 thing. yet charters are donations of the soveraign; and not lawes, but
 exemptions from law. the phrase of law is jubeo, injungo, i command,
 and enjoyn: the phrase of charter is dedi, concessi, i have given, i
 have granted: but what is given or granted, to man, is not forced
 upon him, by law. law may be made to bind all the subjects of a
 common-wealth: liberty, or charter is only to one man, or some one
 part of the people. for to say all the people of common-wealth, have
 liberty in any case whatsoever; is to say, that in such case, there hath
 been law made; or else having been made, is now abrogated.
 


chapter xxvii. of crimes, excuses, and extenuations
 


sinne what
 
sinne, is not onely transgression of law, but also any contempt of
 the legislator. for such contempt, is breach of all his lawes at once.
 and therefore may consist, not onely in the commission of fact, or in
 the speaking of words by the lawes forbidden, or in the omission of
 what the law commandeth, but also in the intention, or purpose to
 transgresse. for the purpose to breake the law, is some degree of
 contempt of him, to whom it belongeth to see it executed. to be
 delighted in the imagination onely, of being possessed of another mans
 goods, servants, or wife, without any intention to take them from him
 by force, or fraud, is breach of the law, that sayth, "thou shalt not
 covet:" nor is the pleasure man my have in imagining, or dreaming of
 the death of him, from whose life expecteth nothing but dammage, and
 displeasure, sinne; but the resolving to put some act in execution,
 that tendeth thereto. for to be pleased in the fiction of that, which
 would please man if it were reall, is passion so adhaerent to the
 nature both of man, and every other living creature, as to make it a
 sinne, were to make sinne of being man. the consideration of this,
 has made think them too severe, both to themselves, and others, that
 maintain, that the first motions of the mind, (though checked with the
 fear of god) be sinnes. but i confesse it is safer to erre on that hand,
 than on the other.
 



crime what
 
crime, is sinne, consisting in the committing (by deed, or word)
 of that which the law forbiddeth, or the omission of what it hath
 commanded. so that every crime is sinne; but not every sinne crime.
 to intend to steale, or kill, is sinne, though it never appeare in
 word, or fact: for god that seeth the thoughts of man, can lay it to
 his charge: but till it appear by some thing done, or said, by which
 the intention may be crime; which distinction the greeks observed in
 the word amartema, and egklema, or aitia; wherof the former, (which is
 translated sinne,) signifieth any swarving from the law whatsoever; but
 the two later, (which are translated crime,) signifie that sinne onely,
 whereof one man may accuse another. but of intentions, which never
 appear by any outward act, there is place for humane accusation. in
 like manner the latines by peccatum, which is sinne, signifie all manner
 of deviation from the law; but by crimen, (which word they derive from
 cerno, which signifies to perceive,) they mean onely such sinnes, as my
 be made appear before judge; and therfore are not meer intentions.
 



where civill law is, there is crime
 
from this relation of sinne to the law, and of crime to the civill
 law, may be inferred, first, that where law ceaseth, sinne ceaseth.
 but because the law of nature is eternall, violation of covenants,
 ingratitude, arrogance, and all facts contrary to any morall vertue, can
 never cease to be sinne. secondly, that the civill law ceasing, crimes
 cease: for there being other law remaining, but that of nature, there
 is place for accusation; every man being his own judge, and accused
 onely by his own conscience, and cleared by the uprightnesse of his own
 intention. when therefore his intention is right, his fact is sinne:
 if otherwise, his fact is sinne; but not crime. thirdly, that when the
 soveraign power ceaseth, crime also ceaseth: for where there is such
 power, there is protection to be had from the law; and therefore
 every one may protect himself by his own power: for man in the
 institution of soveraign power can be supposed to give away the right
 of preserving his own body; for the safety whereof all soveraignty was
 ordained. but this is to be understood onely of those, that have not
 themselves contributed to the taking away of the power that protected
 them: for that was crime from the beginning.
 



ignorance of the law of nature excuseth man
 
the source of every crime, is some defect of the understanding; or some
 errour in reasoning, or some sudden force of the passions. defect in
 the understanding, is ignorance; in reasoning, erroneous opinion. again,
 ignorance is of three sort; of the law, and of the soveraign, and of the
 penalty. ignorance of the law of nature excuseth man; because every
 man that hath attained to the use of reason, is supposed to know, he
 ought not to do to another, what would not have done to himselfe.
 therefore into what place soever man shall come, if do any thing
 contrary to that law, it is crime. if man come from the indies
 hither, and perswade men here to receive new religion, or teach them
 any thing that tendeth to disobedience of the lawes of this country,
 though be never so well perswaded of the truth of what teacheth,
 commits crime, and may be justly punished for the same, not onely
 because his doctrine is false, but also because does that which he
 would not approve in another, namely, that comming from hence, should
 endeavour to alter the religion there. but ignorance of the civill law,
 shall excuse man in strange country, till it be declared to him;
 because, till then civill law is binding.
 



ignorance of the civill law excuseth sometimes
 
in the like manner, if the civill law of mans own country, be not
 so sufficiently declared, as may know it if will; nor the action
 against the law of nature; the ignorance is good excuse: in other
 cases ignorance of the civill law, excuseth not.
 



ignorance of the soveraign excuseth not
 
ignorance of the soveraign power, in the place of mans ordinary
 residence, excuseth him not; because ought to take notice of the
 power, by which hath been protected there.
 



ignorance of the penalty excuseth not
 
ignorance of the penalty, where the law is declared, excuseth man:
 for in breaking the law, which without fear of penalty to follow, were
 not law, but vain words, undergoeth the penalty, though know not
 what it is; because, whosoever voluntarily doth any action, accepteth
 all the known consequences of it; but punishment is known consequence
 of the violation of the lawes, in every common-wealth; which punishment,
 if it be determined already by the law, is subject to that; if not,
 then is subject to arbitrary punishment. for it is reason, that he
 which does injury, without other limitation than that of his own will,
 should suffer punishment without other limitation, than that of his will
 whose law is thereby violated.
 



punishments declared before the fact, excuse from greater punishments
 after it
 
but when penalty, is either annexed to the crime in the law it selfe,
 or hath been usually inflicted in the like cases; there the delinquent
 is excused from greater penalty. for the punishment foreknown, if not
 great enough to deterre men from the action, is an invitement to it:
 because when men compare the benefit of their injustice, with the harm
 of their punishment, by necessity of nature they choose that which
 appeareth best for themselves; and therefore when they are punished more
 than the law had formerly determined, or more than others were punished
 for the same crime; it the law that tempted, and deceiveth them.
 



nothing can be made crime by law made after the fact
 
law, made after fact done, can make it crime: because if the
 fact be against the law of nature, the law was before the fact; and a
 positive law cannot be taken notice of, before it be made; and therefore
 cannot be obligatory. but when the law that forbiddeth fact, is made
 before the fact be done; yet that doth the fact, is lyable to the
 penalty ordained after, in case lesser penalty were made known
 before, neither by writing, nor by example, for the reason immediatly
 before alledged.
 



false principles of right and wrong causes of crime
 
from defect in reasoning, (that is to say, from errour,) men are prone
 to violate the lawes, three wayes. first, by presumption of false
 principles; as when men from having observed how in all places, and
 in all ages, unjust actions have been authorised, by the force, and
 victories of those who have committed them; and that potent men,
 breaking through the cob-web lawes of their country, the weaker sort,
 and those that have failed in their enterprises, have been esteemed the
 onely criminals; have thereupon taken for principles, and grounds of
 their reasoning, "that justice is but vain word: that whatsoever man
 can get by his own industry, and hazard, is his own: that the practice
 of all nations cannot be unjust: that examples of former times are good
 arguments of doing the like again;" and many more of that kind: which
 being granted, act in it selfe can be crime, but must be made so
 (not by the law, but) by the successe of them that commit it; and the
 same fact be vertuous, or vicious, as fortune pleaseth; so that what
 marius makes crime, sylla shall make meritorious, and caesar (the same
 lawes standing) turn again into crime, to the perpetuall disturbance
 of the peace of the common-wealth.
 



false teachers mis-interpreting the law of nature secondly, by false
 teachers, that either mis-interpret the law of nature, making it thereby
 repugnant to the law civill; or by teaching for lawes, such doctrines of
 their own, or traditions of former times, as are inconsistent with the
 duty of subject.
 



and false inferences from true principles, by teachers
 
thirdly, by erroneous inferences from true principles; which happens
 commonly to men that are hasty, and praecipitate in concluding, and
 resolving what to do; such as are they, that have both great opinion
 of their own understanding, and believe that things of this nature
 require not time and study, but onely common experience, and good
 naturall wit; whereof man thinks himselfe unprovided: whereas the
 knowledge, of right and wrong, which is lesse difficult, there is no
 man will pretend to, without great and long study. and of those defects
 in reasoning, there is none that can excuse (though some of them may
 extenuate) crime, in any man, that pretendeth to the administration of
 his own private businesse; much lesse in them that undertake publique
 charge; because they pretend to the reason, upon the want whereof they
 would ground their excuse.
 



by their passions;
 
of the passions that most frequently are the causes of crime, one,
 is vain-glory, or foolish over-rating of their own worth; as if
 difference of worth, were an effect of their wit, or riches, or bloud,
 or some other naturall quality, not depending on the will of those that
 have the soveraign authority. from whence proceedeth presumption that
 the punishments ordained by the lawes, and extended generally to all
 subjects, ought not to be inflicted on them, with the same rigour they
 are inflicted on poore, obscure, and simple men, comprehended under the
 name of the vulgar.
 



presumption of riches
 
therefore it happeneth commonly, that such as value themselves by the
 greatnesse of their wealth, adventure on crimes, upon hope of escaping
 punishment, by corrupting publique justice, or obtaining pardon by mony,
 or other rewards.
 



and friends
 
and that such as have multitude of potent kindred; and popular men, that
 have gained reputation amongst the multitude, take courage to violate
 the lawes, from hope of oppressing the power, to whom it belongeth to
 put them in execution.
 



wisedome
 
and that such as have great, and false opinion of their own wisedome,
 take upon them to reprehend the actions, and call in question the
 authority of them that govern, and so to unsettle the lawes with their
 publique discourse, as that nothing shall be crime, but what their own
 designes require should be so. it happeneth also to the same men, to be
 prone to all such crimes, as consist in craft, and in deceiving of their
 neighbours; because they think their designes are too subtile to be
 perceived. these i say are effects of false presumption of their own
 wisdome. for of them that are the first movers in the disturbance of
 common-wealth, (which can never happen without civill warre,) very few
 are left alive long enough, to see their new designes established: so
 that the benefit of their crimes, redoundeth to posterity, and such as
 would least have wished it: which argues they were not as wise, as
 they thought they were. and those that deceive upon hope of not being
 observed, do commonly deceive themselves, (the darknesse in which they
 believe they lye hidden, being nothing else but their own blindnesse;)
 and are wiser than children, that think all hid, by hiding their own
 eyes.
 
and generally all vain-glorious men, (unlesse they be withall timorous,)
 are subject to anger; as being more prone than others to interpret for
 contempt, the ordinary liberty of conversation: and there are few crimes
 that may not be produced by anger.
 



hatred, lust, ambition, covetousnesse, causes of crime
 
as for the passions, of hate, lust, ambition, and covetousnesse, what
 crimes they are apt to produce, is so obvious to every mans experience
 and understanding, as there needeth nothing to be said of them, saving
 that they are infirmities, so annexed to the nature, both of man, and
 all other living creatures, as that their effects cannot be hindred,
 but by extraordinary use of reason, or constant severity in punishing
 them. for in those things men hate, they find continuall, and
 unavoydable molestation; whereby either mans patience must be
 everlasting, or must be eased by removing the power of that which
 molesteth him; the former is difficult; the later is many times
 impossible, without some violation of the law. ambition, and
 covetousnesse are passions also that are perpetually incumbent, and
 pressing; whereas reason is not perpetually present, to resist them:
 and therefore whensoever the hope of impunity appears, their effects
 proceed. and for lust, what it wants in the lasting, it hath in the
 vehemence, which sufficeth to weigh down the apprehension of all easie,
 or uncertain punishments.
 



fear sometimes cause of crime, as when the danger is neither present,
 nor corporeall
 
of all passions, that which enclineth men least to break the lawes, is
 fear. nay, (excepting some generous natures,) it is the onely thing,
 (when there is apparence of profit, or pleasure by breaking the lawes,)
 that makes men keep them. and yet in many cases crime may be committed
 through feare.
 
for not every fear justifies the action it produceth, but the fear onely
 of corporeall hurt, which we call bodily fear, and from which man
 cannot see how to be delivered, but by the action. man is assaulted,
 fears present death, from which sees not how to escape, but by
 wounding him that assaulteth him; if wound him to death, this is no
 crime; because man is supposed at the making of common-wealth, to
 have abandoned the defence of his life, or limbes, where the law cannot
 arrive time enough to his assistance. but to kill man, because from
 his actions, or his threatnings, i may argue will kill when he
 can, (seeing i have time, and means to demand protection, from the
 soveraign power,) is crime. again, man receives words of disgrace,
 or some little injuries (for which they that made the lawes, had
 assigned punishment, nor thought it worthy of man that hath the use
 of reason, to take notice of,) and is afraid, unlesse revenge it,
 shall fall into contempt, and consequently be obnoxious to the like
 injuries from others; and to avoyd this, breaks the law, and protects
 himselfe for the future, by the terrour of his private revenge. this is
 crime; for the hurt is not corporeall, but phantasticall, and (though
 in this corner of the world, made sensible by custome not many years
 since begun, amongst young and vain men,) so light, as gallant man,
 and one that is assured of his own courage, cannot take notice of. also
 man may stand in fear of spirits, either through his own superstition,
 or through too much credit given to other men, that tell him of strange
 dreams and visions; and thereby be made believe they will hurt him, for
 doing, or omitting divers things, which neverthelesse, to do, or omit,
 is contrary to the lawes; and that which is so done, or omitted, is not
 to be excused by this fear; but is crime. for (as i have shewn before
 in the second chapter) dreams be naturally but the fancies remaining in
 sleep, after the impressions our senses had formerly received waking;
 and when men are by any accident unassured they have slept, seem to be
 reall visions; and therefore that presumes to break the law upon his
 own, or anothers dream, or pretended vision, or upon other fancy of
 the power of invisible spirits, than is permitted by the common-wealth,
 leaveth the law of nature, which is certain offence, and followeth the
 imagery of his own, or another private mans brain, which can never
 know whether it signifieth any thing, or nothing, nor whether that
 tells his dream, say true, or lye; which if every private man should
 have leave to do, (as they must by the law of nature, if any one have
 it) there could law be made to hold, and so all common-wealth would
 be dissolved.
 



crimes not equall
 
from these different sources of crimes, it appeares already, that all
 crimes are not (as the stoicks of old time maintained) of the same
 allay. there is place, not only for excuse, by which that which seemed
 crime, is proved to be none at all; but also for extenuation, by which
 the crime, that seemed great, is made lesse. for though all crimes doe
 equally deserve the name of injustice, as all deviation from strait
 line is equally crookednesse, which the stoicks rightly observed; yet
 it does not follow that all crimes are equally unjust, more than that
 all crooked lines are equally crooked; which the stoicks not observing,
 held it as great crime, to kill hen, against the law, as to kill
 ones father.
 



totall excuses
 
that which totally excuseth fact, and takes away from it the nature of
 crime, can be none but that, which at the same time, taketh away the
 obligation of the law. for the fact committed once against the law,
 if that committed it be obliged to the law, can be other than a
 crime.
 
the want of means to know the law, totally excuseth: for the law whereof
 man has means to enforme himself, is not obligatory. but the want
 of diligence to enquire, shall not be considered as want of means; nor
 shall any man, that pretendeth to reason enough for the government of
 his own affairs, be supposed to want means to know the lawes of nature;
 because they are known by the reason pretends to: only children, and
 madmen are excused from offences against the law naturall.
 
where man is captive, or in the power of the enemy, (and is then in
 the power of the enemy, when his person, or his means of living, is
 so,) if it be without his own fault, the obligation of the law ceaseth;
 because must obey the enemy, or dye; and consequently such obedience
 is crime: for man is obliged (when the protection of the law
 faileth,) not to protect himself, by the best means can.
 
if man by the terrour of present death, be compelled to doe fact
 against the law, is totally excused; because law can oblige a
 man to abandon his own preservation. and supposing such law were
 obligatory; yet man would reason thus, "if i doe it not, i die
 presently; if i doe it, i die afterwards; therefore by doing it, there
 is time of life gained;" nature therefore compells him to the fact.
 
when man is destitute of food, or other thing necessary for his life,
 and cannot preserve himselfe any other way, but by some fact against
 the law; as if in great famine take the food by force, or stealth,
 which cannot obtaine for mony nor charity; or in defence of his life,
 snatch away another mans sword, is totally excused, for the reason
 next before alledged.
 



excuses against the author
 
again, facts done against the law, by the authority of another, are
 by that authority excused against the author; because man ought to
 accuse his own fact in another, that is but his instrument: but it
 is not excused against third person thereby injured; because in the
 violation of the law, bothe the author, and actor are criminalls.
 from hence it followeth that when that man, or assembly, that hath the
 soveraign power, commandeth man to do that which is contrary to a
 former law, the doing of it is totally excused: for ought not to
 condemn it himselfe, because is the author; and what cannot justly
 be condemned by the soveraign, cannot justly be punished by any other.
 besides, when the soveraign commandeth any thing to be done against
 his own former law, the command, as to that particular fact, is an
 abrogation of the law.
 
if that man, or assembly, that hath the soveraign power, disclaime
 any right essentiall to the soveraignty, whereby there accrueth to the
 subject, any liberty inconsistent with the soveraign power, that is to
 say, with the very being of common-wealth, if the subject shall refuse
 to obey the command in any thing, contrary to the liberty granted, this
 is neverthelesse sinne, and contrary to the duty of the subject: for
 ought to take notice of what is inconsistent with the soveraignty,
 because it was erected by his own consent, and for his own defence;
 and that such liberty as is inconsistent with it, was granted through
 ignorance of the evill consequence thereof. but if not onely disobey,
 but also resist publique minister in the execution of it, then it is
 crime; because might have been righted, (without any breach of the
 peace,) upon complaint.
 
the degrees of crime are taken on divers scales, and measured, first, by
 the malignity of the source, or cause: secondly, by the contagion of the
 example: thirdly, by the mischiefe of the effect; and fourthly, by the
 concurrence of times, places, and persons.
 



presumption of power, aggravateth
 
the same fact done against the law, if it proceed from presumption of
 strength, riches, or friends to resist those that are to execute the
 law, is greater crime, than if it proceed from hope of not being
 discovered, or of escape by flight: for presumption of impunity by
 force, is root, from whence springeth, at all times, and upon all
 temptations, contempt of all lawes; whereas in the later case, the
 apprehension of danger, that makes man fly, renders him more obedient
 for the future. crime which we know to be so, is greater than the same
 crime proceeding from false perswasion that it is lawfull: for that
 committeth it against his own conscience, presumeth on his force, or
 other power, which encourages him to commit the same again: but that
 doth it by errour, after the errour shewn him, is conformable to the
 law.
 



evill teachers, extenuate
 
hee, whose errour proceeds from the authority of teacher, or an
 interpreter of the law publiquely authorised, is not so faulty, as he
 whose errour proceedeth from peremptory pursute of his own principles,
 and reasoning: for what is taught by one that teacheth by publique
 authority, the common-wealth teacheth, and hath resemblance of law,
 till the same authority controuleth it; and in all crimes that contain
 not in them denyall of the soveraign power, nor are against an evident
 law, excuseth totally: whereas that groundeth his actions, on his
 private judgement, ought according to the rectitude, or errour thereof,
 to stand, or fall.
 



examples of impunity, extenuate
 
the same fact, if it have been constantly punished in other men, as
 greater crime, than if there have been may precedent examples of
 impunity. for those examples, are so many hopes of impunity given by
 the soveraign himselfe: and because which furnishes man with such
 hope, and presumption of mercy, as encourageth him to offend, hath his
 part in the offence; cannot reasonably charge the offender with the
 whole.
 



praemeditation, aggravateth
 
crime arising from sudden passion, is not so great, as when the same
 ariseth from long meditation: for in the former case there is place
 for extenuation, in the common infirmity of humane nature: but that
 doth it with praemeditation, has used circumspection, and cast his eye,
 on the law, on the punishment, and on the consequence thereof to humane
 society; all which in committing the crime, hee hath contemned, and
 postposed to his own appetite. but there is suddennesse of passion
 sufficient for totall excuse: for all the time between the first
 knowing of the law, and the commission of the fact, shall be taken for
 time of deliberation; because ought by meditation of the law, to
 rectifie the irregularity of his passions.
 
where the law is publiquely, and with assiduity, before all the people
 read, and interpreted; fact done against it, is greater crime,
 than where men are left without such instruction, to enquire of it with
 difficulty, uncertainty, and interruption of their callings, and
 be informed by private men: for in this case, part of the fault is
 discharged upon common infirmity; but in the former there is apparent
 negligence, which is not without some contempt of the soveraign power.
 



tacite approbation of the soveraign, extenuates
 
those facts which the law expresly condemneth, but the law-maker by
 other manifest signes of his will tacitly approveth, are lesse crimes,
 than the same facts, condemned both by the law, and lawmaker. for
 seeing the will of the law-maker is law, there appear in this case two
 contradictory lawes; which would totally excuse, if men were bound to
 take notice of the soveraigns approbation, by other arguments, than are
 expressed by his command. but because there are punishments consequent,
 not onely to the transgression of his law, but also to the observing
 of it, is in part cause of the transgression, and therefore cannot
 reasonably impute the whole crime to the delinquent. for example, the
 law condemneth duells; the punishment is made capitall: on the contrary
 part, that refuseth duell, is subject to contempt and scorne, without
 remedy; and sometimes by the soveraign himselfe thought unworthy to
 have any charge, or preferment in warre: if thereupon accept duell,
 considering all men lawfully endeavour to obtain the good opinion
 of them that have the soveraign power, ought not in reason to be
 rigorously punished; seeing part of the fault may be discharged on the
 punisher; which i say, not as wishing liberty of private revenges,
 or any other kind of disobedience; but care in governours, not
 to countenance any thing obliquely, which directly they forbid. the
 examples of princes, to those that see them, are, and ever have been,
 more potent to govern their actions, than the lawes themselves. and
 though it be our duty to do, not what they do, but what they say; yet
 will that duty never be performed, till it please god to give men an
 extraordinary, and supernaturall grace to follow that precept.
 



comparison of crimes from their effects
 
again, if we compare crimes by the mischiefe of their effects, first,
 the same fact, when it redounds to the dammage of many, is greater, than
 when it redounds to the hurt of few. and therefore, when fact hurteth,
 not onely in the present, but also, (by example) in the future, it is a
 greater crime, than if it hurt onely in the present: for the former,
 is fertile crime, and multiplyes to the hurt of many; the later is
 barren. to maintain doctrines contrary to the religion established in
 the common-wealth, is greater fault, in an authorised preacher, than
 in private person: so also is it, to live prophanely, incontinently,
 or do any irreligious act whatsoever. likewise in professor of the
 law, to maintain any point, on do any act, that tendeth to the weakning
 of the soveraign power, as greater crime, than in another man: also in
 man that hath such reputation for wisedome, as that his counsells are
 followed, or his actions imitated by many, his fact against the law, is
 greater crime, than the same fact in another: for such men not onely
 commit crime, but teach it for law to all other men. and generally all
 crimes are the greater, by the scandall they give; that is to say, by
 becoming stumbling-blocks to the weak, that look not so much upon the
 way they go in, as upon the light that other men carry before them.
 



laesae majestas
 
also facts of hostility against the present state of the common-wealth,
 are greater crimes, than the same acts done to private men; for
 the dammage extends it selfe to all: such are the betraying of the
 strengths, or revealing of the secrets of the common-wealth to an enemy;
 also all attempts upon the representative of the common-wealth, be it a
 monarch, or an assembly; and all endeavours by word, or deed to diminish
 the authority of the same, either in the present time, or in succession:
 which crimes the latines understand by crimina laesae majestatis, and
 consist in designe, or act, contrary to fundamentall law.
 



bribery and false testimony
 
likewise those crimes, which render judgements of effect, are greater
 crimes, than injuries done to one, or few persons; as to receive
 mony to give false judgement, or testimony, is greater crime, than
 otherwise to deceive man of the like, or greater summe; because not
 onely has wrong, that falls by such judgements; but all judgements
 are rendered uselesse, and occasion ministred to force, and private
 revenges.
 



depeculation
 
also robbery, and depeculation of the publique treasure, or revenues,
 is greater crime, than the robbing, or defrauding of private man;
 because to robbe the publique, is to robbe many at once.
 



counterfeiting authority
 
also the counterfeit usurpation of publique ministery, the
 counterfeiting of publique seales, or publique coine, than
 counterfeiting of private mans person, or his seale; because the fraud
 thereof, extendeth to the dammage of many.
 



crimes against private men compared
 
of facts against the law, done to private men, the greater crime, is
 that, where the dammage in the common opinion of men, is most sensible.
 and therefore
 
to kill against the law, is greater crime, that any other injury, life
 preserved.
 
and to kill with torment, greater, than simply to kill.
 
and mutilation of limbe, greater, than the spoyling man of his
 goods.
 
and the spoyling man of his goods, by terrour of death, or wounds,
 than by clandestine surreption.
 
and by clandestine surreption, than by consent fraudulently obtained.
 
and the violation of chastity by force, greater, than by flattery.
 
and of woman married, than of woman not married.
 
for all these things are commonly so valued; though some men are more,
 and some lesse sensible of the same offence. but the law regardeth not
 the particular, but the generall inclination of mankind.
 
and therefore the offence men take, from contumely, in words, or
 gesture, when they produce other harme, than the present griefe of
 him that is reproached, hath been neglected in the lawes of the greeks,
 romans, and other both antient, and moderne common-wealths; supposing
 the true cause of such griefe to consist, not in the contumely, (which
 takes hold upon men conscious of their own vertue,) but in the
 pusillanimity of him that is offended by it.
 
also crime against private man, is much aggravated by the person,
 time, and place. for to kill ones parent, is greater crime, than to
 kill another: for the parent ought to have the honour of soveraign,
 (though have surrendred his power to the civill law,) because had
 it originally by nature. and to robbe poore man, is greater crime,
 than to robbe rich man; because ’tis to the poore more sensible
 dammage.
 
and crime committed in the time, or place appointed for devotion, is
 greater, than if committed at another time or place: for it proceeds
 from greater contempt of the law.
 
many other cases of aggravation, and extenuation might be added: but by
 these i have set down, it is obvious to every man, to take the altitude
 of any other crime proposed.
 



publique crimes what
 
lastly, because in almost all crimes there is an injury done, not onely
 to some private man, but also to the common-wealth; the same crime, when
 the accusation is in the name of the common-wealth, is called publique
 crime; and when in the name of private man, private crime; and the
 pleas according thereunto called publique, judicia publica, pleas of the
 crown; or private pleas. as in an accusation of murder, if the accuser
 be private man, the plea is private plea; if the accuser be the
 soveraign, the plea is publique plea.
 


chapter xxviii. of punishments, and rewards
 



the definition of punishment
 
"a punishment, is an evill inflicted by publique authority, on him that
 hath done, or omitted that which is judged by the same authority to be
 transgression of the law; to the end that the will of men may thereby
 the better be disposed to obedience."
 



right to punish whence derived
 
before i inferre any thing from this definition, there is question to
 be answered, of much importance; which is, by what door the right, or
 authority of punishing in any case, came in. for by that which has
 been said before, man is supposed bound by covenant, not to resist
 violence; and consequently it cannot be intended, that gave any right
 to another to lay violent hands upon his person. in the making of a
 common-wealth, every man giveth away the right of defending another; but
 not of defending himselfe. also obligeth himselfe, to assist him that
 hath the soveraignty, in the punishing of another; but of himselfe
 not. but to covenant to assist the soveraign, in doing hurt to another,
 unlesse that so covenanteth have right to doe it himselfe, is not
 to give him right to punish. it is manifest therefore that the right
 which the common-wealth (that is, he, or they that represent it) hath to
 punish, is not grounded on any concession, or gift of the subjects.
 but i have also shewed formerly, that before the institution of
 common-wealth, every man had right to every thing, and to do
 whatsoever thought necessary to his own preservation; subduing,
 hurting, or killing any man in order thereunto. and this is the
 foundation of that right of punishing, which is exercised in every
 common-wealth. for the subjects did not give the soveraign that right;
 but onely in laying down theirs, strengthned him to use his own, as he
 should think fit, for the preservation of them all: so that it was not
 given, but left to him, and to him onely; and (excepting the limits set
 him by naturall law) as entire, as in the condition of meer nature, and
 of warre of every one against his neighbour.
 



private injuries, and revenges punishments
 
from the definition of punishment, i inferre, first, that neither
 private revenges, nor injuries of private men, can properly be stiled
 punishment; because they proceed not from publique authority.
 



nor denyall of preferment
 
secondly, that to be neglected, and unpreferred by the publique
 favour, is not punishment; because new evill is thereby on any man
 inflicted; is onely left in the estate was in before.
 



nor pain inflicted without publique hearing
 
thirdly, that the evill inflicted by publique authority, without
 precedent publique condemnation, is not to be stiled by the name of
 punishment; but of an hostile act; because the fact for which man
 is punished, ought first to be judged by publique authority, to be a
 transgression of the law.
 



nor pain inflicted by usurped power
 
fourthly, that the evill inflicted by usurped power, and judges
 without authority from the soveraign, is not punishment; but an act of
 hostility; because the acts of power usurped, have not for author, the
 person condemned; and therefore are not acts of publique authority.
 



nor pain inflicted without respect to the future good
 
fifthly, that all evill which is inflicted without intention, or
 possibility of disposing the delinquent, or (by his example) other men,
 to obey the lawes, is not punishment; but an act of hostility; because
 without such an end, hurt done is contained under that name.
 



naturall evill consequences, punishments
 
sixthly, whereas to certain actions, there be annexed by nature, divers
 hurtfull consequences; as when man in assaulting another, is himselfe
 slain, or wounded; or when falleth into sicknesse by the doing of
 some unlawfull act; such hurt, though in respect of god, who is the
 author of nature, it may be said to be inflicted, and therefore a
 punishment divine; yet it is not contaned in the name of punishment in
 respect of men, because it is not inflicted by the authority of man.
 



hurt inflicted, if lesse than the benefit of transgressing, is not
 punishment
 
seventhly, if the harm inflicted be lesse than the benefit, or
 contentment that naturally followeth the crime committed, that harm is
 not within the definition; and is rather the price, or redemption, than
 the punishment of crime: because it is of the nature of punishment, to
 have for end, the disposing of men to obey the law; which end (if it
 be lesse that the benefit of the transgression) it attaineth not, but
 worketh contrary effect.
 



where the punishment is annexed to the law, greater hurt is not
 punishment, but hostility
 
eighthly, if punishment be determined and prescribed in the law it
 selfe, and after the crime committed, there be greater punishment
 inflicted, the excesse is not punishment, but an act of hostility. for
 seeing the aym of punishment is not revenge, but terrour; and the
 terrour of great punishment unknown, is taken away by the declaration
 of lesse, the unexpected addition is part of the punishment.
 but where there is punishment at all determined by the law, there
 whatsoever is inflicted, hath the nature of punishment. for that
 goes about the violation of law, wherein penalty is determined,
 expecteth an indeterminate, that is to say, an arbitrary punishment.
 



hurt inflicted for fact done before the law, punishment
 
ninthly, harme inflicted for fact done before there was law that
 forbad it, is not punishment, but an act of hostility: for before the
 law, there is transgression of the law: but punishment supposeth a
 fact judged, to have been transgression of the law; therefore
 harme inflicted before the law made, is not punishment, but an act of
 hostility.
 



the representative of the common-wealth unpunishable
 
tenthly, hurt inflicted on the representative of the common-wealth, is
 not punishment, but an act of hostility: because it is of the nature
 of punishment, to be inflicted by publique authority, which is the
 authority only of the representative it self.
 



hurt to revolted subjects is done by right of war, not by way of
 punishment
 
lastly, harme inflicted upon one that is declared enemy, fals not
 under the name of punishment: because seeing they were either never
 subject to the law, and therefore cannot transgresse it; or having been
 subject to it, and professing to be longer so, by consequence deny
 they can transgresse it, all the harmes that can be done them, must be
 taken as acts of hostility. but in declared hostility, all infliction of
 evill is lawfull. from whence it followeth, that if subject shall
 by fact, or word, wittingly, and deliberatly deny the authority of
 the representative of the common-wealth, (whatsoever penalty hath
 been formerly ordained for treason,) may lawfully be made to suffer
 whatsoever the representative will: for in denying subjection, denyes
 such punishment as by the law hath been ordained; and therefore suffers
 as an enemy of the common-wealth; that is, according to the will of
 the representative. for the punishments set down in the law, are to
 subjects, not to enemies; such as are they, that having been by their
 own act subjects, deliberately revolting, deny the soveraign power.
 
the first, and most generall distribution of punishments, is into
 divine, and humane. of the former i shall have occasion, to speak, in a
 more convenient place hereafter.
 
humane, are those punishments that be inflicted by the commandement
 of man; and are either corporall, or pecuniary, or ignominy, or
 imprisonment, or exile, or mixt of these.
 



punishments corporall
 
corporall punishment is that, which is inflicted on the body directly,
 and according to the intention of him that inflicteth it: such as are
 stripes, or wounds, or deprivation of such pleasures of the body, as
 were before lawfully enjoyed.
 



capitall
 
and of these, some be capitall, some lesse than capitall. capitall, is
 the infliction of death; and that either simply, or with torment. lesse
 than capitall, are stripes, wounds, chains, and any other corporall
 paine, not in its own nature mortall. for if upon the infliction of
 punishment death follow not in the intention of the inflicter, the
 punishment is not be bee esteemed capitall, though the harme prove
 mortall by an accident not to be foreseen; in which case death is not
 inflicted, but hastened.
 
pecuniary punishment, is that which consisteth not only in the
 deprivation of summe of mony, but also of lands, or any other goods
 which are usually bought and sold for mony. and in case the law, that
 ordaineth such punishment, be made with design to gather mony, from
 such as shall transgresse the same, it is not properly punishment,
 but the price of priviledge, and exemption from the law, which doth not
 absolutely forbid the fact, but only to those that are not able to pay
 the mony: except where the law is naturall, or part of religion; for in
 that case it is not an exemption from the law, but transgression of
 it. as where law exacteth pecuniary mulct, of them that take the
 name of god in vaine, the payment of the mulct, is not the price of a
 dispensation to sweare, but the punishment of the transgression of law
 undispensable. in like manner if the law impose summe of mony to be
 payd, to him that has been injured; this is but satisfaction for the
 hurt done him; and extinguisheth the accusation of the party injured,
 not the crime of the offender.
 



ignominy
 
ignominy, is the infliction of such evill, as is made dishonorable;
 or the deprivation of such good, as is made honourable by the
 common-wealth. for there be some things honorable by nature; as the
 effects of courage, magnanimity, strength, wisdome, and other abilities
 of body and mind: others made honorable by the common-wealth; as badges,
 titles, offices, or any other singular marke of the soveraigns favour.
 the former, (though they may faile by nature, or accident,) cannot be
 taken away by law; and therefore the losse of them is not punishment.
 but the later, may be taken away by the publique authority that made
 them honorable, and are properly punishments: such are degrading men
 condemned, of their badges, titles, and offices; or declaring them
 uncapable of the like in time to come.
 



imprisonment
 
imprisonment, is when man is by publique authority deprived of
 liberty; and may happen from two divers ends; whereof one is the safe
 custody of man accused; the other is the inflicting of paine on man
 condemned. the former is not punishment; because man is supposed
 to be punisht, before be judicially heard, and declared guilty.
 and therefore whatsoever hurt man is made to suffer by bonds, or
 restraint, before his cause be heard, over and above that which is
 necessary to assure his custody, is against the law of nature. but the
 later is punishment, because evill, and inflicted by publique authority,
 for somewhat that has by the same authority been judged transgression
 of the law. under this word imprisonment, i comprehend all restraint of
 motion, caused by an externall obstacle, be it house, which is called
 by the generall name of prison; or an iland, as when men are said to
 be confined to it; or place where men are set to worke, as in old time
 men have been condemned to quarries, and in these times to gallies; or
 be it chaine, or any other such impediment.
 



exile
 
exile, (banishment) is when man is for crime, condemned to depart
 out of the dominion of the common-wealth, or out of certaine part
 thereof; and during prefixed time, or for ever, not to return into it:
 and seemeth not in its own nature, without other circumstances, to be
 punishment; but rather an escape, or publique commandement to
 avoid punishment by flight. and cicero sayes, there was never any such
 punishment ordained in the city of rome; but cals it refuge of men in
 danger. for if man banished, be neverthelesse permitted to enjoy
 his goods, and the revenue of his lands, the meer change of ayr is no
 punishment; nor does it tend to that benefit of the common-wealth, for
 which all punishments are ordained, (that is to say, to the forming of
 mens wils to the observation of the law;) but many times to the dammage
 of the common-wealth. for banished man, is lawfull enemy of the
 common-wealth that banished him; as being more member of the
 same. but if be withall deprived of his lands, or goods, then
 the punishment lyeth not in the exile, but is to be reckoned amongst
 punishments pecuniary.
 



the punishment of innocent subjects is contrary to the law of nature
 
all punishments of innocent subjects, be they great or little, are
 against the law of nature; for punishment is only of transgression of
 the law, and therefore there can be punishment of the innocent. it
 is therefore violation, first, of that law of nature, which forbiddeth
 all men, in their revenges, to look at any thing but some future good:
 for there can arrive good to the common-wealth, by punishing the
 innocent. secondly, of that, which forbiddeth ingratitude: for seeing
 all soveraign power, is originally given by the consent of every one of
 the subjects, to the end they should as long as they are obedient, be
 protected thereby; the punishment of the innocent, is rendring of
 evill for good. and thirdly, of the law that commandeth equity; that
 is to say, an equall distribution of justice; which in punishing the
 innocent is not observed.
 



but the harme done to innocents in war, not so
 
but the infliction of what evill soever, on an innocent man, that is not
 subject, if it be for the benefit of the common-wealth, and without
 violation of any former covenant, is breach of the law of nature.
 for all men that are not subjects, are either enemies, or else they have
 ceased from being so, by some precedent covenants. but against enemies,
 whom the common-wealth judgeth capable to do them hurt, it is lawfull by
 the originall right of nature to make warre; wherein the sword judgeth
 not, nor doth the victor make distinction of nocent and innocent, as to
 the time past; nor has other respect of mercy, than as it conduceth to
 the good of his own people. and upon this ground it is, that also
 in subjects, who deliberatly deny the authority of the common-wealth
 established, the vengeance is lawfully extended, not onely to the
 fathers, but also to the third and fourth generation not yet in being,
 and consequently innocent of the fact, for which they are afflicted:
 because the nature of this offence, consisteth in the renouncing of
 subjection; which is relapse into the condition of warre, commonly
 called rebellion; and they that so offend, suffer not as subjects, but
 as enemies. for rebellion, is but warre renewed.
 



reward, is either salary, or grace
 
reward, is either of gift, or by contract. when by contract, it is
 called salary, and wages; which is benefit due for service performed, or
 promised. when of gift, it is benefit proceeding from the grace of them
 that bestow it, to encourage, or enable men to do them service. and
 therefore when the soveraign of common-wealth appointeth salary
 to any publique office, that receiveth it, is bound in justice
 to performe his office; otherwise, is bound onely in honour, to
 acknowledgement, and an endeavour of requitall. for though men have no
 lawfull remedy, when they be commanded to quit their private businesse,
 to serve the publique, without reward, or salary; yet they are not
 bound thereto, by the law of nature, nor by the institution of the
 common-wealth, unlesse the service cannot otherwise be done; because it
 is supposed the soveraign may make use of all their means, insomuch as
 the most common souldier, may demand the wages of his warrefare, as a
 debt.
 



benefits bestowed for fear, are not rewards
 
the benefits which soveraign bestoweth on subject, for fear of some
 power, and ability hath to do hurt to the common-wealth, are not
 properly rewards; for they are not salaryes; because there is in this
 case contract supposed, every man being obliged already not to do the
 common-wealth disservice: nor are they graces; because they be extorted
 by feare, which ought not to be incident to the soveraign power: but
 are rather sacrifices, which the soveraign (considered in his naturall
 person, and not in the person of the common-wealth) makes, for the
 appeasing the discontent of him thinks more potent than himselfe; and
 encourage not to obedience, but on the contrary, to the continuance, and
 increasing of further extortion.
 



salaries certain and casuall
 
and whereas some salaries are certain, and proceed from the publique
 treasure; and others uncertain, and casuall, proceeding from the
 execution of the office for which the salary is ordained; the later
 is in some cases hurtfull to the common-wealth; as in the case of
 judicature. for where the benefit of the judges, and ministers of a
 court of justice, ariseth for the multitude of causes that are brought
 to their cognisance, there must needs follow two inconveniences: one,
 is the nourishing of sutes; for the more sutes, the greater benefit: and
 another that depends on that, which is contention about jurisdiction;
 each court drawing to it selfe, as many causes as it can. but in
 offices of execution there are not those inconveniences; because their
 employment cannot be encreased by any endeavour of their own. and thus
 much shall suffice for the nature of punishment, and reward; which are,
 as it were, the nerves and tendons, that move the limbes and joynts of a
 common-wealth.
 
hitherto i have set forth the nature of man, (whose pride and other
 passions have compelled him to submit himselfe to government;) together
 with the great power of his governour, whom i compared to leviathan,
 taking that comparison out of the two last verses of the one and
 fortieth of job; where god having set forth the great power of
 leviathan, called him king of the proud. "there is nothing," saith he,
 "on earth, to be compared with him. is made so as not be afraid. hee
 seeth every high thing below him; and is king of all the children of
 pride." but because is mortall, and subject to decay, as all other
 earthly creatures are; and because there is that in heaven, (though not
 on earth) that should stand in fear of, and whose lawes ought to
 obey; i shall in the next following chapters speak of his diseases, and
 the causes of his mortality; and of what lawes of nature is bound to
 obey.
 


chapter xxix. of those things that weaken, or tend to the dissolution of
 common-wealth
 

dissolution of common-wealths proceedeth from imperfect institution
 
though nothing can be immortall, which mortals make; yet, if men had the
 use of reason they pretend to, their common-wealths might be secured, at
 least, from perishing by internall diseases. for by the nature of their
 institution, they are designed to live, as long as man-kind, or as
 the lawes of nature, or as justice it selfe, which gives them life.
 therefore when they come to be dissolved, not by externall violence, but
 intestine disorder, the fault is not in men, as they are the matter; but
 as they are the makers, and orderers of them. for men, as they become
 at last weary of irregular justling, and hewing one another, and desire
 with all their hearts, to conforme themselves into one firme and lasting
 edifice; so for want, both of the art of making fit laws, to square
 their actions by, and also of humility, and patience, to suffer the rude
 and combersome points of their present greatnesse to be taken off, they
 cannot without the help of very able architect, be compiled, into any
 other than crasie building, such as hardly lasting out their own time,
 must assuredly fall upon the heads of their posterity.
 
amongst the infirmities therefore of common-wealth, i will reckon in
 the first place, those that arise from an imperfect institution,
 and resemble the diseases of naturall body, which proceed from a
 defectuous procreation.
 



want of absolute power
 
of which, this is one, "that man to obtain kingdome, is sometimes
 content with lesse power, than to the peace, and defence of the
 common-wealth is necessarily required." from whence it commeth to passe,
 that when the exercise of the power layd by, is for the publique safety
 to be resumed, it hath the resemblance of as unjust act; which disposeth
 great numbers of men (when occasion is presented) to rebell; in the
 same manner as the bodies of children, gotten by diseased parents, are
 subject either to untimely death, or to purge the ill quality, derived
 from their vicious conception, by breaking out into biles and scabbs.
 and when kings deny themselves some such necessary power, it is not
 alwayes (though sometimes) out of ignorance of what is necessary to the
 office they undertake; but many times out of hope to recover the same
 again at their pleasure: wherein they reason not well; because such as
 will hold them to their promises, shall be maintained against them by
 forraign common-wealths; who in order to the good of their own subjects
 let slip few occasions to weaken the estate of their neighbours. so was
 thomas beckett archbishop of canterbury, supported against henry
 the second, by the pope; the subjection of ecclesiastiques to the
 common-wealth, having been dispensed with by william the conqueror at
 his reception, when took an oath, not to infringe the liberty of the
 church. and so were the barons, whose power was by william rufus (to
 have their help in transferring the succession from his elder brother,
 to himselfe,) encreased to degree, inconsistent with the soveraign
 power, maintained in their rebellion against king john, by the french.
 nor does this happen in monarchy onely. for whereas the stile of the
 antient roman common-wealth, was, the senate, and people of rome;
 neither senate, nor people pretended to the whole power; which first
 caused the seditions, of tiberius gracchus, caius gracchus, lucius
 saturnius, and others; and afterwards the warres between the senate and
 the people, under marius and sylla; and again under pompey and caesar,
 to the extinction of their democraty, and the setting up of monarchy.
 
the people of athens bound themselves but from one onely action; which
 was, that man on pain of death should propound the renewing of the
 warre for the island of salamis; and yet thereby, if solon had not
 caused to be given out was mad, and afterwards in gesture and habit
 of mad-man, and in verse, propounded it to the people that flocked
 about him, they had had an enemy perpetually in readinesse, even at the
 gates of their citie; such dammage, or shifts, are all common-wealths
 forced to, that have their power never so little limited.
 



private judgement of good and evill
 
in the second place, i observe the diseases of common-wealth, that
 proceed from the poyson of seditious doctrines; whereof one is, "that
 every private man is judge of good and evill actions." this is true in
 the condition of meer nature, where there are civill lawes; and also
 under civill government, in such cases as are not determined by the
 law. but otherwise, it is manifest, that the measure of good and evill
 actions, is the civill law; and the judge the legislator, who is alwayes
 representative of the common-wealth. from this false doctrine, men are
 disposed to debate with themselves, and dispute the commands of the
 common-wealth; and afterwards to obey, or disobey them, as in their
 private judgements they shall think fit. whereby the common-wealth is
 distracted and weakened.
 



erroneous conscience
 
another doctrine repugnant to civill society, is, that "whatsoever a
 man does against his conscience, is sinne;" and it dependeth on the
 presumption of making himself judge of good and evill. for mans
 conscience, and his judgement is the same thing; and as the judgement,
 so also the conscience may be erroneous. therefore, though that is
 subject to civill law, sinneth in all does against his conscience,
 because has other rule to follow but his own reason; yet it is
 not so with him that lives in common-wealth; because the law is the
 publique conscience, by which hath already undertaken to be guided.
 otherwise in such diversity, as there is of private consciences, which
 are but private opinions, the common-wealth must needs be distracted,
 and man dare to obey the soveraign power, farther than it shall seem
 good in his own eyes.
 



pretence of inspiration
 
it hath been also commonly taught, "that faith and sanctity, are not to
 be attained by study and reason, but by supernaturall inspiration, or
 infusion," which granted, i see not why any man should render reason
 of his faith; or why every christian should not be also prophet; or
 why any man should take the law of his country, rather than his own
 inspiration, for the rule of his action. and thus wee fall again into
 the fault of taking upon us to judge of good and evill; or to make
 judges of it, such private men as pretend to be supernaturally inspired,
 to the dissolution of all civill government. faith comes by hearing,
 and hearing by those accidents, which guide us into the presence of them
 that speak to us; which accidents are all contrived by god almighty; and
 yet are not supernaturall, but onely, for the great number of them that
 concurre to every effect, unobservable. faith, and sanctity, are indeed
 not very frequent; but yet they are not miracles, but brought to passe
 by education, discipline, correction, and other naturall wayes, by which
 god worketh them in his elect, as such time as thinketh fit. and
 these three opinions, pernicious to peace and government, have in this
 part of the world, proceeded chiefly from the tongues, and pens of
 unlearned divines; who joyning the words of holy scripture together,
 otherwise than is agreeable to reason, do what they can, to make men
 think, that sanctity and naturall reason, cannot stand together.
 



subjecting the soveraign power to civill lawes
 
fourth opinion, repugnant to the nature of common-wealth, is this,
 "that that hath the soveraign power, is subject to the civill lawes."
 it is true, that soveraigns are all subjects to the lawes of nature;
 because such lawes be divine, and cannot by any man, or common-wealth
 be abrogated. but to those lawes which the soveraign himselfe, that is,
 which the common-wealth maketh, is not subject. for to be subject to
 lawes, is to be subject to the common-wealth, that is to the soveraign
 representative, that is to himselfe; which is not subjection, but
 freedome from the lawes. which errour, because it setteth the lawes
 above the soveraign, setteth also judge above him, and power to
 punish him; which is to make new soveraign; and again for the same
 reason third, to punish the second; and so continually without end, to
 the confusion, and dissolution of the common-wealth.
 



attributing of absolute propriety to the subjects
 
fifth doctrine, that tendeth to the dissolution of common-wealth,
 is, "that every private man has an absolute propriety in his goods;
 such, as excludeth the right of the soveraign." every man has indeed a
 propriety that excludes the right of every other subject: and has it
 onely from the soveraign power; without the protection whereof, every
 other man should have equall right to the same. but if the right of the
 soveraign also be excluded, cannot performe the office they have put
 him into; which is, to defend them both from forraign enemies, and
 from the injuries of one another; and consequently there is longer a
 common-wealth.
 
and if the propriety of subjects, exclude not the right of the
 soveraign representative to their goods; much lesse to their offices
 of judicature, or execution, in which they represent the soveraign
 himselfe.
 



dividing of the soveraign power
 
there is sixth doctrine, plainly, and directly against the essence
 of common-wealth; and ’tis this, "that the soveraign power may be
 divided." for what is it to divide the power of common-wealth, but
 to dissolve it; for powers divided mutually destroy each other. and for
 these doctrines, men are chiefly beholding to some of those, that making
 profession of the lawes, endeavour to make them depend upon their own
 learning, and not upon the legislative power.
 



imitation of neighbour nations
 
and as false doctrine, so also often-times the example of different
 government in neighbouring nation, disposeth men to alteration of
 the forme already setled. so the people of the jewes were stirred up to
 reject god, and to call upon the prophet samuel, for king after
 the manner of the nations; so also the lesser cities of greece, were
 continually disturbed, with seditions of the aristocraticall, and
 democraticall factions; one part of almost every common-wealth, desiring
 to imitate the lacedaemonians; the other, the athenians. and i doubt
 not, but many men, have been contented to see the late troubles in
 england, out of an imitation of the low countries; supposing there
 needed more to grow rich, than to change, as they had done, the forme
 of their government. for the constitution of mans nature, is of it selfe
 subject to desire novelty: when therefore they are provoked to the same,
 by the neighbourhood also of those that have been enriched by it, it is
 almost impossible for them, not to be content with those that solicite
 them to change; and love the first beginnings, though they be grieved
 with the continuance of disorder; like hot blouds, that having gotten
 the itch, tear themselves with their own nayles, till they can endure
 the smart longer.
 



imitation of the greeks, and romans
 
and as to rebellion in particular against monarchy; one of the most
 frequent causes of it, is the reading of the books of policy, and
 histories of the antient greeks, and romans; from which, young men,
 and all others that are unprovided of the antidote of solid reason,
 receiving strong, and delightfull impression, of the great exploits
 of warre, atchieved by the conductors of their armies, receive withall
 pleasing idea, of all they have done besides; and imagine their great
 prosperity, not to have proceeded from the aemulation of particular men,
 but from the vertue of their popular form of government: not considering
 the frequent seditions, and civill warres, produced by the imperfection
 of their policy. from the reading, i say, of such books, men have
 undertaken to kill their kings, because the greek and latine writers,
 in their books, and discourses of policy, make it lawfull, and laudable,
 for any man so to do; provided before do it, call him tyrant. for
 they say not regicide, that is, killing of king, but tyrannicide, that
 is, killing of tyrant is lawfull. from the same books, they that live
 under monarch conceive an opinion, that the subjects in popular
 common-wealth enjoy liberty; but that in monarchy they are all slaves.
 i say, they that live under monarchy conceive such an opinion; not
 they that live under popular government; for they find such matter.
 in summe, i cannot imagine, how anything can be more prejudiciall to a
 monarchy, than the allowing of such books to be publikely read, without
 present applying such correctives of discreet masters, as are fit to
 take away their venime; which venime i will not doubt to compare to
 the biting of mad dogge, which is disease the physicians call
 hydrophobia, or fear of water. for as that is so bitten, has a
 continuall torment of thirst, and yet abhorreth water; and is in such
 an estate, as if the poyson endeavoured to convert him into dogge:
 so when monarchy is once bitten to the quick, by those democraticall
 writers, that continually snarle at that estate; it wanteth nothing
 more than strong monarch, which neverthelesse out of certain
 tyrannophobia, or feare of being strongly governed, when they have him,
 they abhorre.
 
as here have been doctors, that hold there be three soules in man;
 so there be also that think there may be more soules, (that is, more
 soveraigns,) than one, in common-wealth; and set up supremacy
 against the soveraignty; canons against lawes; and ghostly authority
 against the civill; working on mens minds, with words and distinctions,
 that of themselves signifie nothing, but bewray (by their obscurity)
 that there walketh (as some think invisibly) another kingdome, as it
 were kingdome of fayries, in the dark. now seeing it is manifest, that
 the civill power, and the power of the common-wealth is the same
 thing; and that supremacy, and the power of making canons, and granting
 faculties, implyeth common-wealth; it followeth, that where one is
 soveraign, another supreme; where one can make lawes, and another
 make canons; there must needs be two common-wealths, of one & the same
 subjects; which is kingdome divided in it selfe, and cannot stand. for
 notwithstanding the insignificant distinction of temporall, and ghostly,
 they are still two kingdomes, and every subject is subject to two
 masters. for seeing the ghostly power challengeth the right to declare
 what is sinne it challengeth by consequence to declare what is law,
 (sinne being nothing but the transgression of the law;) and again, the
 civill power challenging to declare what is law, every subject must
 obey two masters, who bothe will have their commands be observed as law;
 which is impossible. or, if it be but one kingdome, either the civill,
 which is the power of the common-wealth, must be subordinate to the
 ghostly; or the ghostly must be subordinate to the temporall and then
 there is supremacy but the temporall. when therefore these two powers
 oppose one another, the common-wealth cannot but be in great danger
 of civill warre, and dissolution. for the civill authority being more
 visible, and standing in the cleerer light of naturall reason cannot
 choose but draw to it in all times very considerable part of the
 people: and the spirituall, though it stand in the darknesse of schoole
 distinctions, and hard words; yet because the fear of darknesse, and
 ghosts, is greater than other fears, cannot want party sufficient to
 trouble, and sometimes to destroy common-wealth. and this is disease
 which not unfitly may be compared to the epilepsie, or falling-sicknesse
 (which the jewes took to be one kind of possession by spirits) in the
 body naturall. for as in this disease, there is an unnaturall spirit,
 or wind in the head that obstructeth the roots of the nerves, and moving
 them violently, taketh away the motion which naturally they should have
 from the power of the soule in the brain, and thereby causeth violent,
 and irregular motions (which men call convulsions) in the parts;
 insomuch as that is seized therewith, falleth down sometimes into the
 water, and sometimes into the fire, as man deprived of his senses;
 so also in the body politique, when the spirituall power, moveth the
 members of common-wealth, by the terrour of punishments, and hope of
 rewards (which are the nerves of it,) otherwise than by the civill power
 (which is the soule of the common-wealth) they ought to be moved; and by
 strange, and hard words suffocates the people, and either overwhelm
 the common-wealth with oppression, or cast it into the fire of civill
 warre.
 



mixt government
 
sometimes also in the meerly civill government, there be more than
 one soule: as when the power of levying mony, (which is the nutritive
 faculty,) has depended on generall assembly; the power of conduct and
 command, (which is the motive faculty,) on one man; and the power of
 making lawes, (which is the rationall faculty,) on the accidentall
 consent, not onely of those two, but also of third; this endangereth
 the common-wealth, somtimes for want of consent to good lawes; but most
 often for want of such nourishment, as is necessary to life, and motion.
 for although few perceive, that such government, is not government,
 but division of the common-wealth into three factions, and call it
 mixt monarchy; yet the truth is, that it is not one independent
 common-wealth, but three independent factions; nor one representative
 person, but three. in the kingdome of god, there may be three persons
 independent, without breach of unity in god that reigneth; but where men
 reigne, that be subject to diversity of opinions, it cannot be so. and
 therefore if the king bear the person of the people, and the generall
 assembly bear also the person of the people, and another assembly bear
 the person of part of the people, they are not one person, nor one
 soveraign, but three persons, and three soveraigns.
 
to what disease in the naturall body of man, i may exactly compare this
 irregularity of common-wealth, i know not. but i have seen man, that
 had another man growing out of his side, with an head, armes, breast,
 and stomach, of his own: if had had another man growing out of his
 other side, the comparison might then have been exact.
 



want of mony
 
hitherto i have named such diseases of common-wealth, as are of the
 greatest, and most present danger. there be other, not so great; which
 neverthelesse are not unfit to be observed. as first, the difficulty of
 raising mony, for the necessary uses of the common-wealth; especially
 in the approach of warre. this difficulty ariseth from the opinion, that
 every subject hath of propriety in his lands and goods, exclusive of
 the soveraigns right to the use of the same. from whence it commeth to
 passe, that the soveraign power, which foreseeth the necessities and
 dangers of the common-wealth, (finding the passage of mony to the
 publique treasure obstructed, by the tenacity of the people,) whereas
 it ought to extend it selfe, to encounter, and prevent such dangers in
 their beginnings, contracteth it selfe as long as it can, and when it
 cannot longer, struggles with the people by strategems of law, to obtain
 little summes, which not sufficing, is fain at last violently to
 open the way for present supply, or perish; and being put often to these
 extremities, at last reduceth the people to their due temper; or else
 the common-wealth must perish. insomuch as we may compare this distemper
 very aptly to an ague; wherein, the fleshy parts being congealed, or
 by venomous matter obstructed; the veins which by their naturall course
 empty themselves into the heart, are not (as they ought to be) supplyed
 from the arteries, whereby there succeedeth at first cold contraction,
 and trembling of the limbes; and afterwards hot, and strong endeavour
 of the heart, to force passage for the bloud; and before it can do
 that, contenteth it selfe with the small refreshments of such things as
 coole of time, till (if nature be strong enough) it break at last
 the contumacy of the parts obstructed, and dissipateth the venome into
 sweat; or (if nature be too weak) the patient dyeth.
 



monopolies and abuses of publicans
 
again, there is sometimes in common-wealth, disease, which
 resembleth the pleurisie; and that is, when the treasure of the
 common-wealth, flowing out of its due course, is gathered together in
 too much abundance, in one, or few private men, by monopolies, or by
 farmes of the publique revenues; in the same manner as the blood in a
 pleurisie, getting into the membrane of the breast, breedeth there an
 inflammation, accompanied with fever, and painfull stitches.
 



popular men
 
also, the popularity of potent subject, (unlesse the common-wealth
 have very good caution of his fidelity,) is dangerous disease; because
 the people (which should receive their motion from the authority of the
 soveraign,) by the flattery, and by the reputation of an ambitious man,
 are drawn away from their obedience to the lawes, to follow man, of
 whose vertues, and designes they have knowledge. and this is commonly
 of more danger in popular government, than in monarchy; as it may
 easily be made believe, they are the people. by this means it was, that
 julius caesar, who was set up by the people against the senate, having
 won to himselfe the affections of his army, made himselfe master, both
 of senate and people. and this proceeding of popular, and ambitious men,
 is plain rebellion; and may be resembled to the effects of witchcraft.
 



excessive greatnesse of town, multitude of corporations
 
another infirmity of common-wealth, is the immoderate greatnesse of a
 town, when it is able to furnish out of its own circuit, the number, and
 expence of great army: as also the great number of corporations; which
 are as it were many lesser common-wealths in the bowels of greater,
 like wormes in the entrayles of naturall man.
 



liberty of disputing against soveraign power
 
to which may be added, the liberty of disputing against absolute power,
 by pretenders to politicall prudence; which though bred for the most
 part in the lees of the people; yet animated by false doctrines, are
 perpetually medling with the fundamentall lawes, to the molestation
 of the common-wealth; like the little wormes, which physicians call
 ascarides.
 
we may further adde, the insatiable appetite, or bulimia, of enlarging
 dominion; with the incurable wounds thereby many times received from
 the enemy; and the wens, of ununited conquests, which are many times a
 burthen, and with lesse danger lost, than kept; as also the lethargy of
 ease, and consumption of riot and vain expence.
 



dissolution of the common-wealth
 
lastly, when in warre (forraign, or intestine,) the enemies got a
 final victory; so as (the forces of the common-wealth keeping the field
 longer) there is farther protection of subjects in their loyalty;
 then is the common-wealth dissolved, and every man at liberty to protect
 himselfe by such courses as his own discretion shall suggest unto him.
 for the soveraign, is the publique soule, giving life and motion to the
 common-wealth; which expiring, the members are governed by it more,
 than the carcasse of man, by his departed (though immortal) soule. for
 though the right of soveraign monarch cannot be extinguished by the
 act of another; yet the obligation of the members may. for that
 wants protection, may seek it anywhere; and when hath it, is obliged
 (without fraudulent pretence of having submitted himselfe out of fear,)
 to protect his protection as long as is able. but when the power of
 an assembly is once suppressed, the right of the same perisheth utterly;
 because the assembly it selfe is extinct; and consequently, there is no
 possibility for the soveraignty to re-enter.
 


chapter xxx. of the office of the soveraign representative
 



the procuration of the good of the people
 
the office of the soveraign, (be it monarch, or an assembly,)
 consisteth in the end, for which was trusted with the soveraign
 power, namely the procuration of the safety of the people; to which he
 is obliged by the law of nature, and to render an account thereof to
 god, the author of that law, and to none but him. but by safety here, is
 not meant bare preservation, but also all other contentments of life,
 which every man by lawfull industry, without danger, or hurt to the
 common-wealth, shall acquire to himselfe.
 



by instruction & lawes
 
and this is intended should be done, not by care applyed to
 individualls, further than their protection from injuries, when they
 shall complain; but by generall providence, contained in publique
 instruction, both of doctrine, and example; and in the making, and
 executing of good lawes, to which individuall persons may apply their
 own cases.
 



against the duty of soveraign to relinquish any essentiall right of
 soveraignty or not to see the people taught the grounds of them
 
and because, if the essentiall rights of soveraignty (specified before
 in the eighteenth chapter) be taken away, the common-wealth is thereby
 dissolved, and every man returneth into the condition, and calamity of a
 warre with every other man, (which is the greatest evill that can happen
 in this life;) it is the office of the soveraign, to maintain those
 rights entire; and consequently against his duty, first, to transferre
 to another, or to lay from himselfe any of them. for that deserteth
 the means, deserteth the ends; and deserteth the means, that being
 the soveraign, acknowledgeth himselfe subject to the civill lawes; and
 renounceth the power of supreme judicature; or of making warre, or
 peace by his own authority; or of judging of the necessities of the
 common-wealth; or of levying mony, and souldiers, when, and as much as
 in his own conscience shall judge necessary; or of making officers,
 and ministers both of warre, and peace; or of appointing teachers, and
 examining what doctrines are conformable, or contrary to the defence,
 peace, and good of the people. secondly, it is against his duty, to let
 the people be ignorant, or mis-in-formed of the grounds, and reasons
 of those his essentiall rights; because thereby men are easie to be
 seduced, and drawn to resist him, when the common-wealth shall require
 their use and exercise.
 
and the grounds of these rights, have the rather need to be diligently,
 and truly taught; because they cannot be maintained by any civill law,
 or terrour of legal punishment. for civill law, that shall forbid
 rebellion, (and such is all resistance to the essentiall rights of
 soveraignty,) is not (as civill law) any obligation, but by vertue
 onely of the law of nature, that forbiddeth the violation of faith;
 which naturall obligation if men know not, they cannot know the right of
 any law the soveraign maketh. and for the punishment, they take it
 but for an act of hostility; which when they think they have strength
 enough, they will endeavour by acts of hostility, to avoyd.
 



objection of those that say there are principles of reason for
 absolute soveraignty
 
as i have heard some say, that justice is but word, without substance;
 and that whatsoever man can by force, or art, acquire to himselfe,
 (not onely in the condition of warre, but also in common-wealth,) is
 his own, which i have already shewed to be false: so there be also
 that maintain, that there are grounds, nor principles of reason, to
 sustain those essentiall rights, which make soveraignty absolute. for
 if there were, they would have been found out in some place, or other;
 whereas we see, there has not hitherto been any common-wealth, where
 those rights have been acknowledged, or challenged. wherein they argue
 as ill, as if the savage people of america, should deny there were any
 grounds, or principles of reason, so to build house, as to last as
 long as the materials, because they never yet saw any so well built.
 time, and industry, produce every day new knowledge. and as the art
 of well building, is derived from principles of reason, observed by
 industrious men, that had long studied the nature of materials, and
 the divers effects of figure, and proportion, long after mankind
 began (though poorly) to build: so, long time after men have begun to
 constitute common-wealths, imperfect, and apt to relapse into disorder,
 there may, principles of reason be found out, by industrious meditation,
 to make use of them, or be neglected by them, or not, concerneth my
 particular interest, at this day, very little. but supposing that
 these of mine are not such principles of reason; yet i am sure they are
 principles from authority of scripture; as i shall make it appear, when
 i shall come to speak of the kingdome of god, (administred by moses,)
 over the jewes, his peculiar people by covenant.
 



objection from the incapacity of the vulgar
 
but they say again, that though the principles be right, yet common
 people are not of capacity enough to be made to understand them. i
 should be glad, that the rich, and potent subjects of kingdome, or
 those that are accounted the most learned, were lesse incapable than
 they. but all men know, that the obstructions to this kind of doctrine,
 proceed not so much from the difficulty of the matter, as from the
 interest of them that are to learn. potent men, digest hardly any thing
 that setteth up power to bridle their affections; and learned men,
 any thing that discovereth their errours, and thereby lesseneth their
 authority: whereas the common-peoples minds, unlesse they be tainted
 with dependance on the potent, or scribbled over with the opinions
 of their doctors, are like clean paper, fit to receive whatsoever by
 publique authority shall be imprinted in them. shall whole nations be
 brought to acquiesce in the great mysteries of christian religion, which
 are above reason; and millions of men be made believe, that the same
 body may be in innumerable places, at one and the same time, which
 is against reason; and shall not men be able, by their teaching, and
 preaching, protected by the law, to make that received, which is so
 consonant to reason, that any unprejudicated man, needs more to learn
 it, than to hear it? i conclude therefore, that in the instruction
 of the people in the essentiall rights (which are the naturall, and
 fundamentall lawes) of soveraignty, there is difficulty, (whilest a
 soveraign has his power entire,) but what proceeds from his own fault,
 or the fault of those whom trusteth in the administration of the
 common-wealth; and consequently, it is his duty, to cause them so to be
 instructed; and not onely his duty, but his benefit also, and security,
 against the danger that may arrive to himselfe in his naturall person,
 from rebellion.
 



subjects are to be taught, not to affect change of government
 
and (to descend to particulars) the people are to be taught, first, that
 they ought not to be in love with any forme of government they see
 in their neighbour nations, more than with their own, nor (whatsoever
 present prosperity they behold in nations that are otherwise governed
 than they,) to desire change. for the prosperity of people ruled by
 an aristocraticall, or democraticall assembly, commeth not from
 aristocracy, nor from democracy, but from the obedience, and concord of
 the subjects; nor do the people flourish in monarchy, because one man
 has the right to rule them, but because they obey him. take away in
 any kind of state, the obedience, (and consequently the concord of the
 people,) and they shall not onely not flourish, but in short time be
 dissolved. and they that go about by disobedience, to doe more than
 reforme the common-wealth, shall find they do thereby destroy it; like
 the foolish daughters of peleus (in the fable;) which desiring to renew
 the youth of their decrepit father, did by the counsell of medea, cut
 him in pieces, and boyle him, together with strange herbs, but made not
 of him new man. this desire of change, is like the breach of the first
 of gods commandements: for there god says, non habebis deos alienos;
 thou shalt not have the gods of other nations; and in another place
 concerning kings, that they are gods.
 



nor adhere (against the soveraign) to popular men
 
secondly, they are to be taught, that they ought not to be led with
 admiration of the vertue of any of their fellow subjects, how
 high soever stand, nor how conspicuously soever shine in the
 common-wealth; nor of any assembly, (except the soveraign assembly,)
 so as to deferre to them any obedience, or honour, appropriate to the
 soveraign onely, whom (in their particular stations) they represent; nor
 to receive any influence from them, but such as is conveighed by them
 from the soveraign authority. for that soveraign, cannot be imagined to
 love his people as ought, that is not jealous of them, but suffers
 them by the flattery of popular men, to be seduced from their loyalty,
 as they have often been, not onely secretly, but openly, so as to
 proclaime marriage with them in facie ecclesiae by preachers; and by
 publishing the same in the open streets: which may fitly be compared to
 the violation of the second of the ten commandements.
 


nor to dispute the soveraign power
 
thirdly, in consequence to this, they ought to be informed, how great
 fault it is, to speak evill of the soveraign representative, (whether
 one man, or an assembly of men;) or to argue and dispute his power, or
 any way to use his name irreverently, whereby may be brought into
 contempt with his people, and their obedience (in which the safety
 of the common-wealth consisteth) slackened. which doctrine the third
 commandement by resemblance pointeth to.
 



and to have dayes set apart to learn their duty
 
fourthly, seeing people cannot be taught this, nor when ’tis taught,
 remember it, nor after one generation past, so much as know in whom the
 soveraign power is placed, without setting part from their ordinary
 labour, some certain times, in which they may attend those that are
 appointed to instruct them; it is necessary that some such times be
 determined, wherein they may assemble together, and (after prayers and
 praises given to god, the soveraign of soveraigns) hear those their
 duties told them, and the positive lawes, such as generally concern them
 all, read and expounded, and be put in mind of the authority that maketh
 them lawes. to this end had the jewes every seventh day, sabbath, in
 which the law was read and expounded; and in the solemnity whereof they
 were put in mind, that their king was god; that having created the world
 in six days, rested the seventh day; and by their resting on it from
 their labour, that that god was their king, which redeemed them from
 their servile, and painfull labour in egypt, and gave them time, after
 they had rejoyced in god, to take joy also in themselves, by lawfull
 recreation. so that the first table of the commandements, is spent all,
 in setting down the summe of gods absolute power; not onely as god,
 but as king by pact, (in peculiar) of the jewes; and may therefore give
 light, to those that have the soveraign power conferred on them by the
 consent of men, to see what doctrine they ought to teach their subjects.
 



and to honour their parents
 
and because the first instruction of children, dependeth on the care
 of their parents; it is necessary that they should be obedient to them,
 whilest they are under their tuition; and not onely so, but that also
 afterwards (as gratitude requireth,) they acknowledge the benefit of
 their education, by externall signes of honour. to which end they are
 to be taught, that originally the father of every man was also his
 soveraign lord, with power over him of life and death; and that the
 fathers of families, when by instituting common-wealth, they resigned
 that absolute power, yet it was never intended, they should lose the
 honour due unto them for their education. for to relinquish such right,
 was not necessary to the institution of soveraign power; nor would there
 be any reason, why any man should desire to have children, or take the
 care to nourish, and instruct them, if they were afterwards to have no
 other benefit from them, than from other men. and this accordeth with
 the fifth commandement.
 



and to avoyd doing of injury:
 
again, every soveraign ought to cause justice to be taught, which
 (consisting in taking from man what is his) is as much as to say, to
 cause men to be taught not to deprive their neighbour, by violence,
 or fraud, of any thing which by the soveraign authority is theirs. of
 things held in propriety, those that are dearest to man are his own
 life, & limbs; and in the next degree, (in most men,) those that
 concern conjugall affection; and after them riches and means of living.
 therefore the people are to be taught, to abstain from violence to
 one anothers person, by private revenges; from violation of conjugall
 honour; and from forcibly rapine, and fraudulent surreption of one
 anothers goods. for which purpose also it is necessary they be shewed
 the evill consequences of false judgement, by corruption either of
 judges or witnesses, whereby the distinction of propriety is taken away,
 and justice becomes of effect: all which things are intimated in the
 sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth commandements.
 



and to do all this sincerely from the heart
 
lastly, they are to be taught, that not onely the unjust facts, but the
 designes and intentions to do them, (though by accident hindred,) are
 injustice; which consisteth in the pravity of the will, as well as in
 the irregularity of the act. and this is the intention of the tenth
 commandement, and the summe of the second table; which is reduced all to
 this one commandement of mutuall charity, "thou shalt love thy neighbour
 as thy selfe:" as the summe of the first table is reduced to "the love
 of god;" whom they had then newly received as their king.
 



the use of universities
 
as for the means, and conduits, by which the people may receive this
 instruction, wee are to search, by what means so may opinions,
 contrary to the peace of man-kind, upon weak and false principles, have
 neverthelesse been so deeply rooted in them. i mean those, which i have
 in the precedent chapter specified: as that men shall judge of what is
 lawfull and unlawfull, not by the law it selfe, but by their own
 private judgements; that subjects sinne in obeying the commands of the
 common-wealth, unlesse they themselves have first judged them to be
 lawfull: that their propriety in their riches is such, as to exclude the
 dominion, which the common-wealth hath over the same: that it is lawfull
 for subjects to kill such, as they call tyrants: that the soveraign
 power may be divided, and the like; which come to be instilled into
 the people by this means. they whom necessity, or covetousnesse keepeth
 attent on their trades, and labour; and they, on the other side, whom
 superfluity, or sloth carrieth after their sensuall pleasures, (which
 two sorts of men take up the greatest part of man-kind,) being diverted
 from the deep meditation, which the learning of truth, not onely in the
 matter of naturall justice, but also of all other sciences necessarily
 requireth, receive the notions of their duty, chiefly from divines
 in the pulpit, and partly from such of their neighbours, or familiar
 acquaintance, as having the faculty of discoursing readily, and
 plausibly, seem wiser and better learned in cases of law, and
 conscience, than themselves. and the divines, and such others as make
 shew of learning, derive their knowledge from the universities, and from
 the schooles of law, or from the books, which by men eminent in
 those schooles, and universities have been published. it is therefore
 manifest, that the instruction of the people, dependeth wholly, on the
 right teaching of youth in the universities. but are not (may some men
 say) the universities of england learned enough already to do that? or
 is it you will undertake to teach the universities? hard questions. yet
 to the first, i doubt not to answer; that till towards the later end of
 henry the eighth, the power of the pope, was alwayes upheld against the
 power of the common-wealth, principally by the universities; and that
 the doctrines maintained by so many preachers, against the soveraign
 power of the king, and by so many lawyers, and others, that had their
 education there, is sufficient argument, that though the universities
 were not authors of those false doctrines, yet they knew not how to
 plant the true. for in such contradiction of opinions, it is most
 certain, that they have not been sufficiently instructed; and ’tis no
 wonder, if they yet retain relish of that subtile liquor, wherewith
 they were first seasoned, against the civill authority. but to the later
 question, it is not fit, nor needfull for to say either i, or no: for
 any man that sees what i am doing, may easily perceive what i think.
 
the safety of the people, requireth further, from him, or them that have
 the soveraign power, that justice be equally administred to all degrees
 of people; that is, that as well the rich, and mighty, as poor and
 obscure persons, may be righted of the injuries done them; so as the
 great, may have greater hope of impunity, when they doe violence,
 dishonour, or any injury to the meaner sort, than when one of these,
 does the like to one of them: for in this consisteth equity; to which,
 as being precept of the law of nature, soveraign is as much subject,
 as any of the meanest of his people. all breaches of the law, are
 offences against the common-wealth: but there be some, that are also
 against private persons. those that concern the common-wealth onely, may
 without breach of equity be pardoned; for every man may pardon what is
 done against himselfe, according to his own discretion. but an offence
 against private man, cannot in equity be pardoned, without the consent
 of him that is injured; or reasonable satisfaction.
 
the inequality of subjects, proceedeth from the acts of soveraign power;
 and therefore has more place in the presence of the soveraign; that
 is to say, in court of justice, then the inequality between kings,
 and their subjects, in the presence of the king of kings. the honour of
 great persons, is to be valued for their beneficence, and the aydes
 they give to men of inferiour rank, or not at all. and the violences,
 oppressions, and injuries they do, are not extenuated, but aggravated by
 the greatnesse of their persons; because they have least need to commit
 them. the consequences of this partiality towards the great, proceed in
 this manner. impunity maketh insolence; insolence hatred; and hatred,
 an endeavour to pull down all oppressing and contumelious greatnesse,
 though with the ruine of the common-wealth.
 



equall taxes
 
to equall justice, appertaineth also the equall imposition of taxes;
 the equality whereof dependeth not on the equality of riches, but on the
 equality of the debt, that every man oweth to the common-wealth for his
 defence. it is not enough, for man to labour for the maintenance
 of his life; but also to fight, (if need be,) for the securing of his
 labour. they must either do as the jewes did after their return from
 captivity, in re-edifying the temple, build with one hand, and hold the
 sword in the other; or else they must hire others to fight for them. for
 the impositions that are layd on the people by the soveraign power, are
 nothing else but the wages, due to them that hold the publique sword,
 to defend private men in the exercise of severall trades, and callings.
 seeing then the benefit that every one receiveth thereby, is the
 enjoyment of life, which is equally dear to poor, and rich; the debt
 which poor man oweth them that defend his life, is the same which a
 rich man oweth for the defence of his; saving that the rich, who have
 the service of the poor, may be debtors not onely for their own persons,
 but for many more. which considered, the equality of imposition,
 consisteth rather in the equality of that which is consumed, than of the
 riches of the persons that consume the same. for what reason is there,
 that which laboureth much, and sparing the fruits of his labour,
 consumeth little, should be more charged, then that living idlely,
 getteth little, and spendeth all gets; seeing the one hath no
 more protection from the common-wealth, then the other? but when the
 impositions, are layd upon those things which men consume, every man
 payeth equally for what useth: nor is the common-wealth defrauded, by
 the luxurious waste of private men.
 



publique charity
 
and whereas many men, by accident unevitable, become unable to maintain
 themselves by their labour; they ought not to be left to the charity
 of private persons; but to be provided for, (as far-forth as the
 necessities of nature require,) by the lawes of the common-wealth. for
 as it is uncharitablenesse in any man, to neglect the impotent; so it
 is in the soveraign of common-wealth, to expose them to the hazard of
 such uncertain charity.
 



prevention of idlenesse
 
but for such as have strong bodies, the case is otherwise: they are to
 be forced to work; and to avoyd the excuse of not finding employment,
 there ought to be such lawes, as may encourage all manner of arts; as
 navigation, agriculture, fishing, and all manner of manifacture that
 requires labour. the multitude of poor, and yet strong people still
 encreasing, they are to be transplanted into countries not sufficiently
 inhabited: where neverthelesse, they are not to exterminate those they
 find there; but constrain them to inhabit closer together, and not range
 great deal of ground, to snatch what they find; but to court each
 little plot with art and labour, to give them their sustenance in due
 season. and when all the world is overchargd with inhabitants, then the
 last remedy of all is warre; which provideth for every man, by victory,
 or death.
 



good lawes what
 
to the care of the soveraign, belongeth the making of good lawes. but
 what is good law? by good law, i mean not just law: for law can
 be unjust. the law is made by the soveraign power, and all that is done
 by such power, is warranted, and owned by every one of the people; and
 that which every man will have so, man can say is unjust. it is in
 the lawes of common-wealth, as in the lawes of gaming: whatsoever
 the gamesters all agree on, is injustice to none of them. good law
 is that, which is needfull, for the good of the people, and withall
 perspicuous.
 



such as are necessary
 
for the use of lawes, (which are but rules authorised) is not to bind
 the people from all voluntary actions; but to direct and keep them in
 such motion, as not to hurt themselves by their own impetuous desires,
 rashnesse, or indiscretion, as hedges are set, not to stop travellers,
 but to keep them in the way. and therefore law that is not needfull,
 having not the true end of law, is not good. law may be conceived to
 be good, when it is for the benefit of the soveraign; though it be
 not necessary for the people; but it is not so. for the good of the
 soveraign and people, cannot be separated. it is weak soveraign, that
 has weak subjects; and weak people, whose soveraign wanteth power to
 rule them at his will. unnecessary lawes are not good lawes; but trapps
 for mony: which where the right of soveraign power is acknowledged, are
 superfluous; and where it is not acknowledged, unsufficient to defend
 the people.
 



such as are perspicuous
 
the perspicuity, consisteth not so much in the words of the law it
 selfe, as in declaration of the causes, and motives, for which it was
 made. that is it, that shewes us the meaning of the legislator, and the
 meaning of the legislator known, the law is more easily understood
 by few, than many words. for all words, are subject to ambiguity;
 and therefore multiplication of words in the body of the law, is
 multiplication of ambiguity: besides it seems to imply, (by too much
 diligence,) that whosoever can evade the words, is without the compasse
 of the law. and this is cause of many unnecessary processes. for when
 i consider how short were the lawes of antient times; and how they
 grew by degrees still longer; thinks i see contention between the
 penners, and pleaders of the law; the former seeking to circumscribe
 the later; and the later to evade their circumscriptions; and that the
 pleaders have got the victory. it belongeth therefore to the office of
 legislator, (such as is in all common-wealths the supreme
 representative, be it one man, or an assembly,) to make the reason
 perspicuous, why the law was made; and the body of the law it selfe, as
 short, but in as proper, and significant termes, as may be.
 



punishments
 
it belongeth also to the office of the soveraign, to make right
 application of punishments, and rewards. and seeing the end of punishing
 is not revenge, and discharge of choler; but correction, either of the
 offender, or of others by his example; the severest punishments are to
 be inflicted for those crimes, that are of most danger to the
 publique; such as are those which proceed from malice to the government
 established; those that spring from contempt of justice; those that
 provoke indignation in the multitude; and those, which unpunished, seem
 authorised, as when they are committed by sonnes, servants, or favorites
 of men in authority: for indignation carrieth men, not onely against the
 actors, and authors of injustice; but against all power that is likely
 to protect them; as in the case of tarquin; when for the insolent act of
 one of his sonnes, was driven out of rome, and the monarchy it selfe
 dissolved. but crimes of infirmity; such as are those which proceed
 from great provocation, from great fear, great need, or from ignorance
 whether the fact be great crime, or not, there is place many times for
 lenity, without prejudice to the common-wealth; and lenity when there is
 such place for it, is required by the law of nature. the punishment of
 the leaders, and teachers in commotion; not the poore seduced people,
 when they are punished, can profit the common-wealth by their example.
 to be severe to the people, is to punish that ignorance, which may in
 great part be imputed to the soveraign, whose fault it was, they were no
 better instructed.
 



rewards
 
in like manner it belongeth to the office, and duty of the soveraign,
 to apply his rewards alwayes so, as there may arise from them benefit
 to the common-wealth: wherein consisteth their use, and end; and is then
 done, when they that have well served the common-wealth, are with
 as little expence of the common treasure, as is possible, so well
 recompenced, as others thereby may be encouraged, both to serve the same
 as faithfully as they can, and to study the arts by which they may be
 enabled to do it better. to buy with mony, or preferment, from popular
 ambitious subject, to be quiet, and desist from making ill impressions
 in the mindes of the people, has nothing of the nature of reward; (which
 is ordained not for disservice, but for service past;) nor signe of
 gratitude, but of fear: nor does it tend to the benefit, but to the
 dammage of the publique. it is contention with ambition, like that of
 hercules with the monster hydra, which having many heads, for every one
 that was vanquished, there grew up three. for in like manner, when the
 stubbornnesse of one popular man, is overcome with reward, there arise
 many more (by the example) that do the same mischiefe, in hope of like
 benefit: and as all sorts of manifacture, so also malice encreaseth by
 being vendible. and though sometimes civill warre, may be differred,
 by such wayes as that, yet the danger growes still the greater, and the
 publique ruine more assured. it is therefore against the duty of the
 soveraign, to whom the publique safety is committed, to reward those
 that aspire to greatnesse by disturbing the peace of their country, and
 not rather to oppose the beginnings of such men, with little danger,
 than after longer time with greater.
 



counsellours
 
another businesse of the soveraign, is to choose good counsellours;
 i mean such, whose advice is to take in the government of the
 common-wealth. for this word counsell, consilium, corrupted from
 considium, is large signification, and comprehendeth all assemblies
 of men that sit together, not onely to deliberate what is to be done
 hereafter, but also to judge of facts past, and of law for the present.
 i take it here in the first sense onely: and in this sense, there is no
 choyce of counsell, neither in democracy, nor aristocracy; because the
 persons counselling are members of the person counselled. the choyce
 of counsellours therefore is to monarchy; in which, the soveraign that
 endeavoureth not to make choyce of those, that in every kind are the
 most able, dischargeth not his office as ought to do. the most able
 counsellours, are they that have least hope of benefit by giving evill
 counsell, and most knowledge of those things that conduce to the peace,
 and defence of the common-wealth. it is hard matter to know who
 expecteth benefit from publique troubles; but the signes that guide to a
 just suspicion, is the soothing of the people in their unreasonable,
 or irremediable grievances, by men whose estates are not sufficient to
 discharge their accustomed expences, and may easily be observed by any
 one whom it concerns to know it. but to know, who has most knowledge of
 the publique affaires, is yet harder; and they that know them, need them
 great deale the lesse. for to know, who knowes the rules almost of any
 art, is great degree of the knowledge of the same art; because no
 man can be assured of the truth of anothers rules, but that is first
 taught to understand them. but the best signes of knowledge of any
 art, are, much conversing in it, and constant good effects of it. good
 counsell comes not by lot, nor by inheritance; and therefore there is no
 more reason to expect good advice from the rich, or noble, in matter
 of state, than in delineating the dimensions of fortresse; unlesse we
 shall think there needs method in the study of the politiques, (as
 there does in the study of geometry,) but onely to be lookers on; which
 is not so. for the politiques is the harder study of the two. whereas
 in these parts of europe, it hath been taken for right of certain
 persons, to have place in the highest councell of state by inheritance;
 it is derived from the conquests of the antient germans; wherein many
 absolute lords joyning together to conquer other nations, would not
 enter in to the confederacy, without such priviledges, as might be
 marks of difference in time following, between their posterity, and the
 posterity of their subjects; which priviledges being inconsistent with
 the soveraign power, by the favour of the soveraign, they may seem to
 keep; but contending for them as their right, they must needs by
 degrees let them go, and have at last further honour, than adhaereth
 naturally to their abilities.
 
and how able soever be the counsellours in any affaire, the benefit
 of their counsell is greater, when they give every one his advice, and
 reasons of it apart, than when they do it in an assembly, by way of
 orations; and when they have praemeditated, than when they speak on the
 sudden; both because they have more time, to survey the consequences
 of action; and are lesse subject to be carried away to contradiction,
 through envy, emulation, or other passions arising from the difference
 of opinion.
 
the best counsell, in those things that concern not other nations, but
 onely the ease, and benefit the subjects may enjoy, by lawes that
 look onely inward, is to be taken from the generall informations, and
 complaints of the people of each province, who are best acquainted
 with their own wants, and ought therefore, when they demand nothing in
 derogation of the essentiall rights of soveraignty, to be diligently
 taken notice of. for without those essentiall rights, (as i have often
 before said,) the common-wealth cannot at all subsist.
 



commanders
 
commander of an army in chiefe, if be not popular, shall not be
 beloved, nor feared as ought to be by his army; and consequently
 cannot performe that office with good successe. must therefore be
 industrious, valiant, affable, liberall and fortunate, that may gain
 an opinion both of sufficiency, and of loving his souldiers. this is
 popularity, and breeds in the souldiers both desire, and courage, to
 recommend themselves to his favour; and protects the severity of
 the generall, in punishing (when need is) the mutinous, or negligent
 souldiers. but this love of souldiers, (if caution be not given of
 the commanders fidelity,) is dangerous thing to soveraign power;
 especially when it is in the hands of an assembly not popular. it
 belongeth therefore to the safety of the people, both that they be good
 conductors, and faithfull subjects, to whom the soveraign commits his
 armies.
 
but when the soveraign himselfe is popular, that is, reverenced and
 beloved of his people, there is danger at all from the popularity of
 subject. for souldiers are never so generally unjust, as to side with
 their captain; though they love him, against their soveraign, when they
 love not onely his person, but also his cause. and therefore those,
 who by violence have at any time suppressed the power of their lawfull
 soveraign, before they could settle themselves in his place, have been
 alwayes put to the trouble of contriving their titles, to save the
 people from the shame of receiving them. to have known right to
 soveraign power, is so popular quality, as that has it needs no
 more, for his own part, to turn the hearts of his subjects to him, but
 that they see him able absolutely to govern his own family: nor, on the
 part of his enemies, but disbanding of their armies. for the greatest
 and most active part of mankind, has never hetherto been well contented
 with the present.
 
concerning the offices of one soveraign to another, which are
 comprehended in that law, which is commonly called the law of nations,
 i need not say any thing in this place; because the law of nations, and
 the law of nature, is the same thing. and every soveraign hath the same
 right, in procuring the safety of his people, that any particular man
 can have, in procuring the safety of his own body. and the same law,
 that dictateth to men that have civil government, what they ought to
 do, and what to avoyd in regard of one another, dictateth the same to
 common-wealths, that is, to the consciences of soveraign princes, and
 soveraign assemblies; there being court of naturall justice, but
 in the conscience onely; where not man, but god raigneth; whose lawes,
 (such of them as oblige all mankind,) in respect of god, as is the
 author of nature, are naturall; and in respect of the same god, as is
 king of kings, are lawes. but of the kingdome of god, as king of kings,
 and as king also of peculiar people, i shall speak in the rest of this
 discourse.
 


chapter xxxi. of the kingdome of god by nature
 



the scope of the following chapters
 
that the condition of meer nature, that is to say, of absolute liberty,
 such as is theirs, that neither are soveraigns, nor subjects, is
 anarchy, and the condition of warre: that the praecepts, by which men
 are guided to avoyd that condition, are the lawes of nature: that
 common-wealth, without soveraign power, is but word, without
 substance, and cannot stand: that subjects owe to soveraigns, simple
 obedience, in all things, wherein their obedience is not repugnant
 to the lawes of god, i have sufficiently proved, in that which i have
 already written. there wants onely, for the entire knowledge of civill
 duty, to know what are those lawes of god. for without that, man knows
 not, when is commanded any thing by the civill power, whether it be
 contrary to the law of god, or not: and so, either by too much civill
 obedience, offends the divine majesty, or through feare of offending
 god, transgresses the commandements of the common-wealth. to avoyd both
 these rocks, it is necessary to know what are the lawes divine. and
 seeing the knowledge of all law, dependeth on the knowledge of the
 soveraign power; i shall say something in that which followeth, of the
 kingdome of god.
 



who are subjects in the kingdome of god
 
"god is king, let the earth rejoice," saith the psalmist. (psal. 96. 1).
 and again, "god is king though the nations be angry; and that sitteth
 on the cherubins, though the earth be moved." (psal. 98. 1). whether
 men will or not, they must be subject alwayes to the divine power. by
 denying the existence, or providence of god, men may shake off their
 ease, but not their yoke. but to call this power of god, which extendeth
 it selfe not onely to man, but also to beasts, and plants, and bodies
 inanimate, by the name of kingdome, is but metaphoricall use of
 the word. for onely is properly said to raigne, that governs his
 subjects, by his word, and by promise of rewards to those that obey
 it, and by threatning them with punishment that obey it not. subjects
 therefore in the kingdome of god, are not bodies inanimate, nor
 creatures irrationall; because they understand precepts as his: nor
 atheists; nor they that believe not that god has any care of the actions
 of mankind; because they acknowledge word for his, nor have hope of
 his rewards, or fear of his threatnings. they therefore that believe
 there is god that governeth the world, and hath given praecepts, and
 propounded rewards, and punishments to mankind, are gods subjects; all
 the rest, are to be understood as enemies.
 



threefold word of god, reason, revelation, prophecy
 
to rule by words, requires that such words be manifestly made known;
 for else they are lawes: for to the nature of lawes belongeth a
 sufficient, and clear promulgation, such as may take away the excuse of
 ignorance; which in the lawes of men is but of one onely kind, and that
 is, proclamation, or promulgation by the voyce of man. but god
 declareth his lawes three wayes; by the dictates of naturall reason, by
 revelation, and by the voyce of some man, to whom by the operation of
 miracles, procureth credit with the rest. from hence there ariseth
 triple word of god, rational, sensible, and prophetique: to which
 correspondeth triple hearing; right reason, sense supernaturall, and
 faith. as for sense supernaturall, which consisteth in revelation, or
 inspiration, there have not been any universall lawes so given, because
 god speaketh not in that manner, but to particular persons, and to
 divers men divers things.
 
twofold kingdome of god, naturall and prophetique from the difference
 between the other two kinds of gods word, rationall, and prophetique,
 there may be attributed to god, two-fold kingdome, naturall, and
 prophetique: naturall, wherein governeth as many of mankind as
 acknowledge his providence, by the naturall dictates of right reason;
 and prophetique, wherein having chosen out one peculiar nation (the
 jewes) for his subjects, governed them, and none but them, not onely
 by naturall reason, but by positive lawes, which gave them by the
 mouths of his holy prophets. of the naturall kingdome of god i intend to
 speak in this chapter.
 
the right of gods soveraignty is derived from his omnipotence the right
 of nature, whereby god reigneth over men, and punisheth those that
 break his lawes, is to be derived, not from his creating them, as if
 required obedience, as of gratitude for his benefits; but from his
 irresistible power. i have formerly shewn, how the soveraign right
 ariseth from pact: to shew how the same right may arise from nature,
 requires more, but to shew in what case it is never taken away.
 seeing all men by nature had right to all things, they had right every
 one to reigne over all the rest. but because this right could not be
 obtained by force, it concerned the safety of every one, laying by that
 right, to set up men (with soveraign authority) by common consent,
 to rule and defend them: whereas if there had been any man of power
 irresistible; there had been reason, why should not by that power
 have ruled, and defended both himselfe, and them, according to his own
 discretion. to those therefore whose power is irresistible, the dominion
 of all men adhaereth naturally by their excellence of power; and
 consequently it is from that power, that the kingdome over men, and
 the right of afflicting men at his pleasure, belongeth naturally to god
 almighty; not as creator, and gracious; but as omnipotent. and though
 punishment be due for sinne onely, because by that word is understood
 affliction for sinne; yet the right of afflicting, is not alwayes
 derived from mens sinne, but from gods power.
 



sinne not the cause of all affliction
 
this question, "why evill men often prosper, and good men suffer
 adversity," has been much disputed by the antient, and is the same
 with this of ours, "by what right god dispenseth the prosperities and
 adversities of this life;" and is of that difficulty, as it hath shaken
 the faith, not onely of the vulgar, but of philosophers, and which is
 more, of the saints, concerning the divine providence. "how good," saith
 david, "is the god of israel to those that are upright in heart; and yet
 my feet were almost gone, my treadings had well-nigh slipt; for i was
 grieved at the wicked, when i saw the ungodly in such prosperity."
 and job, how earnestly does expostulate with god, for the many
 afflictions suffered, notwithstanding his righteousnesse? this
 question in the case of job, is decided by god himselfe, not by
 arguments derived from job’s sinne, but his own power. for whereas the
 friends of job drew their arguments from his affliction to his sinne,
 and defended himselfe by the conscience of his innocence, god
 himselfe taketh up the matter, and having justified the affliction by
 arguments drawn from his power, such as this "where was thou when i
 layd the foundations of the earth," and the like, both approved
 job’s innocence, and reproved the erroneous doctrine of his friends.
 conformable to this doctrine is the sentence of our saviour, concerning
 the man that was born blind, in these words, "neither hath this man
 sinned, nor his fathers; but that the works of god might be made
 manifest in him." and though it be said "that death entred into the
 world by sinne," (by which is meant that if adam had never sinned, had
 never dyed, that is, never suffered any separation of his soule from his
 body,) it follows not thence, that god could not justly have afflicted
 him, though had not sinned, as well as afflicteth other living
 creatures, that cannot sinne.
 



divine lawes
 
having spoken of the right of gods soveraignty, as grounded onely on
 nature; we are to consider next, what are the divine lawes, or dictates
 of naturall reason; which lawes concern either the naturall duties of
 one man to another, or the honour naturally due to our divine soveraign.
 the first are the same lawes of nature, of which i have spoken already
 in the 14. and 15. chapters of this treatise; namely, equity, justice,
 mercy, humility, and the rest of the morall vertues. it remaineth
 therefore that we consider, what praecepts are dictated to men, by their
 naturall reason onely, without other word of god, touching the honour
 and worship of the divine majesty.
 



honour and worship what
 
honour consisteth in the inward thought, and opinion of the power, and
 goodnesse of another: and therefore to honour god, is to think as highly
 of his power and goodnesse, as is possible. and of that opinion, the
 externall signes appearing in the words, and actions of men, are called
 worship; which is one part of that which the latines understand by the
 word cultus: for cultus signifieth properly, and constantly, that labour
 which man bestowes on any thing, with purpose to make benefit by it.
 now those things whereof we make benefit, are either subject to us, and
 the profit they yeeld, followeth the labour we bestow upon them, as a
 naturall effect; or they are not subject to us, but answer our labour,
 according to their own wills. in the first sense the labour bestowed on
 the earth, is called culture; and the education of children culture of
 their mindes. in the second sense, where mens wills are to be wrought to
 our purpose, not by force, but by compleasance, it signifieth as much as
 courting, that is, winning of favour by good offices; as by praises,
 by acknowledging their power, and by whatsoever is pleasing to them from
 whom we look for any benefit. and this is properly worship: in which
 sense publicola, is understood for worshipper of the people, and
 cultus dei, for the worship of god.
 



severall signes of honour
 
from internall honour, consisting in the opinion of power and goodnesse,
 arise three passions; love, which hath reference to goodnesse; and hope,
 and fear, that relate to power: and three parts of externall worship;
 praise, magnifying, and blessing: the subject of praise, being
 goodnesse; the subject of magnifying, and blessing, being power, and the
 effect thereof felicity. praise, and magnifying are significant both by
 words, and actions: by words, when we say man is good, or great:
 by actions, when we thank him for his bounty, and obey his power. the
 opinion of the happinesse of another, can onely be expressed by words.
 



worship naturall and arbitrary
 
there be some signes of honour, (both in attributes and actions,) that
 be naturally so; as amongst attributes, good, just, liberall, and the
 like; and amongst actions, prayers, thanks, and obedience. others are
 so by institution, or custome of men; and in some times and places are
 honourable; in others dishonourable; in others indifferent: such as are
 the gestures in salutation, prayer, and thanksgiving, in different
 times and places, differently used. the former is naturall; the later
 arbitrary worship.
 



worship commanded and free
 
and of arbitrary worship, there bee two differences: for sometimes it is
 commanded, sometimes voluntary worship: commanded, when it is such
 as hee requireth, who is worshipped: free, when it is such as the
 worshipper thinks fit. when it is commanded, not the words, or gestures,
 but the obedience is the worship. but when free, the worship consists
 in the opinion of the beholders: for if to them the words, or actions by
 which we intend honour, seem ridiculous, and tending to contumely; they
 are not worship; because signe is not signe to him that giveth it,
 but to him to whom it is made; that is, to the spectator.
 



worship publique and private
 
again, there is publique, and private worship. publique, is the
 worship that common-wealth performeth, as one person. private, is that
 which private person exhibiteth. publique, in respect of the whole
 common-wealth, is free; but in respect of particular men it is not so.
 private, is in secret free; but in the sight of the multitude, it is
 never without some restraint, either from the lawes, or from the opinion
 of men; which is contrary to the nature of liberty.
 



the end of worship
 
the end of worship amongst men, is power. for where man seeth another
 worshipped supposeth him powerfull, and is the readier to obey him;
 which makes his power greater. but god has ends: the worship we do
 him, proceeds from our duty, and is directed according to our capacity,
 by those rules of honour, that reason dictateth to be done by the weak
 to the more potent men, in hope of benefit, for fear of dammage, or in
 thankfulnesse for good already received from them.
 



attributes of divine honour
 
that we may know what worship of god is taught us by the light of
 nature, i will begin with his attributes. where, first, it is manifest,
 we ought to attribute to him existence: for man can have the will to
 honour that, which thinks not to have any beeing.
 
secondly, that those philosophers, who sayd the world, or the soule of
 the world was god, spake unworthily of him; and denyed his existence:
 for by god, is understood the cause of the world; and to say the world
 is god, is to say there is cause of it, that is, god.
 
thirdly, to say the world was not created, but eternall, (seeing that
 which is eternall has cause,) is to deny there is god.
 
fourthly, that they who attributing (as they think) ease to god, take
 from him the care of mankind; take from him his honour: for it takes
 away mens love, and fear of him; which is the root of honour.
 
fifthly, in those things that signifie greatnesse, and power; to say he
 is finite, is not to honour him: for it is not signe of the will to
 honour god, to attribute to him lesse than we can; and finite, is lesse
 than we can; because to finite, it is easie to adde more.
 
therefore to attribute figure to him, is not honour; for all figure is
 finite:
 
nor to say we conceive, and imagine, or have an idea of him, in our
 mind: for whatsoever we conceive is finite:
 
not to attribute to him parts, or totality; which are the attributes
 onely of things finite:
 
nor to say is this, or that place: for whatsoever is in place, is
 bounded, and finite:
 
nor that is moved, or resteth: for both these attributes ascribe to
 him place:
 
nor that there be more gods than one; because it implies them all
 finite: for there cannot be more than one infinite: nor to ascribe to
 him (unlesse metaphorically, meaning not the passion, but the effect)
 passions that partake of griefe; as repentance, anger, mercy: or of
 want; as appetite, hope, desire; or of any passive faculty: for passion,
 is power limited by somewhat else.
 
and therefore when we ascribe to god will, it is not to be understood,
 as that of man, for rationall appetite; but as the power, by which he
 effecteth every thing.
 
likewise when we attribute to him sight, and other acts of sense; as
 also knowledge, and understanding; which in us is nothing else, but
 tumult of the mind, raised by externall things that presse the
 organicall parts of mans body: for there is such thing in god; and
 being things that depend on naturall causes, cannot be attributed to
 him.
 
hee that will attribute to god, nothing but what is warranted by
 naturall reason, must either use such negative attributes, as infinite,
 eternall, incomprehensible; or superlatives, as most high, most great,
 and the like; or indefinite, as good, just, holy, creator; and in such
 sense, as if meant not to declare what is, (for that were to
 circumscribe him within the limits of our fancy,) but how much wee
 admire him, and how ready we would be to obey him; which is signe of
 humility, and of will to honour him as much as we can: for there is
 but one name to signifie our conception of his nature, and that is, i
 am: and but one name of his relation to us, and that is god; in which is
 contained father, king, and lord.
 



actions that are signes of divine honour
 
concerning the actions of divine worship, it is most generall precept
 of reason, that they be signes of the intention to honour god; such as
 are, first, prayers: for not the carvers, when they made images, were
 thought to make them gods; but the people that prayed to them.
 
secondly, thanksgiving; which differeth from prayer in divine worship,
 otherwise, than that prayers precede, and thanks succeed the benefit;
 the end both of the one, and the other, being to acknowledge god, for
 author of all benefits, as well past, as future.
 
thirdly, gifts; that is to say, sacrifices, and oblations, (if they be
 of the best,) are signes of honour: for they are thanksgivings.
 
fourthly, not to swear by any but god, is naturally signe of honour:
 for it is confession that god onely knoweth the heart; and that no
 mans wit, or strength can protect man against gods vengence on the
 perjured.
 
fifthly, it is part of rationall worship, to speak considerately
 of god; for it argues fear of him, and fear, is confession of his
 power. hence followeth, that the name of god is not to be used rashly,
 and to purpose; for that is as much, as in vain: and it is to
 purpose; unlesse it be by way of oath, and by order of the
 common-wealth, to make judgements certain; or between common-wealths,
 to avoyd warre. and that disputing of gods nature is contrary to his
 honour: for it is supposed, that in this naturall kingdome of god, there
 is other way to know any thing, but by naturall reason; that is, from
 the principles of naturall science; which are so farre from teaching us
 any thing of gods nature, as they cannot teach us our own nature, nor
 the nature of the smallest creature living. and therefore, when men out
 of the principles of naturall reason, dispute of the attributes of god,
 they but dishonour him: for in the attributes which we give to god, we
 are not to consider the signification of philosophicall truth; but the
 signification of pious intention, to do him the greatest honour we are
 able. from the want of which consideration, have proceeded the volumes
 of disputation about the nature of god, that tend not to his honour, but
 to the honour of our own wits, and learning; and are nothing else but
 inconsiderate, and vain abuses of his sacred name.
 
sixthly, in prayers, thanksgivings, offerings and sacrifices, it is a
 dictate of naturall reason, that they be every one in his kind the
 best, and most significant of honour. as for example, that prayers, and
 thanksgiving, be made in words and phrases, not sudden, nor light, nor
 plebeian; but beautifull and well composed; for else we do not god
 as much honour as we can. and therefore the heathens did absurdly, to
 worship images for gods: but their doing it in verse, and with musick,
 both of voyce, and instruments, was reasonable. also that the beasts
 they offered in sacrifice, and the gifts they offered, and their actions
 in worshipping, were full of submission, and commemorative of benefits
 received, was according to reason, as proceeding from an intention to
 honour him.
 
seventhly, reason directeth not onely to worship god in secret; but
 also, and especially, in publique, and in the sight of men: for without
 that, (that which in honour is most acceptable) the procuring others to
 honour him, is lost.
 
lastly, obedience to his lawes (that is, in this case to the lawes
 of nature,) is the greatest worship of all. for as obedience is
 more acceptable to god than sacrifice; so also to set light by his
 commandements, is the greatest of all contumelies. and these are the
 lawes of that divine worship, which naturall reason dictateth to private
 men.
 



publique worship consisteth in uniformity
 
but seeing common-wealth is but one person, it ought also to exhibite
 to god but one worship; which then it doth, when it commandeth it to be
 exhibited by private men, publiquely. and this is publique worship; the
 property whereof, is to be uniforme: for those actions that are done
 differently, by different men, cannot be said to be publique worship.
 and therefore, where many sorts of worship be allowed, proceeding from
 the different religions of private men, it cannot be said there is any
 publique worship, nor that the common-wealth is of any religion at all.
 



all attributes depend on the lawes civill
 
and because words (and consequently the attributes of god) have their
 signification by agreement, and constitution of men; those attributes
 are to be held significative of honour, that men intend shall so be; and
 whatsoever may be done by the wills of particular men, where there is no
 law but reason, may be done by the will of the common-wealth, by lawes
 civill. and because common-wealth hath will, nor makes lawes,
 but those that are made by the will of him, or them that have the
 soveraign power; it followeth, that those attributes which the soveraign
 ordaineth, in the worship of god, for signes of honour, ought to be
 taken and used for such, by private men in their publique worship.
 



not all actions
 
but because not all actions are signes by constitution; but some are
 naturally signes of honour, others of contumely, these later (which are
 those that men are ashamed to do in the sight of them they reverence)
 cannot be made by humane power part of divine worship; nor the former
 (such as are decent, modest, humble behaviour) ever be separated from
 it. but whereas there be an infinite number of actions, and gestures, of
 an indifferent nature; such of them as the common-wealth shall ordain to
 be publiquely and universally in use, as signes of honour, and part of
 gods worship, are to be taken and used for such by the subjects. and
 that which is said in the scripture, "it is better to obey god than
 men," hath place in the kingdome of god by pact, and not by nature.
 



naturall punishments
 
having thus briefly spoken of the naturall kingdome of god, and his
 naturall lawes, i will adde onely to this chapter short declaration of
 his naturall punishments. there is action of man in this life, that
 is not the beginning of so long chayn of consequences, as humane
 providence, is high enough, to give man prospect to the end. and
 in this chayn, there are linked together both pleasing and unpleasing
 events; in such manner, as that will do any thing for his pleasure,
 must engage himselfe to suffer all the pains annexed to it; and these
 pains, are the naturall punishments of those actions, which are the
 beginning of more harme that good. and hereby it comes to passe, that
 intemperance, is naturally punished with diseases; rashnesse, with
 mischances; injustice, with the violence of enemies; pride, with ruine;
 cowardise, with oppression; negligent government of princes, with
 rebellion; and rebellion, with slaughter. for seeing punishments
 are consequent to the breach of lawes; naturall punishments must be
 naturally consequent to the breach of the lawes of nature; and therfore
 follow them as their naturall, not arbitrary effects.
 



the conclusion of the second part
 
and thus farre concerning the constitution, nature, and right of
 soveraigns; and concerning the duty of subjects, derived from the
 principles of naturall reason. and now, considering how different
 this doctrine is, from the practise of the greatest part of the world,
 especially of these western parts, that have received their morall
 learning from rome, and athens; and how much depth of morall philosophy
 is required, in them that have the administration of the soveraign
 power; i am at the point of believing this my labour, as uselesse,
 and the common-wealth of plato; for also is of opinion that it is
 impossible for the disorders of state, and change of governments by
 civill warre, ever to be taken away, till soveraigns be philosophers.
 but when i consider again, that the science of naturall justice, is the
 onely science necessary for soveraigns, and their principall ministers;
 and that they need not be charged with the sciences mathematicall, (as
 by plato they are,) further, than by good lawes to encourage men to
 the study of them; and that neither plato, nor any other philosopher
 hitherto, hath put into order, and sufficiently, or probably proved all
 the theoremes of morall doctrine, that men may learn thereby, both how
 to govern, and how to obey; i recover some hope, that one time or other,
 this writing of mine, may fall into the hands of soveraign, who will
 consider it himselfe, (for it is short, and i think clear,) without the
 help of any interested, or envious interpreter; and by the exercise of
 entire soveraignty, in protecting the publique teaching of it, convert
 this truth of speculation, into the utility of practice.
 




part iii.
 of christian common-wealth
 



chapter xxxii. of the principles of christian politiques
 

the word of god delivered by prophets is the main principle
 
of christian politiques
 
i have derived the rights of soveraigne power, and the duty of subjects
 hitherto, from the principles of nature onely; such as experience has
 found true, or consent (concerning the use of words) has made so; that
 is to say, from the nature of men, known to us by experience, and
 from definitions (of such words as are essentiall to all politicall
 reasoning) universally agreed on. but in that i am next to handle, which
 is the nature and rights of christian common-wealth, whereof there
 dependeth much upon supernaturall revelations of the will of god; the
 ground of my discourse must be, not only the naturall word of god, but
 also the propheticall.
 
neverthelesse, we are not to renounce our senses, and experience; nor
 (that which is the undoubted word of god) our naturall reason. for they
 are the talents which hath put into our hands to negotiate, till the
 coming again of our blessed saviour; and therefore not to be folded up
 in the napkin of an implicate faith, but employed in the purchase of
 justice, peace, and true religion, for though there be many things in
 gods word above reason; that is to say, which cannot by naturall reason
 be either demonstrated, or confuted; yet there is nothing contrary
 to it; but when it seemeth so, the fault is either in our unskilfull
 interpretation, or erroneous ratiocination.
 
therefore, when any thing therein written is too hard for our
 examination, wee are bidden to captivate our understanding to the words;
 and not to labour in sifting out philosophicall truth by logick, of
 such mysteries as are not comprehensible, nor fall under any rule of
 naturall science. for it is with the mysteries of our religion, as with
 wholsome pills for the sick, which swallowed whole, have the vertue to
 cure; but chewed, are for the most part cast up again without effect.
 



what it is to captivate the understanding
 
but by the captivity of our understanding, is not meant submission of
 the intellectual faculty, to the opinion of any other man; but of
 the will to obedience, where obedience is due. for sense, memory,
 understanding, reason, and opinion are not in our power to change; but
 alwaies, and necessarily such, as the things we see, hear, and consider
 suggest unto us; and therefore are not effects of our will, but our will
 of them. we then captivate our understanding and reason, when we forbear
 contradiction; when we so speak, as (by lawfull authority) we are
 commanded; and when we live accordingly; which in sum, is trust, and
 faith reposed in him that speaketh, though the mind be incapable of any
 notion at all from the words spoken.
 



how god speaketh to men
 
when god speaketh to man, it must be either immediately; or by mediation
 of another man, to whom had formerly spoken by himself immediately.
 how god speaketh to man immediately, may be understood by those well
 enough, to whom hath so spoken; but how the same should be understood
 by another, is hard, if not impossible to know. for if man pretend to
 me, that god hath spoken to him supernaturally, and immediately, and i
 make doubt of it, i cannot easily perceive what argument can produce,
 to oblige to beleeve it. it is true, that if be my soveraign,
 may oblige to obedience, so, as not by act or word to declare i
 beleeve him not; but not to think any otherwise then my reason perswades
 me. but if one that hath not such authority over me, shall pretend the
 same, there is nothing that exacteth either beleefe, or obedience.
 
for to say that god hath spoken to him in the holy scripture, is not
 to say god hath spoken to him immediately, but by mediation of the
 prophets, or of the apostles, or of the church, in such manner as he
 speaks to all other christian men. to say hath spoken to him in a
 dream, is more than to say dreamed that god spake to him; which is
 not of force to win beleef from any man, that knows dreams are for
 the most part naturall, and may proceed from former thoughts; and such
 dreams as that, from selfe conceit, and foolish arrogance, and false
 opinion of mans own godlinesse, or other vertue, by which thinks he
 hath merited the favour of extraordinary revelation. to say hath
 seen vision, or heard voice, is to say, that hath dreamed between
 sleeping and waking: for in such manner man doth many times naturally
 take his dream for vision, as not having well observed his own
 slumbering. to say speaks by supernaturall inspiration, is to say he
 finds an ardent desire to speak, or some strong opinion of himself, for
 which can alledge naturall and sufficient reason. so that
 though god almighty can speak to man, by dreams, visions, voice, and
 inspiration; yet obliges man to beleeve hath so done to him
 that pretends it; who (being man), may erre, and (which is more) may
 lie.
 



by what marks prophets are known
 
how then can he, to whom god hath never revealed his wil immediately
 (saving by the way of natural reason) know when is to obey, or not
 to obey his word, delivered by him, that sayes is prophet? (1 kings
 22) of 400 prophets, of whom the k. of israel asked counsel, concerning
 the warre made against ramoth gilead, only micaiah was true one.(1
 kings 13) the prophet that was sent to prophecy against the altar set up
 by jeroboam, though true prophet, and that by two miracles done in
 his presence appears to be prophet sent from god, was yet deceived by
 another old prophet, that perswaded him as from the mouth of god, to eat
 and drink with him. if one prophet deceive another, what certainty is
 there of knowing the will of god, by other way than that of reason? to
 which i answer out of the holy scripture, that there be two marks, by
 which together, not asunder, true prophet is to be known. one is the
 doing of miracles; the other is the not teaching any other religion than
 that which is already established. asunder (i say) neither of these is
 sufficient. (deut. 13 v. 1,2,3,4,5 ) "if prophet rise amongst you, or
 dreamer of dreams, and shall pretend the doing of miracle, and the
 miracle come to passe; if say, let us follow strange gods, which thou
 hast not known, thou shalt not hearken to him, &c. but that prophet and
 dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because hath spoken to you
 to revolt from the lord your god." in which words two things are to
 be observed, first, that god wil not have miracles alone serve for
 arguments, to approve the prophets calling; but (as it is in the third
 verse) for an experiment of the constancy of our adherence to himself.
 for the works of the egyptian sorcerers, though not so great as those
 of moses, yet were great miracles. secondly, that how great soever the
 miracle be, yet if it tend to stir up revolt against the king, or him
 that governeth by the kings authority, that doth such miracle, is
 not to be considered otherwise than as sent to make triall of their
 allegiance. for these words, "revolt from the lord your god," are in
 this place equivalent to "revolt from your king." for they had made god
 their king by pact at the foot of mount sinai; who ruled them by moses
 only; for only spake with god, and from time to time declared gods
 commandements to the people. in like manner, after our saviour christ
 had made his disciples acknowledge him for the messiah, (that is to say,
 for gods anointed, whom the nation of the jews daily expected for their
 king, but refused when came,) omitted not to advertise them of the
 danger of miracles. "there shall arise," (saith he) "false christs, and
 false prophets, and shall doe great wonders and miracles, even to the
 seducing (if it were possible) of the very elect." (mat. 24. 24) by
 which it appears, that false prophets may have the power of miracles;
 yet are wee not to take their doctrin for gods word. st. paul says
 further to the galatians, that "if himself, or an angell from heaven
 preach another gospel to them, than had preached, let him be
 accursed." (gal. 1. 8) that gospel was, that christ was king; so that
 all preaching against the power of the king received, in consequence
 to these words, is by st. paul accursed. for his speech is addressed to
 those, who by his preaching had already received jesus for the christ,
 that is to say, for king of the jews.
 



the marks of prophet in the old law, miracles, and doctrine
 conformable to the law
 
and as miracles, without preaching that doctrine which god hath
 established; so preaching the true doctrine, without the doing of
 miracles, is an unsufficient argument of immediate revelation. for if
 man that teacheth not false doctrine, should pretend to bee prophet
 without shewing any miracle, is never the more to bee regarded for
 his pretence, as is evident by deut. 18. v. 21, 22. "if thou say in
 thy heart, how shall we know that the word (of the prophet) is not that
 which the lord hath spoken. when the prophet shall have spoken in the
 name of the lord, that which shall not come to passe, that’s the word
 which the lord hath not spoken, but the prophet has spoken it out of
 the pride of his own heart, fear him not." but man may here again ask,
 when the prophet hath foretold thing, how shal we know whether it will
 come to passe or not? for may foretel it as thing to arrive after
 certain long time, longer then the time of mans life; or indefinitely,
 that it will come to passe one time or other: in which case this mark
 of prophet is unusefull; and therefore the miracles that oblige us to
 beleeve prophet, ought to be confirmed by an immediate, or not
 long deferr’d event. so that it is manifest, that the teaching of
 the religion which god hath established, and the showing of present
 miracle, joined together, were the only marks whereby the scripture
 would have true prophet, that is to say immediate revelation to be
 acknowledged; neither of them being singly sufficient to oblige any
 other man to regard what saith.
 



miracles ceasing, prophets cease, the scripture supplies their place
 
seeing therefore miracles now cease, we have sign left, whereby to
 acknowledge the pretended revelations, or inspirations of any private
 man; nor obligation to give ear to any doctrine, farther than it is
 conformable to the holy scriptures, which since the time of our saviour,
 supply the want of all other prophecy; and from which, by wise and
 careful ratiocination, all rules and precepts necessary to the knowledge
 of our duty both to god and man, without enthusiasme, or supernaturall
 inspiration, may easily be deduced. and this scripture is it, out of
 which i am to take the principles of my discourse, concerning the
 rights of those that are the supream govenors on earth, of christian
 common-wealths; and of the duty of christian subjects towards their
 soveraigns. and to that end, i shall speak in the next chapter, or the
 books, writers, scope and authority of the bible.
 



chapter xxxiii. of the number, antiquity, scope, authority, and
 interpreters of the books of holy scripture
 



of the books of holy scripture
 
by the books of holy scripture, are understood those, which ought to be
 the canon, that is to say, the rules of christian life. and because all
 rules of life, which men are in conscience bound to observe, are laws;
 the question of the scripture, is the question of what is law throughout
 all christendome, both naturall, and civill. for though it be not
 determined in scripture, what laws every christian king shall constitute
 in his own dominions; yet it is determined what laws shall not
 constitute. seeing therefore i have already proved, that soveraigns
 in their own dominions are the sole legislators; those books only are
 canonicall, that is, law, in every nation, which are established for
 such by the soveraign authority. it is true, that god is the soveraign
 of all soveraigns; and therefore, when speaks to any subject, he
 ought to be obeyed, whatsoever any earthly potentate command to the
 contrary. but the question is not of obedience to god, but of when,
 and what god hath said; which to subjects that have supernaturall
 revelation, cannot be known, but by that naturall reason, which guided
 them, for the obtaining of peace and justice, to obey the authority
 of their severall common-wealths; that is to say, of their lawfull
 soveraigns. according to this obligation, i can acknowledge other
 books of the old testament, to be holy scripture, but those which have
 been commanded to be acknowledged for such, by the authority of the
 church of england. what books these are, is sufficiently known, without
 catalogue of them here; and they are the same that are acknowledged
 by st. jerome, who holdeth the rest, namely, the wisdome of solomon,
 ecclesiasticus, judith, tobias, the first and second of maccabees,
 (though had seen the first in hebrew) and the third and fourth of
 esdras, for apocrypha. of the canonicall, josephus learned jew, that
 wrote in the time of the emperor domitian, reckoneth twenty two, making
 the number agree with the hebrew alphabet. st. jerome does the same,
 though they reckon them in different manner. for josephus numbers five
 books of moses, thirteen of prophets, that writ the history of their own
 times (which how it agrees with the prophets writings contained in the
 bible wee shall see hereafter), and four of hymnes and morall precepts.
 but st. jerome reckons five books of moses, eight of prophets, and nine
 of other holy writ, which calls of hagiographa. the septuagint, who
 were 70. learned men of the jews, sent for by ptolemy king of egypt, to
 translate the jewish law, out of the hebrew into the greek, have left us
 other for holy scripture in the greek tongue, but the same that are
 received in the church of england.
 
as for the books of the new testament, they are equally acknowledged for
 canon by all christian churches, and by all sects of christians, that
 admit any books at all for canonicall.
 



their antiquity
 
who were the originall writers of the severall books of holy scripture,
 has not been made evident by any sufficient testimony of other history,
 (which is the only proof of matter of fact); nor can be by any arguments
 of naturall reason; for reason serves only to convince the truth (not
 of fact, but) of consequence. the light therefore that must guide us in
 this question, must be that which is held out unto us from the bookes
 themselves: and this light, though it show us not the writer of every
 book, yet it is not unusefull to give us knowledge of the time, wherein
 they were written.
 



the pentateuch not written by moses
 
and first, for the pentateuch, it is not argument enough that they were
 written by moses, because they are called the five books of moses; no
 more than these titles, the book of joshua, the book of judges, the book
 of ruth, and the books of the kings, are arguments sufficient to prove,
 that they were written by joshua, by the judges, by ruth, and by the
 kings. for in titles of books, the subject is marked, as often as the
 writer. the history of livy, denotes the writer; but the history of
 scanderbeg, is denominated from the subject. we read in the last chapter
 of deuteronomie, ver. 6. concerning the sepulcher of moses, "that man
 knoweth of his sepulcher to this day," that is, to the day wherein those
 words were written. it is therefore manifest, that those words were
 written after his interrement. for it were strange interpretation, to
 say moses spake of his own sepulcher (though by prophecy), that it was
 not found to that day, wherein was yet living. but it may perhaps
 be alledged, that the last chapter only, not the whole pentateuch, was
 written by some other man, but the rest not: let us therefore consider
 that which we find in the book of genesis, chap. 12. ver. 6 "and abraham
 passed through the land to the place of sichem, unto the plain of moreh,
 and the canaanite was then in the land;" which must needs bee the
 words of one that wrote when the canaanite was not in the land; and
 consequently, not of moses, who dyed before came into it. likewise
 numbers 21. ver. 14. the writer citeth another more ancient book,
 entituled, the book of the warres of the lord, wherein were registred
 the acts of moses, at the red-sea, and at the brook of arnon. it is
 therefore sufficiently evident, that the five books of moses were
 written after his time, though how long after it be not so manifest.
 
but though moses did not compile those books entirely, and in the form
 we have them; yet wrote all that which hee is there said to have
 written: as for example, the volume of the law, which is contained, as
 it seemeth in the 11 of deuteronomie, and the following chapters to the
 27. which was also commanded to be written on stones, in their entry
 into the land of canaan. (deut. 31. 9) and this did moses himself
 write, and deliver to the priests and elders of israel, to be read
 every seventh year to all israel, at their assembling in the feast of
 tabernacles. and this is that law which god commanded, that their kings
 (when they should have established that form of government) should take
 copy of from the priests and levites to lay in the side of the arke;
 (deut. 31. 26) and the same which having been lost, was long time after
 found again by hilkiah, and sent to king josias, who causing it to be
 read to the people, renewed the covenant between god and them. (2 king.
 22. 8 & 23. 1,2,3)
 



the book of joshua written after his time
 
that the book of joshua was also written long after the time of joshua,
 may be gathered out of many places of the book it self. joshua had
 set up twelve stones in the middest of jordan, for monument of their
 passage; (josh 4. 9) of which the writer saith thus, "they are there
 unto this day;" (josh 5. 9) for "unto this day", is phrase that
 signifieth time past, beyond the memory of man. in like manner, upon
 the saying of the lord, that had rolled off from the people the
 reproach of egypt, the writer saith, "the place is called gilgal unto
 this day;" which to have said in the time of joshua had been improper.
 so also the name of the valley of achor, from the trouble that achan
 raised in the camp, (josh. 7. 26) the writer saith, "remaineth unto
 this day;" which must needs bee therefore long after the time of joshua.
 arguments of this kind there be many other; as josh. 8. 29. 13. 13. 14.
 14. 15. 63.
 



the booke of judges and ruth written long after the captivity
 
the same is manifest by like arguments of the book of judges, chap. 1.
 21,26 6.24 10.4 15.19 17.6 and ruth 1. 1. but especially judg. 18. 30.
 where it is said, that jonathan "and his sonnes were priests to the
 tribe of dan, untill the day of the captivity of the land."
 



the like of the bookes of samuel
 
that the books of samuel were also written after his own time, there
 are the like arguments, 1 sam. 5.5. 7.13,15. 27.6. & 30.25. where, after
 david had adjudged equall part of the spoiles, to them that guarded
 the ammunition, with them that fought, the writer saith, "he made it a
 statute and an ordinance to israel to this day." (2. sam. 6.4.) again,
 when david (displeased, that the lord had slain uzzah, for putting out
 his hand to sustain the ark,) called the place perez-uzzah, the writer
 saith, it is called so "to this day": the time therefore of the writing
 of that book, must be long after the time of the fact; that is, long
 after the time of david.
 



the books of the kings, and the chronicles
 
as for the two books of the kings, and the two books of the chronicles,
 besides the places which mention such monuments, as the writer saith,
 remained till his own days; such as are 1 kings 9.13. 9.21. 10. 12.
 12.19. 2 kings 2.22. 8.22. 10.27. 14.7. 16.6. 17.23. 17.34. 17.41. 1
 chron. 4.41. 5.26. it is argument sufficient they were written after the
 captivity in babylon, that the history of them is continued till that
 time. for the facts registred are alwaies more ancient than such books
 as make mention of, and quote the register; as these books doe in divers
 places, referring the reader to the chronicles of the kings of juda,
 to the chronicles of the kings of israel, to the books of the prophet
 samuel, or the prophet nathan, of the prophet ahijah; to the vision of
 jehdo, to the books of the prophet serveiah, and of the prophet addo.
 



ezra and nehemiah
 
the books of esdras and nehemiah were written certainly after their
 return from captivity; because their return, the re-edification of
 the walls and houses of jerusalem, the renovation of the covenant, and
 ordination of their policy are therein contained.
 



esther
 
the history of queen esther is of the time of the captivity; and
 therefore the writer must have been of the same time, or after it.
 



job
 
the book of job hath mark in it of the time wherein it was written:
 and though it appear sufficiently (exekiel 14.14, and james 5.11.)
 that was fained person; yet the book it self seemeth not to be
 history, but treatise concerning question in ancient time much
 disputed, "why wicked men have often prospered in this world, and good
 men have been afflicted;" and it is the most probably, because from the
 beginning, to the third verse of the third chapter, where the complaint
 of job beginneth, the hebrew is (as st. jerome testifies) in prose; and
 from thence to the sixt verse of the last chapter in hexameter verses;
 and the rest of that chapter again in prose. so that the dispute is all
 in verse; and the prose is added, but as preface in the beginning, and
 an epilogue in the end. but verse is usuall stile of such, as either
 are themselves in great pain, as job; or of such as come to comfort
 them, as his friends; but in philosophy, especially morall philosophy,
 in ancient time frequent.
 



the psalter
 
the psalmes were written the most part by david, for the use of the
 quire. to these are added some songs of moses, and other holy men; and
 some of them after the return from the captivity; as the 137. and the
 126. whereby it is manifest that the psalter was compiled, and put into
 the form it now hath, after the return of the jews from babylon.
 



the proverbs
 
the proverbs, being collection of wise and godly sayings, partly of
 solomon, partly of agur the of jakeh; and partly of the mother
 of king lemuel, cannot probably be thought to have been collected by
 solomon, rather then by agur, or the mother of lemues; and that, though
 the sentences be theirs, yet the collection or compiling them into this
 one book, was the work of some other godly man, that lived after them
 all.
 



ecclesiastes and the canticles
 
the books of ecclesiastes and the canticles have nothing that was not
 solomons, except it be the titles, or inscriptions. for "the words of
 the preacher, the of david, king in jerusalem;" and, "the song of
 songs, which is solomon’s," seem to have been made for distinctions
 sake, then, when the books of scripture were gathered into one body of
 the law; to the end, that not the doctrine only, but the authors also
 might be extant.
 



the prophets
 
of the prophets, the most ancient, are sophoniah, jonas, amos, hosea,
 isaiah and michaiah, who lived in the time of amaziah, and azariah,
 otherwise ozias, kings of judah. but the book of jonas is not properly
 register of his prophecy, (for that is contained in these few words,
 "fourty dayes and ninivy shall be destroyed,") but history or narration
 of his frowardenesse and disputing gods commandements; so that there is
 small probability should be the author, seeing is the subject of
 it. but the book of amos is his prophecy.
 
jeremiah, abdias, nahum, and habakkuk prophecyed in the time of josiah.
 
ezekiel, daniel, aggeus, and zacharias, in the captivity.
 
when joel and malachi prophecyed, is not evident by their writings. but
 considering the inscriptions, or titles of their books, it is manifest
 enough, that the whole scripture of the old testament, was set forth in
 the form we have it, after the return of the jews from their captivity
 in babylon, and before the time of ptolemaeus philadelphus, that caused
 it to bee translated into greek by seventy men, which were sent him
 out of judea for that purpose. and if the books of apocrypha (which
 are recommended to us by the church, though not for canonicall, yet for
 profitable books for our instruction) may in this point be credited, the
 scripture was set forth in the form wee have it in, by esdras; as may
 appear by that which himself saith, in the second book, chapt. 14.
 verse 21, 22, &c. where speaking to god, saith thus, "thy law is
 burnt; therefore man knoweth the things which thou has done, or the
 works that are to begin. but if i have found grace before thee, send
 down the holy spirit into me, and i shall write all that hath been done
 in the world, since the beginning, which were written in thy law, that
 men may find thy path, and that they which will live in the later days,
 may live." and verse 45. "and it came to passe when the forty dayes were
 fulfilled, that the highest spake, saying, ‘the first that thou hast
 written, publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it; but
 keep the seventy last, that thou mayst deliver them onely to such as
 be wise among the people.’" and thus much concerning the time of the
 writing of the bookes of the old testament.
 



the new testament
 
the writers of the new testament lived all in lesse then an age after
 christs ascension, and had all of them seen our saviour, or been his
 disciples, except st. paul, and st. luke; and consequently whatsoever
 was written by them, is as ancient as the time of the apostles. but
 the time wherein the books of the new testament were received, and
 acknowledged by the church to be of their writing, is not altogether so
 ancient. for, as the bookes of the old testament are derived to us, from
 higher time then that of esdras, who by the direction of gods spirit
 retrived them, when they were lost: those of the new testament, of which
 the copies were not many, nor could easily be all in any one private
 mans hand, cannot bee derived from higher time, that that wherein the
 governours of the church collected, approved, and recommended them to
 us, as the writings of those apostles and disciples; under whose names
 they go. the first enumeration of all the bookes, both of the old,
 and new testament, is in the canons of the apostles, supposed to be
 collected by clement the first (after st. peter) bishop of rome. but
 because that is but supposed, and by many questioned, the councell of
 laodicea is the first we know, that recommended the bible to the then
 christian churches, for the writings of the prophets and apostles: and
 this councell was held in the 364. yeer after christ. at which time,
 though ambition had so far prevailed on the great doctors of the church,
 as more to esteem emperours, though christian, for the shepherds of
 the people, but for sheep; and emperours not christian, for wolves; and
 endeavoured to passe their doctrine, not for counsell, and information,
 as preachers; but for laws, as absolute governours; and thought such
 frauds as tended to make the people the more obedient to christian
 doctrine, to be pious; yet i am perswaded they did not therefore
 falsifie the scriptures, though the copies of the books of the new
 testament, were in the hands only of the ecclesiasticks; because if they
 had had an intention so to doe, they would surely have made them more
 favorable to their power over christian princes, and civill soveraignty,
 than they are. i see not therefore any reason to doubt, but that the
 old, and new testament, as we have them now, are the true registers of
 those things, which were done and said by the prophets, and apostles.
 and so perhaps are some of those books which are called apocrypha, if
 left out of the canon, not for inconformity of doctrine with the
 rest, but only because they are not found in the hebrew. for after the
 conquest of asia by alexander the great, there were few learned jews,
 that were not perfect in the greek tongue. for the seventy interpreters
 that converted the bible into greek, were all of them hebrews; and we
 have extant the works of philo and josephus both jews, written by them
 eloquently in greek. but it is not the writer, but the authority of the
 church, that maketh book canonicall.
 



their scope
 
and although these books were written by divers men, yet it is manifest
 the writers were all indued with one and the same spirit, in that they
 conspire to one and the same end, which is the setting forth of the
 rights of the kingdome of god, the father, son, and holy ghost. for
 the book of genesis, deriveth the genealogy of gods people, from the
 creation of the world, to the going into egypt: the other four books of
 moses, contain the election of god for their king, and the laws which
 hee prescribed for their government: the books of joshua, judges, ruth,
 and samuel, to the time of saul, describe the acts of gods people,
 till the time they cast off gods yoke, and called for king, after the
 manner of their neighbour nations; the rest of the history of the
 old testament, derives the succession of the line of david, to the
 captivity, out of which line was to spring the restorer of the kingdome
 of god, even our blessed saviour god the son, whose coming was foretold
 in the bookes of the prophets, after whom the evangelists writt his
 life, and actions, and his claim to the kingdome, whilst lived one
 earth: and lastly, the acts, and epistles of the apostles, declare the
 coming of god, the holy ghost, and the authority left with them, and
 their successors, for the direction of the jews, and for the invitation
 of the gentiles. in summe, the histories and the prophecies of the old
 testament, and the gospels, and epistles of the new testament, have had
 one and the same scope, to convert men to the obedience of god; 1. in
 moses, and the priests; 2. in the man christ; and 3. in the apostles and
 the successors to apostolicall power. for these three at several times
 did represent the person of god: moses, and his successors the high
 priests, and kings of judah, in the old testament: christ himself, in
 the time lived on earth: and the apostles, and their successors, from
 the day of pentecost (when the holy ghost descended on them) to this
 day.
 



the question of the authority of the scriptures stated.
 
it is question much disputed between the divers sects of christian
 religion, from whence the scriptures derive their authority; which
 question is also propounded sometimes in other terms, as, how wee know
 them to be the word of god, or, why we beleeve them to be so: and the
 difficulty of resolving it, ariseth chiefly from the impropernesse of
 the words wherein the question it self is couched. for it is beleeved
 on all hands, that the first and originall author of them is god; and
 consequently the question disputed, is not that. again, it is manifest,
 that none can know they are gods word, (though all true christians
 beleeve it,) but those to whom god himself hath revealed it
 supernaturally; and therefore the question is not rightly moved, of our
 knowledge of it. lastly, when the question is propounded of our beleefe;
 because some are moved to beleeve for one, and others for other reasons,
 there can be rendred one generall answer for them all. the question
 truly stated is, by what authority they are made law.
 



their authority and interpretation
 
as far as they differ not from the laws of nature, there is doubt,
 but they are the law of god, and carry their authority with them,
 legible to all men that have the use of naturall reason: but this is
 other authority, then that of all other morall doctrine consonant to
 reason; the dictates whereof are laws, not made, but eternall.
 
if they be made law by god himselfe, they are of the nature of written
 law, which are laws to them only to whom god hath so sufficiently
 published them, as man can excuse himself, by saying, know not
 they were his.
 
therefore, to whom god hath not supernaturally revealed, that they
 are his, nor that those that published them, were sent by him, is not
 obliged to obey them, by any authority, but his, whose commands have
 already the force of laws; that is to say, by any other authority, then
 that of the common-wealth, residing in the soveraign, who only has the
 legislative power. again, if it be not the legislative authority of
 the common-wealth, that giveth them the force of laws, it must bee
 some other authority derived from god, either private, or publique:
 if private, it obliges onely him, to whom in particular god hath been
 pleased to reveale it. for if every man should be obliged, to take for
 gods law, what particular men, on pretence of private inspiration, or
 revelation, should obtrude upon him, (in such number of men, that out
 of pride, and ignorance, take their own dreams, and extravagant fancies,
 and madnesse, for testimonies of gods spirit; or out of ambition,
 pretend to such divine testimonies, falsely, and contrary to their
 own consciences,) it were impossible that any divine law should be
 acknowledged. if publique, it is the authority of the common-wealth, or
 of the church. but the church, if it be one person, is the same thing
 with common-wealth of christians; called common-wealth, because it
 consisteth of men united in one person, their soveraign; and church,
 because it consisteth in christian men, united in one christian
 soveraign. but if the church be not one person, then it hath no
 authority at all; it can neither command, nor doe any action at all; nor
 is capable of having any power, or right to any thing; nor has any will,
 reason, nor voice; for all these qualities are personall. now if the
 whole number of christians be not contained in one common-wealth, they
 are not one person; nor is there an universall church that hath any
 authority over them; and therefore the scriptures are not made laws,
 by the universall church: or if it bee one common-wealth, then all
 christian monarchs, and states are private persons, and subject to
 bee judged, deposed, and punished by an universall soveraigne of all
 christendome. so that the question of the authority of the scriptures is
 reduced to this, "whether christian kings, and the soveraigne assemblies
 in christian common-wealths, be absolute in their own territories,
 immediately under god; or subject to one vicar of christ, constituted
 over the universall church; to bee judged, condemned, deposed, and put
 to death, as hee shall think expedient, or necessary for the common
 good."
 
which question cannot bee resolved, without more particular
 consideration of the kingdome of god; from whence also, wee are to judge
 of the authority of interpreting the scripture. for, whosoever hath a
 lawfull power over any writing, to make it law, hath the power also to
 approve, or disapprove the interpretation of the same.
 


chapter xxxiv. of the signification of spirit, angel, and inspiration in
 the books of holy scripture
 



body and spirit how taken in the scripture
 
seeing the foundation of all true ratiocination, is the constant
 signification of words; which in the doctrine following, dependeth not
 (as in naturall science) on the will of the writer, nor (as in common
 conversation) on vulgar use, but on the sense they carry in the
 scripture; it is necessary, before i proceed any further, to determine,
 out of the bible, the meaning of such words, as by their ambiguity, may
 render what i am to inferre upon them, obscure, or disputable. i will
 begin with the words body, and spirit, which in the language of the
 schools are termed, substances, corporeall, and incorporeall.
 
the word body, in the most generall acceptation, signifieth that
 which filleth, or occupyeth some certain room, or imagined place; and
 dependeth not on the imagination, but is reall part of that we call
 the universe. for the universe, being the aggregate of all bodies, there
 is reall part thereof that is not also body; nor any thing properly
 body, that is not also part of (that aggregate of all bodies) the
 universe. the same also, because bodies are subject to change, that is
 to say, to variety of apparence to the sense of living creatures, is
 called substance, that is to say, subject, to various accidents, as
 sometimes to be moved, sometimes to stand still; and to seem to our
 senses sometimes hot, sometimes cold, sometimes of one colour, smel,
 tast, or sound, somtimes of another. and this diversity of seeming,
 (produced by the diversity of the operation of bodies, on the organs
 of our sense) we attribute to alterations of the bodies that operate, &
 call them accidents of those bodies. and according to this acceptation
 of the word, substance and body, signifie the same thing; and therefore
 substance incorporeall are words, which when they are joined together,
 destroy one another, as if man should say, an incorporeall body.
 
but in the sense of common people, not all the universe is called body,
 but only such parts thereof as they can discern by the sense of feeling,
 to resist their force, or by the sense of their eyes, to hinder them
 from farther prospect. therefore in the common language of men, aire,
 and aeriall substances, use not to be taken for bodies, but (as often
 as men are sensible of their effects) are called wind, or breath, or
 (because the some are called in the latine spiritus) spirits; as when
 they call that aeriall substance, which in the body of any living
 creature, gives it life and motion, vitall and animall spirits. but for
 those idols of the brain, which represent bodies to us, where they
 are not, as in looking-glasse, in dream, or to distempered brain
 waking, they are (as the apostle saith generally of all idols) nothing;
 nothing at all, i say, there where they seem to bee; and in the brain
 it self, nothing but tumult, proceeding either from the action of the
 objects, or from the disorderly agitation of the organs of our sense.
 and men, that are otherwise imployed, then to search into their causes,
 know not of themselves, what to call them; and may therefore easily be
 perswaded, by those whose knowledge they much reverence, some to
 call them bodies, and think them made of aire compacted by power
 supernaturall, because the sight judges them corporeall; and some to
 call them spirits, because the sense of touch discerneth nothing in the
 place where they appear, to resist their fingers: so that the proper
 signification of spirit in common speech, is either subtile, fluid,
 and invisible body, or ghost, or other idol or phantasme of the
 imagination. but for metaphoricall significations, there be many: for
 sometimes it is taken for disposition or inclination of the mind; as
 when for the disposition to controwl the sayings of other men, we say,
 spirit contradiction; for disposition to uncleannesse, an unclean
 spirit; for perversenesse, froward spirit; for sullennesse, dumb
 spirit, and for inclination to godlinesse, and gods service, the spirit
 of god: sometimes for any eminent ability, or extraordinary passion,
 or disease of the mind, as when great wisdome is called the spirit of
 wisdome; and mad men are said to be possessed with spirit.
 
other signification of spirit i find where any; and where none
 of these can satisfie the sense of that word in scripture, the place
 falleth not under humane understanding; and our faith therein consisteth
 not in our opinion, but in our submission; as in all places where god
 is said to be spirit; or where by the spirit of god, is meant god
 himselfe. for the nature of god is incomprehensible; that is to say, we
 understand nothing of what is, but only that is; and therefore the
 attributes we give him, are not to tell one another, what is, nor
 to signifie our opinion of his nature, but our desire to honor him with
 such names as we conceive most honorable amongst our selves.
 



spirit of god taken in the scripture sometimes for wind, or breath
 
gen. 1. 2. "the spirit of god moved upon the face of the waters." here
 if by the spirit of god be meant god himself, then is motion attributed
 to god, and consequently place, which are intelligible only of bodies,
 and not of substances incorporeall; and so the place is above our
 understanding, that can conceive nothing moved that changes not place,
 or that has not dimension; and whatsoever has dimension, is body. but
 the meaning of those words is best understood by the like place, gen.
 8. 1. where when the earth was covered with waters, as in the beginning,
 god intending to abate them, and again to discover the dry land, useth
 like words, "i will bring my spirit upon the earth, and the waters shall
 be diminished:" in which place by spirit is understood wind, (that is
 an aire or spirit moved,) which might be called (as in the former place)
 the spirit of god, because it was gods work.
 



secondly, for extraordinary gifts of the understanding
 
gen. 41. 38. pharaoh calleth the wisdome of joseph, the spirit of god.
 for joseph having advised him to look out wise and discreet man, and
 to set him over the land of egypt, saith thus, "can we find such a
 man as this is, in whom is the spirit of god?" and exod. 28.3. "thou
 shalt speak (saith god) to all that are wise hearted, whom i have filled
 with the spirit of wisdome, to make aaron garments, to consecrate him."
 where extraordinary understanding, though but in making garments, as
 being the gift of god, is called the spirit of god. the same is found
 again, exod. 31.3,4,5,6. and 35.31. and isaiah 11.2,3. where the prophet
 speaking of the messiah, saith, "the spirit of the lord shall abide upon
 him, the spirit of wisdome and understanding, the spirit of counsell,
 and fortitude; and the spirit of the fear of the lord." where manifestly
 is meant, not so many ghosts, but so many eminent graces that god would
 give him.
 



thirdly, for extraordinary affections
 
in the book of judges, an extraordinary zeal, and courage in the
 defence of gods people, is called the spirit of god; as when it excited
 othoniel, gideon, jeptha, and samson to deliver them from servitude,
 judg. 3.10. 6.34. 11.29. 13.25. 14.6,19. and of saul, upon the newes of
 the insolence of the ammonites towards the men of jabeth gilead, it is
 said (1 sam.11.6.) that "the spirit of god came upon saul, and his anger
 (or, as it is in the latine, his fury) was kindled greatly." where it is
 not probable was meant ghost, but an extraordinary zeal to punish the
 cruelty of the ammonites. in like manner by the spirit of god, that came
 upon saul, when hee was amongst the prophets that praised god in songs,
 and musick (1 sam.19.20.) is to be understood, not ghost, but an
 unexpected and sudden zeal to join with them in their devotions.
 



fourthly, for the gift of prediction by dreams and visions
 
the false prophet zedekiah, saith to micaiah (1 kings 22.24.) "which way
 went the spirit of the lord from to speak to thee?" which cannot be
 understood of ghost; for micaiah declared before the kings of israel
 and judah, the event of the battle, as from vision, and not as from a
 spirit, speaking in him.
 
in the same manner it appeareth, in the books of the prophets, that
 though they spake by the spirit of god, that is to say, by speciall
 grace of prediction; yet their knowledge of the future, was not by a
 ghost within them, but by some supernaturall dream or vision.
 



fiftly, for life
 
gen. 2.7. it is said, "god made man of the dust of the earth, and
 breathed into his nostrills (spiraculum vitae) the breath of life, and
 man was made living soul." there the breath of life inspired by god,
 signifies more, but that god gave him life; and (job 27.3.) "as long
 as the spirit of god is in my nostrils;" is more then to say, "as
 long as i live." so in ezek. 1.20. "the spirit of life was in the
 wheels," is equivalent to, "the wheels were alive." and (ezek. 2.30.)
 "the spirit entred into me, and set on my feet," that is, "i
 recovered my vitall strength;" not that any ghost, or incorporeal
 substance entred into, and possessed his body.
 



sixtly, for subordination to authority
 
in the 11 chap. of numbers. verse 17. "i will take (saith god) of the
 spirit, which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall
 bear the burthen of the people with thee;" that is, upon the seventy
 elders: whereupon two of the seventy are said to prophecy in the campe;
 of whom some complained, and joshua desired moses to forbid them; which
 moses would not doe. whereby it appears; that joshua knew not they had
 received authority so to do, and prophecyed according to the mind of
 moses, that is to say, by spirit, or authority subordinate to his own.
 
in the like sense we read (deut. 34.9.) that "joshua was full of the
 spirit of wisdome," because moses had laid his hands upon him: that is,
 because was ordained by moses, to prosecute the work hee had himselfe
 begun, (namely, the bringing of gods people into the promised land), but
 prevented by death, could not finish.
 
in the like sense it is said, (rom. 8.9.) "if any man have not the
 spirit of christ, is none of his:" not meaning thereby the ghost of
 christ, but submission to his doctrine. as also (1 john 4.2.) "hereby
 you shall know the spirit of god; every spirit that confesseth that
 jesus christ is come in the flesh, is of god;" by which is meant the
 spirit of unfained christianity, or submission to that main article of
 christian faith, that jesus is the christ; which cannot be interpreted
 of ghost.
 
likewise these words (luke 4.1.) "and jesus full of the holy ghost"
 (that is, as it is exprest, mat. 4.1. and mar. 1.12. "of the holy
 spirit",) may be understood, for zeal to doe the work for which hee was
 sent by god the father: but to interpret it of ghost, is to say, that
 god himselfe (for so our saviour was,) was filled with god; which is
 very unproper, and unsignificant. how we came to translate spirits, by
 the word ghosts, which signifieth nothing, neither in heaven, nor earth,
 but the imaginary inhabitants of mans brain, i examine not: but this i
 say, the word spirit in the text signifieth such thing; but either
 properly reall substance, or metaphorically, some extraordinary
 ability of affection of the mind, or of the body.
 



seventhly, for aeriall bodies
 
the disciples of christ, seeing him walking upon the sea, (mat. 14.26.
 and marke 6.49.) supposed him to be spirit, meaning thereby an aeriall
 body, and not phantasme: for it is said, they all saw him; which
 cannot be understood of the delusions of the brain, (which are not
 common to many at once, as visible bodies are; but singular, because of
 the differences of fancies), but of bodies only. in like manner, where
 was taken for spirit, by the same apostles (luke 24.3,7.): so also
 (acts 12.15) when st. peter was delivered out of prison, it would not
 be beleeved; but when the maid said was at the dore, they said it
 was his angel; by which must be meant corporeall substance, or we must
 say, the disciples themselves did follow the common opinion of both jews
 and gentiles, that some such apparitions were not imaginary, but reall;
 and such as needed not the fancy of man for their existence: these the
 jews called spirits, and angels, good or bad; as the greeks called the
 same by the name of daemons. and some such apparitions may be reall, and
 substantiall; that is to say, subtile bodies, which god can form by
 the same power, by which formed all things, and make use of, as of
 ministers, and messengers (that is to say, angels) to declare his
 will, and execute the same when pleaseth, in extraordinary and
 supernaturall manner. but when hee hath so formed them they are
 substances, endued with dimensions, and take up roome, and can be moved
 from place to place, which is peculiar to bodies; and therefore are not
 ghosts incorporeall, that is to say, ghosts that are in place;
 that is to say, that are where; that is to say, that seeming to be
 somewhat, are nothing. but if corporeall be taken in the most vulgar
 manner, for such substances as are perceptible by our externall senses;
 then is substance incorporeall, thing not imaginary, but reall;
 namely, thin substance invisible, but that hath the same dimensions
 that are in grosser bodies.
 



angel what
 
by the name of angel, is signified generally, messenger; and most
 often, messenger of god: and by messenger of god, is signified, any
 thing that makes known his extraordinary presence; that is to say, the
 extraordinary manifestation of his power, especially by dream, or
 vision.
 
concerning the creation of angels, there is nothing delivered in the
 scriptures. that they are spirits, is often repeated: but by the name of
 spirit, is signified both in scripture, and vulgarly, both amongst jews,
 and gentiles, sometimes thin bodies; as the aire, the wind, the spirits
 vitall, and animall, of living creatures; and sometimes the images
 that rise in the fancy in dreams, and visions; which are not reall
 substances, but accidents of the brain; yet when god raiseth them
 supernaturally, to signifie his will, they are not unproperly termed
 gods messengers, that is to say, his angels.
 
and as the gentiles did vulgarly conceive the imagery of the brain, for
 things really subsistent without them, and not dependent on the fancy;
 and out of them framed their opinions of daemons, good and evill; which
 because they seemed to subsist really, they called substances; and
 because they could not feel them with their hands, incorporeall: so also
 the jews upon the same ground, without any thing in the old testament
 that constrained them thereunto, had generally an opinion, (except the
 sect of the sadduces,) that those apparitions (which it pleased god
 sometimes to produce in the fancie of men, for his own service, and
 therefore called them his angels) were substances, not dependent on the
 fancy, but permanent creatures of god; whereof those which they thought
 were good to them, they esteemed the angels of god, and those they
 thought would hurt them, they called evill angels, or evill spirits;
 such as was the spirit of python, and the spirits of mad-men, of
 lunatiques, and epileptiques: for they esteemed such as were troubled
 with such diseases, daemoniaques.
 
but if we consider the places of the old testament where angels are
 mentioned, we shall find, that in most of them, there can nothing else
 be understood by the word angel, but some image raised (supernaturally)
 in the fancy, to signifie the presence of god in the execution of some
 supernaturall work; and therefore in the rest, where their nature is not
 exprest, it may be understood in the same manner.
 
for we read gen. 16. that the same apparition is called, not onely an
 angel, but god; where that which (verse 7.) is called the angel of
 the lord, in the tenth verse, saith to agar, "i will multiply thy seed
 exceedingly;" that is, speaketh in the person of god. neither was this
 apparition fancy figured, but voice. by which it is manifest,
 that angel signifieth there, nothing but god himself, that caused agar
 supernaturally to apprehend voice supernaturall, testifying gods
 speciall presence there. why therefore may not the angels that appeared
 to lot, and are called gen. 19.13. men; and to whom, though they were
 but two, lot speaketh (ver. 18.) as but one, and that one, as god, (for
 the words are, "lot said unto them, oh not so my lord") be understood of
 images of men, supernaturally formed in the fancy; as well as before by
 angel was understood fancyed voice? when the angel called to abraham
 out of heaven, to stay his hand (gen. 22.11.) from slaying isaac, there
 was apparition, but voice; which neverthelesse was called properly
 enough messenger, or angel of god, because it declared gods will
 supernaturally, and saves the labour of supposing any permanent ghosts.
 the angels which jacob saw on the ladder of heaven (gen. 28.12.) were
 vision of his sleep; therefore onely fancy, and dream; yet being
 supernaturall, and signs of gods speciall presence, those apparitions
 are not improperly called angels. the same is to be understood
 (gen.31.11.) where jacob saith thus, "the angel of the lord appeared to
 mee in my sleep." for an apparition made to man in his sleep, is
 that which all men call dreame, whether such dreame be naturall, or
 supernaturall: and that which there jacob calleth an angel, was god
 himselfe; for the same angel saith (verse 13.) "i am the god of bethel."
 
also (exod.14.9.) the angel that went before the army of israel to the
 red sea, and then came behind it, is (verse 19.) the lord himself; and
 appeared not in the form of beautifull man, but in form (by day)
 of pillar of cloud and (by night) in form of pillar of fire; and yet
 this pillar was all the apparition, and angel promised to moses (exod.
 14.9.) for the armies guide: for this cloudy pillar, is said, to have
 descended, and stood at the dore of the tabernacle, and to have talked
 with moses.
 
there you see motion, and speech, which are commonly attributed to
 angels, attributed to cloud, because the cloud served as sign of
 gods presence; and was lesse an angel, then if it had had the form of
 man, or child of never so great beauty; or wings, as usually they are
 painted, for the false instruction of common people. for it is not the
 shape; but their use, that makes them angels. but their use is to be
 significations of gods presence in supernaturall operations; as when
 moses (exod. 33.14.) had desired god to goe along with the campe, (as
 had done alwaies before the making of the golden calfe,) god did not
 answer, "i will goe," nor "i will send an angel in my stead;" but thus,
 "my presence shall goe with thee."
 
to mention all the places of the old testament where the name of angel
 is found, would be too long. therefore to comprehend them all at once,
 i say, there is text in that part of the old testament, which the
 church of england holdeth for canonicall, from which we can conclude,
 there is, or hath been created, any permanent thing (understood by the
 name of spirit or angel,) that hath not quantity; and that may not be,
 by the understanding divided; that is to say, considered by parts; so
 as one part may bee in one place, and the next part in the next place
 to it; and, in summe, which is not (taking body for that, which is some
 what, or some where) corporeall; but in every place, the sense will bear
 the interpretation of angel, for messenger; as john baptist is called
 an angel, and christ the angel of the covenant; and as (according to the
 same analogy) the dove, and the fiery tongues, in that they were signes
 of gods speciall presence, might also be called angels. though we find
 in daniel two names of angels, gabriel, and michael; yet is cleer out of
 the text it selfe, (dan. 12.1) that by michael is meant christ, not as
 an angel, but as prince: and that gabriel (as the like apparitions
 made to other holy men in their sleep) was nothing but supernaturall
 phantasme, by which it seemed to daniel, in his dream, that two saints
 being in talke, one of them said to the other, "gabriel, let us make
 this man understand his vision:" for god needeth not, to distinguish
 his celestiall servants by names, which are usefull onely to the short
 memories of mortalls. nor in the new testament is there any place, out
 of which it can be proved, that angels (except when they are put for
 such men, as god hath made the messengers, and ministers of his word,
 or works) are things permanent, and withall incorporeall. that they
 are permanent, may bee gathered from the words of our saviour himselfe,
 (mat. 25.41.) where saith, it shall be said to the wicked in the last
 day, "go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
 angels:" which place is manifest for the permanence of evill angels,
 (unlesse wee might think the name of devill and his angels may be
 understood of the churches adversaries and their ministers;) but then
 it is repugnant to their immateriality; because everlasting fire is no
 punishment to impatible substances, such as are all things incorporeall.
 angels therefore are not thence proved to be incorporeall. in like
 manner where st. paul sayes (1 cor. 6.3.) "knew ye not that wee shall
 judge the angels?" and (2 pet. 2.4.) "for if god spared not the angels
 that sinned, but cast them down into hell." and (jude 1,6.) "and the
 angels that kept not their first estate, but left their owne habitation,
 hee hath reserved in everlasting chaines under darknesse unto the
 judgement of the last day;" though it prove the permanence of angelicall
 nature, it confirmeth also their materiality. and (mat. 22.30.) in the
 resurrection men doe neither marry, nor give in marriage, but are as
 the angels of god in heaven:" but in the resurrection men shall be
 permanent, and not incorporeall; so therefore also are the angels.
 
there be divers other places out of which may be drawn the like
 conclusion. to men that understand the signification of these words,
 substance, and incorporeall; as incorporeall is taken not for subtile
 body, but for not body, they imply contradiction: insomuch as to say,
 an angel, or spirit is (in that sense) an incorporeall substance, is
 to say in effect, there is angel nor spirit at all. considering
 therefore the signification of the word angel in the old testament, and
 the nature of dreams and visions that happen to men by the ordinary way
 of nature; i was enclined to this opinion, that angels were nothing
 but supernaturall apparitions of the fancy, raised by the speciall
 and extraordinary operation of god, thereby to make his presence and
 commandements known to mankind, and chiefly to his own people. but the
 many places of the new testament, and our saviours own words, and in
 such texts, wherein is suspicion of corruption of the scripture, have
 extorted from my feeble reason, an acknowledgement, and beleef, that
 there be also angels substantiall, and permanent. but to beleeve they be
 in place, that is to say, where, that is to say, nothing, as they
 (though indirectly) say, that will have them incorporeall, cannot by
 scripture bee evinced.
 



inspiration what
 
on the signification of the word spirit, dependeth that of the word
 inspiration; which must either be taken properly; and then it is nothing
 but the blowing into man some thin and subtile aire, or wind, in such
 manner as man filleth bladder with his breath; or if spirits be not
 corporeal, but have their existence only in the fancy, it is nothing but
 the blowing in of phantasme; which is improper to say, and impossible;
 for phantasmes are not, but only seem to be somewhat. that word
 therefore is used in the scripture metaphorically onely: as (gen. 2.7.)
 where it is said, that god inspired into man the breath of life, more
 is meant, then that god gave unto him vitall motion. for we are not to
 think that god made first living breath, and then blew it into adam
 after was made, whether that breath were reall, or seeming; but only
 as it is (acts 17.25.) "that gave him life and breath;" that is,
 made him living creature. and where it is said (2 tim. 3.16.) "all
 scripture is given by inspiration from god," speaking there of the
 scripture of the old testament, it is an easie metaphor, to signifie,
 that god enclined the spirit or mind of those writers, to write that
 which should be usefull, in teaching, reproving, correcting, and
 instructing men in the way of righteous living. but where st. peter (2
 pet. 1.21.) saith, that "prophecy came not in old time by the will
 of man, but the holy men of god spake as they were moved by the holy
 spirit," by the holy spirit, is meant the voice of god in dream, or
 vision supernaturall, which is not inspiration; nor when our saviour
 breathing on his disciples, said, "receive the holy spirit," was that
 breath the spirit, but sign of the spirituall graces gave unto
 them. and though it be said of many, and of our saviour himself, that he
 was full of the holy spirit; yet that fulnesse is not to be understood
 for infusion of the substance of god, but for accumulation of his gifts,
 such as are the gift of sanctity of life, of tongues, and the like,
 whether attained supernaturally, or by study and industry; for in all
 cases they are the gifts of god. so likewise where god sayes (joel
 2.28.) "i will powre out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
 your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
 young men shall see visions," wee are not to understand it in the
 proper sense, as if his spirit were like water, subject to effusion, or
 infusion; but as if god had promised to give them propheticall dreams,
 and visions. for the proper use of the word infused, in speaking of
 the graces of god, is an abuse of it; for those graces are vertues, not
 bodies to be carryed hither and thither, and to be powred into men, as
 into barrels.
 
in the same manner, to take inspiration in the proper sense, or to
 say that good spirits entred into men to make them prophecy, or evill
 spirits into those that became phrenetique, lunatique, or epileptique,
 is not to take the word in the sense of the scripture; for the spirit
 there is taken for the power of god, working by causes to us unknown. as
 also (acts 2.2.) the wind, that is there said to fill the house wherein
 the apostles were assembled on the day of pentecost, is not to be
 understood for the holy spirit, which is the deity it self; but for an
 externall sign of gods speciall working on their hearts, to effect in
 them the internall graces, and holy vertues hee thought requisite for
 the performance of their apostleship.
 



chapter xxxv. of the signification in scripture of kingdome of god, of
 holy, sacred, and sacrament
 

kingdom of god taken by divines metaphorically but in the scriptures
 properly
 
the kingdome of god in the writings of divines, and specially in
 sermons, and treatises of devotion, is taken most commonly for eternall
 felicity, after this life, in the highest heaven, which they also call
 the kingdome of glory; and sometimes for (the earnest of that felicity)
 sanctification, which they terme the kingdome of grace, but never
 for the monarchy, that is to say, the soveraign power of god over
 any subjects acquired by their own consent, which is the proper
 signification of kingdome.
 
to the contrary, i find the kingdome of god, to signifie in most places
 of scripture, kingdome properly so named, constituted by the votes
 of the people of israel in peculiar manner; wherein they chose god
 for their king by covenant made with him, upon gods promising them the
 possession of the land of canaan; and but seldom metaphorically;
 and then it is taken for dominion over sinne; (and only in the new
 testament;) because such dominion as that, every subject shall have in
 the kingdome of god, and without prejudice to the soveraign.
 
from the very creation, god not only reigned over all men naturally by
 his might; but also had peculiar subjects, whom commanded by voice,
 as one man speaketh to another. in which manner reigned over adam,
 and gave him commandement to abstaine from the tree of cognizance of
 good and evill; which when obeyed not, but tasting thereof, took upon
 him to be as god, judging between good and evill, not by his creators
 commandement, but by his own sense, his punishment was privation of
 the estate of eternall life, wherein god had at first created him: and
 afterwards god punished his posterity, for their vices, all but eight
 persons, with an universall deluge; and in these eight did consist the
 then kingdome of god.
 



the originall of the kingdome of god
 
after this, it pleased god to speak to abraham, and (gen. 17.7,8.) to
 make covenant with him in these words, "i will establish my covenant
 between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations,
 for an everlasting covenant, to be god to thee, and to thy seed after
 thee; and i will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
 wherein thou art stranger, all the land of canaan for an everlasting
 possession." and for memoriall, and token of this covenant, he
 ordaineth (verse 11.) the sacrament of circumcision. this is it which is
 called the old covenant, or testament; and containeth contract between
 god and abraham; by which abraham obligeth himself, and his posterity,
 in peculiar manner to be subject to gods positive law; for to the law
 morall was obliged before, as by an oath of allegiance. and though
 the name of king be not yet given to god, nor of kingdome to abraham and
 his seed; yet the thing is the same; namely, an institution by pact,
 of gods peculiar soveraignty over the seed of abraham; which in the
 renewing of the same covenant by moses, at mount sinai, is expressely
 called peculiar kingdome of god over the jews: and it is of abraham
 (not of moses) st. paul saith (rom. 4.11.) that is the "father of the
 faithfull," that is, of those that are loyall, and doe not violate their
 allegiance sworn to god, then by circumcision, and afterwards in the new
 covenant by baptisme.
 



that the kingdome of god is properly his civill soveraignty over a
 peculiar people by pact
 
this covenant, at the foot of mount sinai, was renewed by moses (exod.
 19.5.) where the lord commandeth moses to speak to the people in this
 manner, "if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then
 yee shall be peculiar people to me, for all the earth is mine; and
 yee shall be unto sacerdotall kingdome, and an holy nation." for a
 "peculiar people" the vulgar latine hath, peculium cunctis populis:
 the english translation made in the beginning of the reign of king
 james, hath, "peculiar treasure unto above all nations;" and the
 geneva french, "the most precious jewel of all nations." but the truest
 translation is the first, because it is confirmed by st. paul himself
 (tit. 2.14.) where saith, alluding to that place, that our blessed
 saviour "gave himself for us, that might purifie us to himself, a
 peculiar (that is, an extraordinary) people:" for the word is in the
 greek periousios, which is opposed commonly to the word epiousios: and
 as this signifieth ordinary, quotidian, or (as in the lords prayer) of
 daily use; so the other signifieth that which is overplus, and stored
 up, and enjoyed in speciall manner; which the latines call peculium;
 and this meaning of the place is confirmed by the reason god rendereth
 of it, which followeth immediately, in that addeth, "for all the
 earth is mine," as if should say, "all the nations of the world are
 mine;" but it is not so that you are mine, but in speciall manner: for
 they are all mine, by reason of my power; but you shall be mine, by your
 own consent, and covenant; which is an addition to his ordinary title,
 to all nations.
 
the same is again confirmed in expresse words in the same text, "yee
 shall be to sacerdotall kingdome, and an holy nation." the vulgar
 latine hath it, regnum sacerdotale, to which agreeth the translation of
 that place (1 pet. 2.9.) sacerdotium regale, regal priesthood; as also
 the institution it self, by which man might enter into the sanctum
 sanctorum, that is to say, man might enquire gods will immediately of
 god himselfe, but onely the high priest. the english translation before
 mentioned, following that of geneva, has, "a kingdome of priests;" which
 is either meant of the succession of one high priest after another, or
 else it accordeth not with st. peter, nor with the exercise of the high
 priesthood; for there was never any but the high priest onely, that was
 to informe the people of gods will; nor any convocation of priests ever
 allowed to enter into the sanctum sanctorum.
 
again, the title of holy nation confirmes the same: for holy
 signifies, that which is gods by speciall, not by generall right. all
 the earth (as is said in the text) is gods; but all the earth is
 not called holy, but that onely which is set apart for his especiall
 service, as was the nation of the jews. it is therefore manifest enough
 by this one place, that by the kingdome of god, is properly meant a
 common-wealth, instituted (by the consent of those which were to be
 subject thereto) for their civill government, and the regulating of
 their behaviour, not onely towards god their king, but also towards one
 another in point of justice, and towards other nations both in peace and
 warre; which properly was kingdome, wherein god was king, and the
 high priest was to be (after the death of moses) his sole viceroy, or
 lieutenant.
 
but there be many other places that clearly prove the same. as first (1
 sam. 8.7.) when the elders of israel (grieved with the corruption of
 the sons of samuel) demanded king, samuel displeased therewith, prayed
 unto the lord; and the lord answering said unto him, "hearken unto the
 voice of the people, for they have not rejected thee, but they have
 rejected me, that i should not reign over them." out of which it is
 evident, that god himself was then their king; and samuel did not
 command the people, but only delivered to them that which god from time
 to time appointed him.
 
again, (1 sam. 12.12.) where samuel saith to the people, "when yee saw
 that nahash king of the children of ammon came against you, ye said unto
 me, nay, but king shall reign over us, when the lord your god was your
 king:" it is manifest that god was their king, and governed the civill
 state of their common-wealth.
 
and after the israelites had rejected god, the prophets did foretell his
 restitution; as (isaiah 24.23.) "then the moon shall be confounded, and
 the sun ashamed when the lord of hosts shall reign in mount zion, and
 in jerusalem;" where speaketh expressely of his reign in zion, and
 jerusalem; that is, on earth. and (micah 4.7.) "and the lord shall
 reign over them in mount zion:" this mount zion is in jerusalem upon the
 earth. and (ezek. 20.33.) "as i live, saith the lord god, surely with a
 mighty hand, and stretched out arme, and with fury powred out, i wil
 rule over you; and (verse 37.) i will cause you to passe under the rod,
 and i will bring you into the bond of the covenant;" that is, i will
 reign over you, and make you to stand to that covenant which you made
 with by moses, and brake in your rebellion against in the days of
 samuel, and in your election of another king.
 
and in the new testament, the angel gabriel saith of our saviour (luke
 1.32,33) "he shall be great, and be called the of the most high,
 and the lord shall give him the throne of his father david; and shall
 reign over the house of jacob for ever; and of his kingdome there shall
 be end." this is also kingdome upon earth; for the claim whereof,
 as an enemy to caesar, was put to death; the title of his crosse,
 was, jesus of nazareth, king of the jews; hee was crowned in scorn with
 crown of thornes; and for the proclaiming of him, it is said of
 the disciples (acts 17.7.) "that they did all of them contrary to
 the decrees of caesar, saying there was another king, one jesus. the
 kingdome therefore of god, is reall, not metaphoricall kingdome; and
 so taken, not onely in the old testament, but the new; when we say, "for
 thine is the kingdome, the power, and glory," it is to be understood of
 gods kingdome, by force of our covenant, not by the right of gods power;
 for such kingdome god alwaies hath; so that it were superfluous to
 say in our prayer, "thy kingdome come," unlesse it be meant of the
 restauration of that kingdome of god by christ, which by revolt of the
 israelites had been interrupted in the election of saul. nor had it been
 proper to say, "the kingdome of heaven is at hand," or to pray, "thy
 kingdome come," if it had still continued.
 
there be so many other places that confirm this interpretation, that it
 were wonder there is greater notice taken of it, but that it gives
 too much light to christian kings to see their right of ecclesiastical
 government. this they have observed, that in stead of sacerdotall
 kingdome, translate, kingdome of priests: for they may as well
 translate royall priesthood, (as it is in st. peter) into priesthood
 of kings. and whereas, for peculiar people, they put pretious jewel,
 or treasure, man might as well call the speciall regiment, or company
 of generall, the generalls pretious jewel, or his treasure.
 
in short, the kingdome of god is civill kingdome; which consisted,
 first in the obligation of the people of israel to those laws, which
 moses should bring unto them from mount sinai; and which afterwards the
 high priest of the time being, should deliver to them from before the
 cherubins in the sanctum sanctorum; and which kingdome having been cast
 off, in the election of saul, the prophets foretold, should be restored
 by christ; and the restauration whereof we daily pray for, when we
 say in the lords prayer, "thy kingdome come;" and the right whereof we
 acknowledge, when we adde, "for thine is the kingdome, the power, and
 glory, for ever and ever, amen;" and the proclaiming whereof, was
 the preaching of the apostles; and to which men are prepared, by the
 teachers of the gospel; to embrace which gospel, (that is to say, to
 promise obedience to gods government) is, to bee in the kingdome of
 grace, because god hath gratis given to such the power to bee the
 subjects (that is, children) of god hereafter, when christ shall come
 in majesty to judge the world, and actually to govern his owne people,
 which is called the kingdome of glory. if the kingdome of god (called
 also the kingdome of heaven, from the gloriousnesse, and admirable
 height of that throne) were not kingdome which god by his lieutenant,
 or vicars, who deliver his commandements to the people, did exercise on
 earth; there would not have been so much contention, and warre, about
 who it is, by whom god speaketh to us; neither would many priests have
 troubled themselves with spirituall jurisdiction, nor any king have
 denied it them.
 
out of this literall interpretation of the kingdome of god, ariseth also
 the true interpretation of the word holy. for it is word, which in
 gods kingdome answereth to that, which men in their kingdomes use to
 call publique, or the kings.
 
the king of any countrey is the publique person, or representative of
 all his own subjects. and god the king of israel was the holy one of
 israel. the nation which is subject to one earthly soveraign, is the
 nation of that soveraign, that is, of the publique person. so the jews,
 who were gods nation, were called (exod. 19.6.) "a holy nation." for by
 holy, is alwaies understood, either god himselfe, or that which is gods
 in propriety; as by publique is alwaies meant, either the person of the
 common-wealth it self, or something that is so the common-wealths, as no
 private person can claim any propriety therein.
 
therefore the sabbath (gods day) is holy day; the temple, (gods house)
 holy house; sacrifices, tithes, and offerings (gods tribute) holy
 duties; priests, prophets, and anointed kings, under christ (gods
 ministers) holy men; the coelestiall ministring spirits (gods
 messengers) holy angels; and the like: and wheresoever the word holy is
 taken properly, there is still something signified of propriety, gotten
 by consent. in saying "hallowed be thy name," we do but pray to god for
 grace to keep the first commandement, of "having other gods but
 him." mankind is gods nation in propriety: but the jews only were holy
 nation. why, but because they became his propriety by covenant.
 



sacred what
 
and the word profane, is usually taken in the scripture for the same
 with common; and consequently their contraries, holy, and proper, in the
 kingdome of god must be the same also. but figuratively, those men also
 are called holy, that led such godly lives, as if they had forsaken all
 worldly designes, and wholly devoted, and given themselves to god.
 in the proper sense, that which is made holy by gods appropriating or
 separating it to his own use, is said to be sanctified by god, as the
 seventh day in the fourth commandement; and as the elect in the new
 testament were said to bee sanctified, when they were endued with the
 spirit of godlinesse. and that which is made holy by the dedication of
 men, and given to god, so as to be used onely in his publique service,
 is called also sacred, and said to be consecrated, as temples, and other
 houses of publique prayer, and their utensils, priests, and ministers,
 victimes, offerings, and the externall matter of sacraments.
 



degrees of sanctity
 
of holinesse there be degrees: for of those things that are set apart
 for the service of god, there may bee some set apart again, for neerer
 and more especial service. the whole nation of the israelites were a
 people holy to god; yet the tribe of levi was amongst the israelites a
 holy tribe; and amongst the levites, the priests were yet more holy; and
 amongst the priests, the high priest was the most holy. so the land
 of judea was the holy land; but the holy city wherein god was to be
 worshipped, was more holy; and again, the temples more holy than the
 city; and the sanctum sanctorum more holy than the rest of the temple.
 



sacrament
 
sacrament, is separation of some visible thing from common use;
 and consecration of it to gods service, for sign, either of our
 admission into the kingdome of god, to be of the number of his peculiar
 people, or for commemoration of the same. in the old testament, the
 sign of admission was circumcision; in the new testament, baptisme. the
 commemoration of it in the old testament, was the eating (at certain
 time, which was anniversary) of the paschall lamb; by which they were
 put in mind of the night wherein they were delivered out of their
 bondage in egypt; and in the new testament, the celebrating of the
 lords supper; by which, we are put in mind, of our deliverance from
 the bondage of sin, by our blessed saviours death upon the crosse. the
 sacraments of admission, are but once to be used, because there needs
 but one admission; but because we have need of being often put in
 mind of our deliverance, and of our allegeance, the sacraments of
 commemoration have need to be reiterated. and these are the principall
 sacraments, and as it were the solemne oathes we make of our
 alleageance. there be also other consecrations, that may be called
 sacraments, as the word implyeth onely consecration to gods service; but
 as it implies an oath, or promise of alleageance to god, there were no
 other in the old testament, but circumcision, and the passover; nor
 are there any other in the new testament, but baptisme, and the lords
 supper.
 


chapter xxxvi. of the word of god, and of prophets
 



word what
 
when there is mention of the word of god, or of man, it doth not
 signifie part of speech, such as grammarians call nown, or verb,
 or any simple voice, without contexture with other words to make it
 significative; but perfect speech or discourse, whereby the speaker
 affirmeth, denieth, commandeth, promiseth, threateneth, wisheth, or
 interrogateth. in which sense it is not vocabulum, that signifies a
 word; but sermo, (in greek logos) that is some speech, discourse, or
 saying.
 



the words spoken by god and concerning god, both are called gods word
 in scripture
 
again, if we say the word of god, or of man, it may bee understood
 sometimes of the speaker, (as the words that god hath spoken, or that
 man hath spoken): in which sense, when we say, the gospel of st.
 matthew, we understand st. matthew to be the writer of it: and sometimes
 of the subject: in which sense, when we read in the bible, "the words
 of the days of the kings of israel, or judah," ’tis meant, that the acts
 that were done in those days, were the subject of those words; and in
 the greek, which (in the scripture) retaineth many hebraismes, by the
 word of god is oftentimes meant, not that which is spoken by god, but
 concerning god, and his government; that is to say, the doctrine of
 religion: insomuch, as it is all one, to say logos theou, and theologia;
 which is, that doctrine which wee usually call divinity, as is manifest
 by the places following (acts 13.46.) "then paul and barnabas waxed
 bold, and said, it was necessary that the word of god should first
 have been spoken to you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your
 selves unworthy of everlasting life, loe, we turn to the gentiles."
 that which is here called the word of god, was the doctrine of christian
 religion; as it appears evidently by that which goes before. and (acts
 5.20.) where it is said to the apostles by an angel, "go stand and speak
 in the temple, all the words of this life;" by the words of this life,
 is meant, the doctrine of the gospel; as is evident by what they did in
 the temple, and is expressed in the last verse of the same chap. "daily
 in the temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach
 christ jesus:" in which place it is manifest, that jesus christ was the
 subject of this word of life; or (which is all one) the subject of the
 words of this life eternall, that our saviour offered them. so (acts
 15.7.) the word of god, is called the word of the gospel, because it
 containeth the doctrine of the kingdome of christ; and the same word
 (rom. 10.8,9.) is called the word of faith; that is, as is there
 expressed, the doctrine of christ come, and raised from the dead. also
 (mat. 13. 19.) "when any one heareth the word of the kingdome;" that is,
 the doctrine of the kingdome taught by christ. again, the same word, is
 said (acts 12. 24.) "to grow and to be multiplied;" which to understand
 of the evangelicall doctrine is easie, but of the voice, or speech
 of god, hard and strange. in the same sense the doctrine of devils,
 signifieth not the words of any devill, but the doctrine of heathen men
 concerning daemons, and those phantasms which they worshipped as gods.
 (1 tim. 4.1.)
 
considering these two significations of the word of god, as it is taken
 in scripture, it is manifest in this later sense (where it is taken for
 the doctrine of the christian religion,) that the whole scripture is the
 word of god: but in the former sense not so. for example, though these
 words, "i am the lord thy god, &c." to the end of the ten commandements,
 were spoken by god to moses; yet the preface, "god spake these words
 and said," is to be understood for the words of him that wrote the holy
 history. the word of god, as it is taken for that which hath spoken,
 is understood sometimes properly, sometimes metaphorically. properly,
 as the words, hath spoken to his prophets; metaphorically, for his
 wisdome, power, and eternall decree, in making the world; in which
 sense, those fiats, "let there be light," "let there be firmament,"
 "let us make man," &c. (gen. 1.) are the word of god. and in the same
 sense it is said (john 1.3.) "all things were made by it, and without it
 was nothing made that was made; and (heb. 1.3.) "he upholdeth all things
 by the word of his power;" that is, by the power of his word; that is,
 by his power; and (heb. 11.3.) "the worlds were framed by the word
 of god;" and many other places to the same sense: as also amongst the
 latines, the name of fate, which signifieth properly the word spoken, is
 taken in the same sense.
 



secondly, for the effect of his word
 
secondly, for the effect of his word; that is to say, for the thing it
 self, which by his word is affirmed, commanded, threatned, or promised;
 as (psalm 105.19.) where joseph is said to have been kept in prison,
 "till his word was come;" that is, till that was come to passe which
 had (gen. 40.13.) foretold to pharaohs butler, concerning his being
 restored to his office: for there by his word was come, is meant, the
 thing it self was come to passe. so also (1 king. 18.36.) elijah saith
 to god, "i have done all these thy words," in stead of "i have done all
 these things at thy word," or commandement: and (jer. 17.15.) "where is
 the word of the lord," is put for, "where is the evill threatened:"
 and (ezek. 12.28.) "there shall none of my words be prolonged any
 more:" by "words" are understood those things, which god promised to his
 people. and in the new testament (mat. 24.35.) "heaven and earth shal
 pass away, but my words shall not pass away;" that is, there is nothing
 that i have promised or foretold, that shall not come to passe. and in
 this sense it is, that st. john the evangelist, and, i think, st. john
 onely calleth our saviour himself as in the flesh "the word of god
 (as joh. 1.14.) the word was made flesh;" that is to say, the word, or
 promise that christ should come into the world, "who in the beginning
 was with god;" that is to say, it was in the purpose of god the father,
 to send god the into the world, to enlighten men in the way of
 eternall life, but it was not till then put in execution, and actually
 incarnate; so that our saviour is there called "the word," not because
 was the promise, but the thing promised. they that taking occasion
 from this place, doe commonly call him the verbe of god, do but render
 the text more obscure. they might as well term him the nown of god:
 for as by nown, so also by verbe, men understand nothing but part
 of speech, voice, sound, that neither affirms, nor denies, nor
 commands, nor promiseth, nor is any substance corporeall, or spirituall;
 and therefore it cannot be said to bee either god, or man; whereas our
 saviour is both. and this word which st. john in his gospel saith was
 with god, is (in his 1 epistle, verse 1.) called "the word of life;" and
 (verse 2.) "the eternall life, which was with the father:" so that he
 can be in other sense called the word, then in that, wherein is
 called eternall life; that is, "he that hath procured us eternall life,"
 by his comming in the flesh. so also (apocalypse 19.13.) the apostle
 speaking of christ, clothed in garment dipt in bloud, saith; his name
 is "the word of god;" which is to be understood, as if had said his
 name had been, "he that was come according to the purpose of god from
 the beginning, and according to his word and promises delivered by the
 prophets." so that there is nothing here of the incarnation of word,
 but of the incarnation of god the son, therefore called the word,
 because his incarnation was the performance of the promise; in like
 manner as the holy ghost is called the promise. (acts 1.4. luke 24.49.)
 



thirdly, for the words of reason and equity
 
there are also places of the scripture, where, by the word of god, is
 signified such words as are consonant to reason, and equity, though
 spoken sometimes neither by prophet, nor by holy man. for pharaoh
 necho was an idolator; yet his words to the good king josiah, in which
 advised him by messengers, not to oppose him in his march against
 carchemish, are said to have proceeded from the mouth of god; and that
 josiah not hearkning to them, was slain in the battle; as is to be read
 2 chron. 35. vers. 21,22,23. it is true, that as the same history is
 related in the first book of esdras, not pharaoh, but jeremiah spake
 these words to josiah, from the mouth of the lord. but wee are to
 give credit to the canonicall scripture, whatsoever be written in the
 apocrypha.
 
the word of god, is then also to be taken for the dictates of reason,
 and equity, when the same is said in the scriptures to bee written in
 mans heart; as psalm 36.31. jerem. 31.33. deut.30.11, 14. and many other
 like places.
 



divers acceptions of the word prophet
 
the name of prophet, signifieth in scripture sometimes prolocutor; that
 is, that speaketh from god to man, or from man to god: and sometimes
 praedictor, or foreteller of things to come; and sometimes one that
 speaketh incoherently, as men that are distracted. it is most frequently
 used in the sense of speaking from god to the people. so moses, samuel,
 elijah, isaiah, jeremiah, and others were prophets. and in this sense
 the high priest was prophet, for only went into the sanctum
 sanctorum, to enquire of god; and was to declare his answer to the
 people. and therefore when caiphas said, it was expedient that one man
 should die for the people, st. john saith (chap. 11.51.) that "he spake
 not this of himselfe, but being high priest that year, prophesied
 that one man should dye for the nation." also they that in christian
 congregations taught the people, (1 cor. 14.3.) are said to prophecy. in
 the like sense it is, that god saith to moses (exod. 4.16.) concerning
 aaron, "he shall be thy spokes-man to the people; and shall be to
 thee mouth, and thou shalt be to him in stead of god;" that which here
 is spokesman, is (chap.7.1.) interpreted prophet; "see (saith god)
 i have made thee god to pharaoh, and aaron thy brother shall be thy
 prophet." in the sense of speaking from man to god, abraham is called
 prophet (genes. 20.7.) where god in dream speaketh to abimelech
 in this manner, "now therefore restore the man his wife, for is a
 prophet, and shall pray for thee;" whereby may be also gathered,
 that the name of prophet may be given, not unproperly to them that
 in christian churches, have calling to say publique prayers for the
 congregation. in the same sense, the prophets that came down from the
 high place (or hill of god) with psaltery, and tabret, and pipe,
 and harp (1 sam. 10.5,6.) and (vers. 10.) saul amongst them, are said
 to prophecy, in that they praised god, in that manner publiquely. in the
 like sense, is miriam (exod. 15.20.) called prophetesse. so is it
 also to be taken (1 cor. 11.4,5.) where st. paul saith, "every man that
 prayeth or prophecyeth with his head covered, &c. and every woman that
 prayeth or prophecyeth with her head uncovered: for prophecy in that
 place, signifieth more, but praising god in psalmes, and holy songs;
 which women might doe in the church, though it were not lawfull for them
 to speak to the congregation. and in this signification it is, that the
 poets of the heathen, that composed hymnes and other sorts of poems in
 the honor of their gods, were called vates (prophets) as is well enough
 known by all that are versed in the books of the gentiles, and as
 is evident (tit. 1.12.) where st. paul saith of the cretians, that a
 prophet of their owne said, they were liars; not that st. paul held
 their poets for prophets, but acknowledgeth that the word prophet was
 commonly used to signifie them that celebrated the honour of god in
 verse
 



praediction of future contingents, not alwaies prophecy
 
when by prophecy is meant praediction, or foretelling of future
 contingents; not only they were prophets, who were gods spokesmen, and
 foretold those things to others, which god had foretold to them; but
 also all those imposters, that pretend by the helpe of familiar spirits,
 or by superstitious divination of events past, from false causes, to
 foretell the like events in time to come: of which (as i have declared
 already in the 12. chapter of this discourse) there be many kinds, who
 gain in the opinion of the common sort of men, greater reputation
 of prophecy, by one casuall event that may bee but wrested to their
 purpose, than can be lost again by never so many failings. prophecy is
 not an art, nor (when it is taken for praediction) constant vocation;
 but an extraordinary, and temporary employment from god, most often of
 good men, but sometimes also of the wicked. the woman of endor, who
 is said to have had familiar spirit, and thereby to have raised a
 phantasme of samuel, and foretold saul his death, was not therefore a
 prophetesse; for neither had she any science, whereby she could raise
 such phantasme; nor does it appear that god commanded the raising of
 it; but onely guided that imposture to be means of sauls terror and
 discouragement; and by consequent, of the discomfiture, by which he
 fell. and for incoherent speech, it was amongst the gentiles taken for
 one sort of prophecy, because the prophets of their oracles, intoxicated
 with spirit, or vapour from the cave of the pythian oracle at delphi,
 were for the time really mad, and spake like mad-men; of whose loose
 words sense might be made to fit any event, in such sort, as all
 bodies are said to be made of materia prima. in the scripture i find
 it also so taken (1 sam. 18. 10.) in these words, "and the evill spirit
 came upon saul, and prophecyed in the midst of the house."
 



the manner how god hath spoken to the prophets
 
and although there be so many significations in scripture of the word
 prophet; yet is that the most frequent, in which it is taken for him,
 to whom god speaketh immediately, that which the prophet is to say from
 him, to some other man, or to the people. and hereupon question may
 be asked, in what manner god speaketh to such prophet. can it (may some
 say) be properly said, that god hath voice and language, when it cannot
 be properly said, hath tongue, or other organs, as man? the
 prophet david argueth thus, "shall that made the eye, not see? or he
 that made the ear, not hear?" but this may be spoken, not (as usually) to
 signifie gods nature, but to signifie our intention to honor him. for
 to see, and hear, are honorable attributes, and may be given to god, to
 declare (as far as our capacity can conceive) his almighty power. but
 if it were to be taken in the strict, and proper sense, one might argue
 from his making of all parts of mans body, that had also the same use
 of them which we have; which would be many of them so uncomely, as it
 would be the greatest contumely in the world to ascribe them to him.
 therefore we are to interpret gods speaking to men immediately, for that
 way (whatsoever it be), by which god makes them understand his will: and
 the wayes whereby doth this, are many; and to be sought onely in the
 holy scripture: where though many times it be said, that god spake to
 this, and that person, without declaring in what manner; yet there be
 again many places, that deliver also the signes by which they were
 to acknowledge his presence, and commandement; and by these may be
 understood, how spake to many of the rest.
 



to the extraordinary prophets of the old testament spake by dreams,
 or visions
 
in what manner god spake to adam, and eve, and cain, and noah, is not
 expressed; nor how spake to abraham, till such time as came out of
 his own countrey to sichem in the land of canaan; and then (gen. 12.7.)
 god is said to have appeared to him. so there is one way, whereby god
 made his presence manifest; that is, by an apparition, or vision. and
 again, (gen. 15.1.) the word of the lord came to abraham in vision;
 that is to say, somewhat, as sign of gods presence, appeared as gods
 messenger, to speak to him. again, the lord appeared to abraham (gen.
 18. 1.) by an apparition of three angels; and to abimelech (gen. 20. 3.)
 in dream: to lot (gen. 19. 1.) by an apparition of two angels: and
 to hagar (gen. 21. 17.) by the apparition of one angel: and to abraham
 again (gen. 22. 11.) by the apparition of voice from heaven: and (gen.
 26. 24.) to isaac in the night; (that is, in his sleep, or by dream):
 and to jacob (gen. 18. 12.) in dream; that is to say (as are the words
 of the text) "jacob dreamed that saw ladder, &c." and (gen. 32. 1.)
 in vision of angels: and to moses (exod. 3.2.) in the apparition of a
 flame of fire out of the midst of bush: and after the time of moses,
 (where the manner how god spake immediately to man in the old testament,
 is expressed) hee spake alwaies by vision, or by dream; as to
 gideon, samuel, eliah, elisha, isaiah, ezekiel, and the rest of the
 prophets; and often in the new testament, as to joseph, to st. peter, to
 st. paul, and to st. john the evangelist in the apocalypse.
 
onely to moses hee spake in more extraordinary manner in mount sinai,
 and in the tabernacle; and to the high priest in the tabernacle, and in
 the sanctum sanctorum of the temple. but moses, and after him the
 high priests were prophets of more eminent place, and degree in
 gods favour; and god himself in express words declareth, that to other
 prophets hee spake in dreams and visions, but to his servant moses, in
 such manner as man speaketh to his friend. the words are these (numb.
 12. 6,7,8.) "if there be prophet among you, i the lord will make my
 self known to him in vision, and will speak unto him in dream. my
 servant moses is not so, who is faithfull in all my house; with him i
 will speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, not in dark speeches; and
 the similitude of the lord shall behold." and (exod. 33. 11.) "the
 lord spake to moses face to face, as man speaketh to his friend."
 and yet this speaking of god to moses, was by mediation of an angel, or
 angels, as appears expressely, acts 7. ver. 35. and 53. and gal. 3. 19.
 and was therefore vision, though more cleer vision than was given to
 other prophets. and conformable hereunto, where god saith (deut. 13. 1.)
 "if there arise amongst you prophet, or dreamer of dreams," the later
 word is but the interpretation of the former. and (joel 2. 28.) "your
 sons and your daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams,
 and your young men shall see visions:" where again, the word prophecy is
 expounded by dream, and vision. and in the same manner it was, that god
 spake to solomon, promising him wisdome, riches, and honor; for the text
 saith, (1 kings 3. 15.) "and solomon awoak, and behold it was dream:"
 so that generally the prophets extraordinary in the old testament took
 notice of the word of god otherwise, than from their dreams, or
 visions, that is to say, from the imaginations which they had in their
 sleep, or in an extasie; which imaginations in every true prophet were
 supernaturall; but in false prophets were either naturall, or feigned.
 
the same prophets were neverthelesse said to speak by the spirit; as
 (zach. 7. 12.) where the prophet speaking of the jewes, saith, "they
 made their hearths hard as adamant, lest they should hear the law, and
 the words which the lord of hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former
 prophets." by which it is manifest, that speaking by the spirit, or
 inspiration, was not particular manner of gods speaking, different
 from vision, when they that were said to speak by the spirit, were
 extraordinary prophets, such as for every new message, were to have a
 particular commission, or (which is all one) new dream, or vision.
 
to prophets of perpetuall calling, and supreme, god spake in the
 old testament from the mercy seat, in manner not expressed in the
 scripture. of prophets, that were so by perpetuall calling in the old
 testament, some were supreme, and some subordinate: supreme were first
 moses; and after him the high priest, every one for his time, as long
 as the priesthood was royall; and after the people of the jews, had
 rejected god, that should more reign over them, those kings which
 submitted themselves to gods government, were also his chief prophets;
 and the high priests office became ministeriall. and when god was to be
 consulted, they put on the holy vestments, and enquired of the lord,
 as the king commanded them, and were deprived of their office, when
 the king thought fit. for king saul (1 sam. 13. 9.) commanded the burnt
 offering to be brought, and (1 sam. 14. 18.) commands the priest to
 bring the ark neer him; and (ver. 19.) again to let it alone, because he
 saw an advantage upon his enemies. and in the same chapter saul asketh
 counsell of god. in like manner king david, after his being anointed,
 though before had possession of the kingdome, is said to "enquire
 of the lord" (1 sam. 23. 2.) whether should fight against the
 philistines at keilah; and (verse 10.) david commandeth the priest to
 bring him the ephod, to enquire whether should stay in keilah,
 or not. and king solomon (1 kings 2. 27.) took the priesthood from
 abiathar, and gave it (verse 35.) to zadoc. therefore moses, and
 the high priests, and the pious kings, who enquired of god on all
 extraordinary occasions, how they were to carry themselves, or what
 event they were to have, were all soveraign prophets. but in what manner
 god spake unto them, is not manifest. to say that when moses went up to
 god in mount sinai, it was dream, or vision, such as other prophets
 had, is contrary to that distinction which god made between moses, and
 other prophets, numb. 12. 6,7,8. to say god spake or appeared as he
 is in his own nature, is to deny his infinitenesse, invisibility,
 incomprehensibility. to say spake by inspiration, or infusion of the
 holy spirit, as the holy spirit signifieth the deity, is to make moses
 equall with christ, in whom onely the godhead (as st. paul speaketh col.
 2.9.) dwelleth bodily. and lastly, to say spake by the holy spirit,
 as it signifieth the graces, or gifts of the holy spirit, is to
 attribute nothing to him supernaturall. for god disposeth men to piety,
 justice, mercy, truth, faith, and all manner of vertue, both morall,
 and intellectuall, by doctrine, example, and by severall occasions,
 naturall, and ordinary.
 
and as these ways cannot be applyed to god, in his speaking to moses, at
 mount sinai; so also, they cannot be applyed to him, in his speaking
 to the high priests, from the mercy-seat. therefore in what manner god
 spake to those soveraign prophets of the old testament, whose office
 it was to enquire of him, is not intelligible. in the time of the new
 testament, there was soveraign prophet, but our saviour; who was both
 god that spake, and the prophet to whom spake.
 
to prophets of perpetuall calling, but subordinate, god spake by the
 spirit. to subordinate prophets of perpetuall calling, i find not any
 place that proveth god spake to them supernaturally; but onely in
 such manner, as naturally inclineth men to piety, to beleef, to
 righteousnesse, and to other vertues all other christian men. which
 way, though it consist in constitution, instruction, education, and the
 occasions and invitements men have to christian vertues; yet it is truly
 attributed to the operation of the spirit of god, or holy spirit
 (which we in our language call the holy ghost): for there is good
 inclination, that is not of the operation of god. but these operations
 are not alwaies supernaturall. when therefore prophet is said to speak
 in the spirit, or by the spirit of god, we are to understand more,
 but that speaks according to gods will, declared by the supreme
 prophet. for the most common acceptation of the word spirit, is in the
 signification of mans intention, mind, or disposition.
 
in the time of moses, there were seventy men besides himself, that
 prophecyed in the campe of the israelites. in what manner god spake to
 them, is declared in the 11 of numbers, verse 25. "the lord came down in
 cloud, and spake unto moses, and took of the spirit that was upon him,
 and gave it to the seventy elders. and it came to passe, when the spirit
 rested upon them, they prophecyed, and did not cease," by which it is
 manifest, first, that their prophecying to the people, was subservient,
 and subordinate to the prophecying of moses; for that god took of the
 spirit of moses, to put upon them; so that they prophecyed as moses
 would have them: otherwise they had not been suffered to prophecy at
 all. for there was (verse 27.) complaint made against them to moses;
 and joshua would have moses to have forbidden them; which did not,
 but said to joshua, bee not jealous in my behalf. secondly, that
 the spirit of god in that place, signifieth nothing but the mind and
 disposition to obey, and assist moses in the administration of the
 government. for if it were meant they had the substantial spirit of god;
 that is, the divine nature, inspired into them, then they had it in no
 lesse manner than christ himself, in whom onely the spirit of god dwelt
 bodily. it is meant therefore of the gift and grace of god, that guided
 them to co-operate with moses; from whom their spirit was derived. and
 it appeareth (verse 16.) that, they were such as moses himself should
 appoint for elders and officers of the people: for the words are,
 "gather unto seventy men, whom thou knowest to be elders and
 officers of the people:" where, "thou knowest," is the same with "thou
 appointest," or "hast appointed to be such." for we are told
 before (exod. 18.) that moses following the counsell of jethro his
 father-in-law, did appoint judges, and officers over the people, such as
 feared god; and of these, were those seventy, whom god by putting upon
 them moses spirit, inclined to aid moses in the administration of the
 kingdome: and in this sense the spirit of god is said (1 sam. 16. 13,
 14.) presently upon the anointing of david, to have come upon david, and
 left saul; god giving his graces to him chose to govern his people,
 and taking them away from him, rejected. so that by the spirit is
 meant inclination to gods service; and not any supernaturall revelation.
 



god sometimes also spake by lots
 
god spake also many times by the event of lots; which were ordered by
 such as had put in authority over his people. so wee read that god
 manifested by the lots which saul caused to be drawn (1 sam. 14. 43.)
 the fault that jonathan had committed, in eating honey-comb, contrary
 to the oath taken by the people. and (josh. 18. 10.) god divided the
 land of canaan amongst the israelite, by the "lots that joshua did cast
 before the lord in shiloh." in the same manner it seemeth to be, that
 god discovered (joshua 7.16., &c.) the crime of achan. and these are the
 wayes whereby god declared his will in the old testament.
 
all which ways used also in the new testament. to the virgin mary, by
 vision of an angel: to joseph in dream: again to paul in the way
 to damascus in vision of our saviour: and to peter in the vision of
 sheet let down from heaven, with divers sorts of flesh, of clean and
 unclean, beasts; and in prison, by vision of an angel: and to all the
 apostles, and writers of the new testament, by the graces of his spirit;
 and to the apostles again (at the choosing of matthias in the place of
 judas iscariot) by lot.
 



every man ought to examine the probability of pretended prophets
 calling
 
seeing then all prophecy supposeth vision, or dream, (which two, when
 they be naturall, are the same,) or some especiall gift of god, so
 rarely observed in mankind, as to be admired where observed; and seeing
 as well such gifts, as the most extraordinary dreams, and visions, may
 proceed from god, not onely by his supernaturall, and immediate, but
 also by his naturall operation, and by mediation of second causes;
 there is need of reason and judgement to discern between naturall, and
 supernaturall gifts, and between naturall, and supernaturall visions, or
 dreams. and consequently men had need to be very circumspect, and wary,
 in obeying the voice of man, that pretending himself to be prophet,
 requires us to obey god in that way, which in gods name telleth us to
 be the way to happinesse. for that pretends to teach men the way of
 so great felicity, pretends to govern them; that is to say, to rule, and
 reign over them; which is thing, that all men naturally desire, and
 is therefore worthy to be suspected of ambition and imposture; and
 consequently, ought to be examined, and tryed by every man, before hee
 yeeld them obedience; unlesse have yeelded it them already, in
 the institution of common-wealth; as when the prophet is the civill
 soveraign, or by the civil soveraign authorized. and if this examination
 of prophets, and spirits, were not allowed to every one of the people,
 it had been to purpose, to set out the marks, by which every man
 might be able, to distinguish between those, whom they ought, and those
 whom they ought not to follow. seeing therefore such marks are set out
 (deut. 13. 1,&c.) to know prophet by; and (1 john 4.1.&c) to know a
 spirit by: and seeing there is so much prophecying in the old testament;
 and so much preaching in the new testament against prophets; and so much
 greater number ordinarily of false prophets, then of true; every
 one is to beware of obeying their directions, at their own perill. and
 first, that there were many more false than true prophets, appears by
 this, that when ahab (1 kings 12.) consulted four hundred prophets, they
 were all false imposters, but onely one michaiah. and little before
 the time of the captivity, the prophets were generally lyars. "the
 prophets" (saith the lord by jerem. cha. 14. verse 14.) "prophecy lies
 in my name. i sent them not, neither have i commanded them, nor spake
 unto them, they prophecy to you false vision, thing of naught; and
 the deceit of their heart." in so much as god commanded the people by
 the mouth of the prophet jeremiah (chap. 23. 16.) not to obey them.
 "thus saith the lord of hosts, hearken not unto the words of the
 prophets, that prophecy to you. they make you vain, they speak vision
 of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the lord."
 



all prophecy but of the soveraign prophet is to be examined by every
 subject
 
seeing then there was in the time of the old testament, such quarrells
 amongst the visionary prophets, one contesting with another, and asking
 when departed the spirit from me, to go to thee? as between michaiah,
 and the rest of the four hundred; and such giving of the lye to one
 another, (as in jerem. 14.14.) and such controversies in the new
 testament at this day, amongst the spirituall prophets: every man then
 was, and now is bound to make use of his naturall reason, to apply to
 all prophecy those rules which god hath given us, to discern the
 true from the false. of which rules, in the old testament, one was,
 conformable doctrine to that which moses the soveraign prophet had
 taught them; and the other the miraculous power of foretelling what god
 would bring to passe, as i have already shown out of deut. 13. 1. &c.
 and in the new testament there was but one onely mark; and that was the
 preaching of this doctrine, that jesus is the christ, that is, the
 king of the jews, promised in the old testament. whosoever denyed that
 article, was false prophet, whatsoever miracles might seem to
 work; and that taught it was true prophet. for st. john (1 epist,
 4. 2, &c) speaking expressely of the means to examine spirits, whether
 they be of god, or not; after hath told them that there would arise
 false prophets, saith thus, "hereby know ye the spirit of god. every
 spirit that confesseth that jesus christ is come in the flesh, is of
 god;" that is, is approved and allowed as prophet of god: not that
 is godly man, or one of the elect, for this, that confesseth,
 professeth, or preacheth jesus to be the christ; but for that is a
 prophet avowed. for god sometimes speaketh by prophets, whose persons he
 hath not accepted; as did by baalam; and as foretold saul of his
 death, by the witch of endor. again in the next verse, "every spirit
 that confesseth not that jesus christ is come in the flesh, is not
 of christ. and this is the spirit of antichrist." so that the rule is
 perfect on both sides; that is true prophet, which preacheth the
 messiah already come, in the person of jesus; and false one that
 denyeth him come, and looketh for him in some future imposter, that
 shall take upon him that honour falsely, whom the apostle there properly
 calleth antichrist. every man therefore ought to consider who is the
 soveraign prophet; that is to say, who it is, that is gods viceregent
 on earth; and hath next under god, the authority of governing christian
 men; and to observe for rule, that doctrine, which in the name of
 god, hee commanded to bee taught; and thereby to examine and try out
 the truth of those doctrines, which pretended prophets with miracles, or
 without, shall at any time advance: and if they find it contrary to that
 rule, to doe as they did, that came to moses, and complained that there
 were some that prophecyed in the campe, whose authority so to doe they
 doubted of; and leave to the soveraign, as they did to moses to uphold,
 or to forbid them, as hee should see cause; and if hee disavow them,
 then more to obey their voice; or if approve them, then to obey
 them, as men to whom god hath given part of the spirit of their
 soveraigne. for when christian men, take not their christian soveraign,
 for gods prophet; they must either take their owne dreams, for the
 prophecy they mean to bee governed by, and the tumour of their own
 hearts for the spirit of god; or they must suffer themselves to bee lead
 by some strange prince; or by some of their fellow subjects, that can
 bewitch them, by slander of the government, into rebellion, without
 other miracle to confirm their calling, then sometimes an extraordinary
 successe, and impunity; and by this means destroying all laws, both
 divine, and humane, reduce all order, government, and society, to the
 first chaos of violence, and civill warre.
 


chapter xxxvii. of miracles, and their use
 



miracle is work that causeth admiration
 
by miracles are signified the admirable works of god: & therefore they
 are also called wonders. and because they are for the most part, done,
 for signification of his commandement, in such occasions, as
 without them, men are apt to doubt, (following their private naturall
 reasoning,) what hath commanded, and what not, they are commonly in
 holy scripture, called signes, in the same sense, as they are called by
 the latines, ostenta, and portenta, from shewing, and fore-signifying
 that, which the almighty is about to bring to passe.
 



and must therefore be rare, whereof there is naturall cause known
 
to understand therefore what is miracle, we must first understand what
 works they are, which men wonder at, and call admirable. and there be
 but two things which make men wonder at any event: the one is, if it
 be strange, that is to say, such, as the like of it hath never, or very
 rarely been produced: the other is, if when it is produced, we cannot
 imagine it to have been done by naturall means, but onely by the
 immediate hand of god. but when wee see some possible, naturall cause of
 it, how rarely soever the like has been done; or if the like have been
 often done, how impossible soever it be to imagine naturall means
 thereof, we more wonder, nor esteem it for miracle.
 
therefore, if horse, or cow should speak, it were miracle; because
 both the thing is strange, & the naturall cause difficult to imagin: so
 also were it, to see strange deviation of nature, in the production
 of some new shape of living creature. but when man, or other animal,
 engenders his like, though we know more how this is done, than the
 other; yet because ’tis usuall, it is miracle. in like manner, if a
 man be metamorphosed into stone, or into pillar, it is miracle;
 because strange: but if peece of wood be so changed; because we see it
 often, it is miracle: and yet we know more, by what operation of
 god, the one is brought to passe, than the other.
 
the first rainbow that was seen in the world, was miracle, because the
 first; and consequently strange; and served for sign from god, placed
 in heaven, to assure his people, there should be more an universall
 destruction of the world by water. but at this day, because they
 are frequent, they are not miracles, neither to them that know their
 naturall causes, nor to them who know them not. again, there be many
 rare works produced by the art of man: yet when we know they are done;
 because thereby wee know also the means how they are done, we count them
 not for miracles, because not wrought by the immediate hand of god, but
 by mediation of humane industry.
 



that which seemeth miracle to one man, may seem otherwise to another
 
furthermore, seeing admiration and wonder, is consequent to the
 knowledge and experience, wherewith men are endued, some more, some
 lesse; it followeth, that the same thing, may be miracle to one, and
 not to another. and thence it is, that ignorant, and superstitious men
 make great wonders of those works, which other men, knowing to proceed
 from nature, (which is not the immediate, but the ordinary work of god,)
 admire not at all: as when ecclipses of the sun and moon have been taken
 for supernaturall works, by the common people; when neverthelesse, there
 were others, could from their naturall causes, have foretold the very
 hour they should arrive: or, as when man, by confederacy, and secret
 intelligence, getting knowledge of the private actions of an ignorant,
 unwary man, thereby tells him, what has done in former time; it seems
 to him miraculous thing; but amongst wise, and cautelous men, such
 miracles as those, cannot easily be done.
 



the end of miracles
 
again, it belongeth to the nature of miracle, that it be wrought for
 the procuring of credit to gods messengers, ministers, and prophets,
 that thereby men may know, they are called, sent, and employed by god,
 and thereby be the better inclined to obey them. and therefore, though
 the creation of the world, and after that the destruction of all living
 creatures in the universall deluge, were admirable works; yet because
 they were not done to procure credit to any prophet, or other minister
 of god, they use not to be called miracles. for how admirable soever any
 work be, the admiration consisteth not in that it could be done, because
 men naturally beleeve the almighty can doe all things, but because he
 does it at the prayer, or word of man. but the works of god in egypt,
 by the hand of moses, were properly miracles; because they were done
 with intention to make the people of israel beleeve, that moses came
 unto them, not out of any design of his owne interest, but as sent from
 god. therefore after god had commanded him to deliver the israelites
 from the egyptian bondage, when said (exod 4.1. &c.) "they will not
 beleeve me, but will say, the lord hath not appeared unto me," god gave
 him power, to turn the rod had in his hand into serpent, and again
 to return it into rod; and by putting his hand into his bosome, to
 make it leprous; and again by pulling it out to make it whole, to make
 the children of israel beleeve (as it is verse 5.) that the god of their
 fathers had appeared unto him; and if that were not enough, gave
 him power to turn their waters into bloud. and when hee had done these
 miracles before the people, it is said (verse 41.) that "they beleeved
 him." neverthelesse, for fear of pharaoh, they durst not yet obey him.
 therefore the other works which were done to plague pharaoh and the
 egyptians, tended all to make the israelites beleeve in moses, and were
 properly miracles. in like manner if we consider all the miracles
 done by the hand of moses, and all the rest of the prophets, till the
 captivity; and those of our saviour, and his apostles afterward; we
 shall find, their end was alwaies to beget, or confirm beleefe, that
 they came not of their own motion, but were sent by god. wee may further
 observe in scripture, that the end of miracles, was to beget beleef,
 not universally in all men, elect, and reprobate; but in the elect
 only; that is to say, is such as god had determined should become his
 subjects. for those miraculous plagues of egypt, had not for end, the
 conversion of pharaoh; for god had told moses before, that would
 harden the heart of pharaoh, that should not let the people goe: and
 when let them goe at last, not the miracles perswaded him, but the
 plagues forced him to it. so also of our saviour, it is written, (mat.
 13. 58.) that wrought not many miracles in his own countrey, because
 of their unbeleef; and (in marke 6.5.) in stead of, "he wrought not
 many," it is, "he could work none." it was not because wanted power;
 which to say, were blasphemy against god; nor that the end of miracles
 was not to convert incredulous men to christ; for the end of all the
 miracles of moses, of prophets, of our saviour, and of his apostles
 was to adde men to the church; but it was, because the end of their
 miracles, was to adde to the church (not all men, but) such as should
 be saved; that is to say, such as god had elected. seeing therefore
 our saviour sent from his father, hee could not use his power in the
 conversion of those, whom his father had rejected. they that expounding
 this place of st. marke, say, that his word, "hee could not," is put
 for, "he would not," do it without example in the greek tongue, (where
 would not, is put sometimes for could not, in things inanimate, that
 have will; but could not, for would not, never,) and thereby lay
 stumbling block before weak christians; as if christ could doe no
 miracles, but amongst the credulous.
 



the definition of miracle
 
from that which i have here set down, of the nature, and use of a
 miracle, we may define it thus, "a miracle, is work of god, (besides
 his operation by the way of nature, ordained in the creation,) done
 for the making manifest to his elect, the mission of an extraordinary
 minister for their salvation."
 
and from this definition, we may inferre; first, that in all miracles,
 the work done, is not the effect of any vertue in the prophet; because
 it is the effect of the immediate hand of god; that is to say god hath
 done it, without using the prophet therein, as subordinate cause.
 
secondly, that devil, angel, or other created spirit, can do a
 miracle. for it must either be by vertue of some naturall science, or
 by incantation, that is, vertue of words. for if the inchanters do it
 by their own power independent, there is some power that proceedeth not
 from god; which all men deny: and if they doe it by power given them,
 then is the work not from the immediate hand of god, but naturall, and
 consequently miracle.
 
there be some texts of scripture, that seem to attribute the power of
 working wonders (equall to some of those immediate miracles, wrought
 by god himself,) to certain arts of magick, and incantation. as for
 example, when we read that after the rod of moses being cast on the
 ground became serpent, (exod. 7. 11.) "the magicians of egypt did the
 like by their enchantments;" and that after moses had turned the waters
 of the egyptian streams, rivers, ponds, and pooles of water into blood,
 (exod. 7. 22.) "the magicians of egypt did so likewise, with their
 enchantments;" and that after moses had by the power of god brought
 frogs upon the land, (exod. 8. 7.) "the magicians also did so with their
 enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of egypt;" will not a
 man be apt to attribute miracles to enchantments; that is to say, to the
 efficacy of the sound of words; and think the same very well proved out
 of this, and other such places? and yet there is place of scripture,
 that telleth us what on enchantment is. if therefore enchantment be not,
 as many think it, working of strange effects by spells, and words;
 but imposture, and delusion, wrought by ordinary means; and so far
 from supernaturall, as the impostors need not the study so much as of
 naturall causes, but the ordinary ignorance, stupidity, and superstition
 of mankind, to doe them; those texts that seem to countenance the power
 of magick, witchcraft, and enchantment, must needs have another sense,
 than at first sight they seem to bear.
 



that men are apt to be deceived by false miracles
 
for it is evident enough, that words have effect, but on those
 that understand them; and then they have other, but to signifie the
 intentions, or passions of them that speak; and thereby produce, hope,
 fear, or other passions, or conceptions in the hearer. therefore when a
 rod seemeth serpent, or the water bloud, or any other miracle seemeth
 done by enchantment; if it be not to the edification of gods people,
 not the rod, nor the water, nor any other thing is enchanted; that is
 to say, wrought upon by the words, but the spectator. so that all the
 miracle consisteth in this, that the enchanter has deceived man; which
 is miracle, but very easie matter to doe.
 
for such is the ignorance, and aptitude to error generally of all men,
 but especially of them that have not much knowledge of naturall causes,
 and of the nature, and interests of men; as by innumerable and easie
 tricks to be abused. what opinion of miraculous power, before it was
 known there was science of the course of the stars, might man have
 gained, that should have told the people, this hour, or day the sun
 should be darkned? juggler by the handling of his goblets, and other
 trinkets, if it were not now ordinarily practised, would be thought
 to do his wonders by the power at least of the devil. man that hath
 practised to speak by drawing in of his breath, (which kind of men in
 antient time were called ventriloqui,) and so make the weaknesse of
 his voice seem to proceed, not from the weak impulsion of the organs
 of speech, but from distance of place, is able to make very many men
 beleeve it is voice from heaven, whatsoever please to tell them.
 and for crafty man, that hath enquired into the secrets, and familiar
 confessions that one man ordinarily maketh to another of his actions and
 adventures past, to tell them him again is hard matter; and yet there
 be many, that by such means as that, obtain the reputation of being
 conjurers. but it is too long businesse, to reckon up the severall
 sorts of those men, which the greeks called thaumaturgi, that is to say,
 workers of things wonderfull; and yet these do all they do, by their
 own single dexterity. but if we looke upon the impostures wrought by
 confederacy, there is nothing how impossible soever to be done, that is
 impossible to bee beleeved. for two men conspiring, one to seem lame,
 the other to cure him with charme, will deceive many: but many
 conspiring, one to seem lame, another so to cure him, and all the rest
 to bear witnesse; will deceive many more.
 



cautions against the imposture of miracles
 
in this aptitude of mankind, to give too hasty beleefe to pretended
 miracles, there can be better, nor i think any other caution, than
 that which god hath prescribed, first by moses, (as i have said before
 in the precedent chapter,) in the beginning of the 13. and end of the
 18. of deuteronomy; that wee take not any for prophets, that teach any
 other religion, then that which gods lieutenant, (which at that time was
 moses,) hath established; nor any, (though teach the same religion,)
 whose praediction we doe not see come to passe. moses therefore in his
 time, and aaron, and his successors in their times, and the soveraign
 governour of gods people, next under god himself, that is to say, the
 head of the church in all times, are to be consulted, what doctrine
 hath established, before wee give credit to pretended miracle, or
 prophet. and when that is done, the thing they pretend to be miracle,
 we must both see it done, and use all means possible to consider,
 whether it be really done; and not onely so, but whether it be such, as
 man can do the like by his naturall power, but that it requires the
 immediate hand of god. and in this also we must have recourse to gods
 lieutenant; to whom in all doubtfull cases, wee have submitted our
 private judgments. for example; if man pretend, that after certain
 words spoken over peece of bread, that presently god hath made it not
 bread, but god, or man, or both, and neverthelesse it looketh still
 as like bread as ever it did; there is reason for any man to think
 it really done; nor consequently to fear him, till enquire of god,
 by his vicar, or lieutenant, whether it be done, or not. if say not,
 then followeth that which moses saith, (deut. 18. 22.) "he hath spoken
 it presumptuously, thou shalt not fear him." if say ’tis done, then
 is not to contradict it. so also if wee see not, but onely hear tell
 of miracle, we are to consult the lawful church; that is to say, the
 lawful head thereof, how far we are to give credit to the relators of
 it. and this is chiefly the case of men, that in these days live under
 christian soveraigns. for in these times, i do not know one man, that
 ever saw any such wondrous work, done by the charm, or at the word,
 or prayer of man, that man endued but with mediocrity of reason,
 would think supernaturall: and the question is more, whether what wee
 see done, be miracle; whether the miracle we hear, or read of, were
 reall work, and not the act of tongue, or pen; but in plain terms,
 whether the report be true, or lye. in which question we are not every
 one, to make our own private reason, or conscience, but the publique
 reason, that is, the reason of gods supreme lieutenant, judge; and
 indeed we have made him judge already, if wee have given him soveraign
 power, to doe all that is necessary for our peace and defence. private
 man has alwaies the liberty, (because thought is free,) to beleeve,
 or not beleeve in his heart, those acts that have been given out for
 miracles, according as shall see, what benefit can accrew by
 mens belief, to those that pretend, or countenance them, and thereby
 conjecture, whether they be miracles, or lies. but when it comes
 to confession of that faith, the private reason must submit to the
 publique; that is to say, to gods lieutenant. but who is this lieutenant
 of god, and head of the church, shall be considered in its proper place
 thereafter.
 


chapter xxxviii. of the signification in scripture of eternall life,
 hell, salvation, the world to come, and redemption
 

the maintenance of civill society, depending on justice; and justice on
 the power of life and death, and other lesse rewards and punishments,
 residing in them that have the soveraignty of the common-wealth; it
 is impossible common-wealth should stand, where any other than the
 soveraign, hath power of giving greater rewards than life; and of
 inflicting greater punishments than death. now seeing eternall life is
 greater reward, than the life present; and eternall torment greater
 punishment than the death of nature; it is thing worthy to be well
 considered, of all men that desire (by obeying authority) to avoid
 the calamities of confusion, and civill war, what is meant in holy
 scripture, by life eternall, and torment eternall; and for what
 offences, against whom committed, men are to be eternally tormented; and
 for what actions, they are to obtain eternall life.
 



place of adams eternity if had not sinned, the terrestrial paradise
 
and first we find, that adam was created in such condition of life,
 as had not broken the commandement of god, had enjoyed it in the
 paradise of eden everlastingly. for there was the tree of life; whereof
 was so long allowed to eat, as should forbear to eat of the tree
 of knowledge of good an evill; which was not allowed him. and therefore
 as soon as had eaten of it, god thrust him out of paradise, "lest he
 should put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and live
 for ever." (gen. 3. 22.) by which it seemeth to me, (with submission
 neverthelesse both in this, and in all questions, whereof the
 determination dependeth on the scriptures, to the interpretation of the
 bible authorized by the common-wealth, whose subject i am,) that adam if
 had not sinned, had had an eternall life on earth: and that mortality
 entred upon himself, and his posterity, by his first sin. not that
 actuall death then entred; for adam then could never have had children;
 whereas lived long after, and saw numerous posterity ere dyed.
 but where it is said, "in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt
 surely die," it must needs bee meant of his mortality, and certitude
 of death. seeing then eternall life was lost by adams forfeiture, in
 committing sin, that should cancell that forfeiture was to recover
 thereby, that life again. now jesus christ hath satisfied for the sins
 of all that beleeve in him; and therefore recovered to all beleevers,
 that eternall life, which was lost by the of adam. and in this sense
 it is, that the comparison of st. paul holdeth (rom. 5.18, 19.) "as by
 the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even
 so by the righteousnesse of one, the free gift came upon all men
 to justification of life." which is again (1 cor. 15.21,22) more
 perspicuously delivered in these words, "for since by man came death, by
 man came also the resurrection of the dead. for as in adam all die, even
 so in christ shall all be made alive."
 



texts concerning the place of life eternall for beleevers
 
concerning the place wherein men shall enjoy that eternall life, which
 christ hath obtained for them, the texts next before alledged seem to
 make it on earth. for if as in adam, all die, that is, have forfeited
 paradise, and eternall life on earth; even so in christ all shall be
 made alive; then all men shall be made to live on earth; for else
 the comparison were not proper. hereunto seemeth to agree that of the
 psalmist, (psal. 133.3.) "upon zion god commanded the blessing, even
 life for evermore;" for zion, is in jerusalem, upon earth: as also that
 of s. joh. (rev. 2.7.) "to him that overcommeth i will give to eat of
 the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of god." this
 was the tree of adams eternall life; but his life was to have been on
 earth. the same seemeth to be confirmed again by st. joh. (rev. 21.2.)
 where saith, "i john saw the holy city, new jerusalem, coming down
 from god out of heaven, prepared as bride adorned for her husband:"
 and again v. 10. to the same effect: as if should say, the new
 jerusalem, the paradise of god, at the coming again of christ, should
 come down to gods people from heaven, and not they goe up to it from
 earth. and this differs nothing from that, which the two men in white
 clothing (that is, the two angels) said to the apostles, that were
 looking upon christ ascending (acts 1.11.) "this same jesus, who is
 taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him go up
 into heaven." which soundeth as if they had said, should come down
 to govern them under his father, eternally here; and not take them up
 to govern them in heaven; and is conformable to the restauration of the
 kingdom of god, instituted under moses; which was political government
 of the jews on earth. again, that saying of our saviour (mat. 22.30.)
 "that in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
 but are as the angels of god in heaven," is description of an eternall
 life, resembling that which we lost in adam in the point of marriage.
 for seeing adam, and eve, if they had not sinned, had lived on earth
 eternally, in their individuall persons; it is manifest, they should
 not continually have procreated their kind. for if immortals should have
 generated, as mankind doth now; the earth in small time, would not
 have been able to afford them place to stand on. the jews that asked
 our saviour the question, whose wife the woman that had married many
 brothers, should be, in the resurrection, knew not what were the
 consequences of immortality; that there shal be generation, and
 consequently marriage, more than there is marriage, or generation
 among the angels. the comparison between that eternall life which adam
 lost, and our saviour by his victory over death hath recovered; holdeth
 also in this, that as adam lost eternall life by his sin, and yet lived
 after it for time; so the faithful christian hath recovered eternal
 life by christs passion, though die natural death, and remaine dead
 for time; namely, till the resurrection. for as death is reckoned from
 the condemnation of adam, not from the execution; so life is reckoned
 from the absolution, not from the resurrection of them that are elected
 in christ.
 



ascension into heaven
 
that the place wherein men are to live eternally, after the
 resurrection, is the heavens, meaning by heaven, those parts of the
 world, which are the most remote from earth, as where the stars are,
 or above the stars, in another higher heaven, called caelum empyreum,
 (whereof there is mention in scripture, nor ground in reason) is not
 easily to be drawn from any text that i can find. by the kingdome of
 heaven, is meant the kingdome of the king that dwelleth in heaven; and
 his kingdome was the people of israel, whom ruled by the prophets
 his lieutenants, first moses, and after him eleazar, and the soveraign
 priests, till in the days of samuel they rebelled, and would have a
 mortall man for their king, after the manner of other nations. and
 when our saviour christ, by the preaching of his ministers, shall have
 perswaded the jews to return, and called the gentiles to his obedience,
 then shall there be new kingdome of heaven, because our king shall
 then be god, whose throne is heaven; without any necessity evident in
 the scripture, that man shall ascend to his happinesse any higher than
 gods footstool the earth. on the contrary, we find written (joh. 3.13.)
 that "no man hath ascended into heaven, but that came down from
 heaven, even the of man, that is in heaven." where i observe by the
 way, that these words are not, as those which go immediately before, the
 words of our saviour, but of st. john himself; for christ was then not
 in heaven, but upon the earth. the like is said of david (acts 2.34.)
 where st. peter, to prove the ascension of christ, using the words of
 the psalmist, (psal. 16.10.) "thou wilt not leave my soule in hell, nor
 suffer thine holy one to see corruption," saith, they were spoken (not
 of david, but) of christ; and to prove it, addeth this reason, "for
 david is not ascended into heaven." but to this man may easily answer,
 and say, that though their bodies were not to ascend till the generall
 day of judgment, yet their souls were in heaven as soon as they were
 departed from their bodies; which also seemeth to be confirmed by the
 words of our saviour (luke 20.37,38.) who proving the resurrection out
 of the word of moses, saith thus, "that the dead are raised, even moses
 shewed, at the bush, when calleth the lord, the god of abraham, and
 the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. for is not god of the dead,
 but of the living; for they all live to him." but if these words be to
 be understood only of the immortality of the soul, they prove not at all
 that which our saviour intended to prove, which was the resurrection
 of the body, that is to say, the immortality of the man. therefore our
 saviour meaneth, that those patriarchs were immortall; not by property
 consequent to the essence, and nature of mankind, but by the will of
 god, that was pleased of his mere grace, to bestow eternall life upon
 the faithfull. and though at that time the patriarchs and many other
 faithfull men were dead, yet as it is in the text, they lived to god;
 that is, they were written in the book of life with them that were
 absolved of their sinnes, and ordained to life eternall at the
 resurrection. that the soul of man is in its own nature eternall, and
 living creature independent on the body; or that any meer man is
 immortall, otherwise than by the resurrection in the last day, (except
 enos and elias,) is doctrine not apparent in scripture. the whole 14.
 chapter of job, which is the speech not of his friends, but of himselfe,
 is complaint of this mortality of nature; and yet contradiction of
 the immortality at the resurrection. "there is hope of tree," (saith
 hee verse 7.) "if it be cast down, though the root thereof wax old, and
 the stock thereof die in the ground, yet when it scenteth the water
 it will bud, and bring forth boughes like plant. but man dyeth, and
 wasteth away, yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?" and (verse
 12.) "man lyeth down, and riseth not, till the heavens be more." but
 when is it, that the heavens shall be more? st. peter tells us, that
 it is at the generall resurrection. for in his 2. epistle, 3. chapter,
 and 7. verse, saith, that "the heavens and the earth that are now,
 are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of
 ungodly men," and (verse 12.) "looking for, and hasting to the comming
 of god, wherein the heavens shall be on fire, and shall be dissolved,
 and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. neverthelesse, we
 according to the promise look for new heavens, and new earth, wherein
 dwelleth righteousnesse." therefore where job saith, man riseth not till
 the heavens be more; it is all one, as if had said, the immortall
 life (and soule and life in the scripture, do usually signifie the same
 thing) beginneth not in man, till the resurrection, and day of judgment;
 and hath for cause, not his specificall nature, and generation; but the
 promise. for st. peter saies not, "wee look for new heavens, and new
 earth, (from nature) but from promise."
 
lastly, seeing it hath been already proved out of divers evident places
 of scripture, in the 35. chapter of this book, that the kingdom of god
 is civil common-wealth, where god himself is soveraign, by vertue
 first of the old, and since of the new covenant, wherein reigneth by
 his vicar, or lieutenant; the same places do therefore also prove, that
 after the comming again of our saviour in his majesty, and glory, to
 reign actually, and eternally; the kingdom of god is to be on earth. but
 because this doctrine (though proved out of places of scripture not few,
 nor obscure) will appear to most men novelty; i doe but propound
 it; maintaining nothing in this, or any other paradox of religion;
 but attending the end of that dispute of the sword, concerning the
 authority, (not yet amongst my countrey-men decided,) by which all sorts
 of doctrine are to bee approved, or rejected; and whose commands, both
 in speech, and writing, (whatsoever be the opinions of private men) must
 by all men, that mean to be protected by their laws, be obeyed. for
 the points of doctrine concerning the kingdome (of) god, have so great
 influence on the kingdome of man, as not to be determined, but by them,
 that under god have the soveraign power.
 



the place after judgment, of those who were never in the kingdome of
 god, or having been in, are cast out
 
as the kingdome of god, and eternall life, so also gods enemies, and
 their torments after judgment, appear by the scripture, to have their
 place on earth. the name of the place, where all men remain till the
 resurrection, that were either buryed, or swallowed up of the earth, is
 usually called in scripture, by words that signifie under ground; which
 the latines read generally infernus, and inferni, and the greeks hades;
 that is to say, place where men cannot see; and containeth as well the
 grave, as any other deeper place. but for the place of the damned after
 the resurrection, it is not determined, neither in the old, nor new
 testament, by any note of situation; but onely by the company: as that
 it shall bee, where such wicked men were, as god in former times in
 extraordinary, and miraculous manner, had destroyed from off the face of
 the earth: as for example, that they are in inferno, in tartarus, or in
 the bottomelesse pit; because corah, dathan, and abirom, were swallowed
 up alive into the earth. not that the writers of the scripture would
 have us beleeve, there could be in the globe of the earth, which is
 not only finite, but also (compared to the height of the stars) of no
 considerable magnitude, pit without bottome; that is, hole of
 infinite depth, such as the greeks in their daemonologie (that is to
 say, in their doctrine concerning daemons,) and after them, the romans
 called tartarus; of which virgill sayes,
 
bis patet in præceps, tantem tendítque sub umbras,
 quantus ad æthereum cœli suspectus olympum:
 
for that is thing the proportion of earth to heaven cannot bear: but
 that wee should beleeve them there, indefinitely, where those men are,
 on whom god inflicted that exemplary punnishment.
 



the congregation of giants
 
again, because those mighty men of the earth, that lived in the time
 of noah, before the floud, (which the greeks called heroes, and the
 scripture giants, and both say, were begotten, by copulation of the
 children of god, with the children of men,) were for their wicked life
 destroyed by the generall deluge; the place of the damned, is therefore
 also sometimes marked out, by the company of those deceased giants; as
 proverbs 21.16. "the man that wandreth out of the way of understanding,
 shall remain in the congregation of the giants," and job 26.5. "behold
 the giants groan under water, and they that dwell with them." here
 the place of the damned, is under the water. and isaiah 14.9. "hell is
 troubled how to meet thee," (that is, the king of babylon) "and will
 displace the giants for thee:" and here again the place of the damned,
 (if the sense be literall,) is to be under water.
 



lake of fire
 
thirdly, because the cities of sodom, and gomorrah, by the extraordinary
 wrath of god, were consumed for their wickednesse with fire and
 brimstone, and together with them the countrey about made stinking
 bituminous lake; the place of the damned is sometimes expressed by
 fire, and fiery lake: as in the apocalypse ch.21.8. "but the timorous,
 incredulous, and abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
 sorcerers, and idolators, and all lyars, shall have their part in the
 lake that burneth with fire, and brimstone; which is the second death."
 so that it is manifest, that hell fire, which is here expressed by
 metaphor, from the reall fire of sodome, signifieth not any certain
 kind, or place of torment; but is to be taken indefinitely, for
 destruction, as it is in the 20. chapter, at the 14. verse; where it is
 said, that "death and hell were cast into the lake of fire;" that is
 to say, were abolished, and destroyed; as if after the day of judgment,
 there shall be more dying, nor more going into hell; that is, no
 more going to hades (from which word perhaps our word hell is derived,)
 which is the same with more dying.
 



utter darknesse
 
fourthly, from the plague of darknesse inflicted on the egyptians, of
 which it is written (exod. 10.23.) "they saw not one another, neither
 rose any man from his place for three days; but all the children of
 israel had light in their dwellings;" the place of the wicked after
 judgment, is called utter darknesse, or (as it is in the originall)
 darknesse without. and so it is expressed (mat. 22.13.) where the king
 commandeth his servants, "to bind hand and foot the man that had not
 on his wedding garment, and to cast him out," eis to skotos to exoteron,
 externall darknesse, or darknesse without: which though translated utter
 darknesse, does not signifie how great, but where that darknesse is to
 be; namely, without the habitation of gods elect.
 



gehenna, and tophet
 
lastly, whereas there was place neer jerusalem, called the valley of
 the children of hinnon; in part whereof, called tophet, the jews had
 committed most grievous idolatry, sacrificing their children to the
 idol moloch; and wherein also god had afflicted his enemies with most
 grievous punishments; and wherein josias had burnt the priests of moloch
 upon their own altars, as appeareth at large in the 2 of kings chap. 23.
 the place served afterwards, to receive the filth, and garbage which was
 carried thither, out of the city; and there used to be fires made, from
 time to time, to purifie the aire, and take away the stench of carrion.
 from this abominable place, the jews used ever after to call the place
 of the damned, by the name of gehenna, or valley of hinnon. and this
 gehenna, is that word, which is usually now translated hell; and
 from the fires from time to time there burning, we have the notion of
 everlasting, and unquenchable fire.
 



of the literall sense of the scripture concerning hell
 
seeing now there is none, that so interprets the scripture, as that
 after the day of judgment, the wicked are all eternally to be punished
 in the valley of hinnon; or that they shall so rise again, as to be ever
 after under ground, or under water; or that after the resurrection, they
 shall more see one another; nor stir from one place to another; it
 followeth, thinks, very necessarily, that that which is thus said
 concerning hell fire, is spoken metaphorically; and that therefore there
 is proper sense to bee enquired after, (for of all metaphors there is
 some reall ground, that may be expressed in proper words) both of the
 place of hell, and the nature of hellish torment, and tormenters.
 



satan, devill, not proper names, but appellatives
 
and first for the tormenters, wee have their nature, and properties,
 exactly and properly delivered by the names of, the enemy, or satan;
 the accuser, or diabolus; the destroyer, or abbadon. which significant
 names, satan, devill, abbadon, set not forth to us any individuall
 person, as proper names use to doe; but onely an office, or quality;
 and are therefore appellatives; which ought not to have been left
 untranslated, as they are, in the latine, and modern bibles; because
 thereby they seem to be the proper names of daemons; and men are the
 more easily seduced to beleeve the doctrine of devills; which at that
 time was the religion of the gentiles, and contrary to that of moses,
 and of christ.
 
and because by the enemy, the accuser, and destroyer, is meant, the
 enemy of them that shall be in the kingdome of god; therefore if the
 kingdome of god after the resurrection, bee upon the earth, (as in the
 former chapter i have shewn by scripture it seems to be,) the enemy,
 and his kingdome must be on earth also. for so also was it, in the time
 before the jews had deposed god. for gods kingdome was in palestine;
 and the nations round about, were the kingdomes of the enemy; and
 consequently by satan, is meant any earthly enemy of the church.
 



torments of hell
 
the torments of hell, are expressed sometimes, by "weeping, and gnashing
 of teeth," as mat. 8.12. sometimes, by "the worm of conscience;" as
 isa.66.24. and mark 9.44, 46, 48; sometimes, by fire, as in the place
 now quoted, "where the worm dyeth not, and the fire is not quenched,"
 and many places beside: sometimes by "shame, and contempt," as dan.
 12.2. "and many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall
 awake; some to everlasting life; and some to shame, and everlasting
 contempt." all which places design metaphorically grief, and
 discontent of mind, from the sight of that eternall felicity in others,
 which they themselves through their own incredulity, and disobedience
 have lost. and because such felicity in others, is not sensible but by
 comparison with their own actuall miseries; it followeth that they are
 to suffer such bodily paines, and calamities, as are incident to those,
 who not onely live under evill and cruell governours, but have also for
 enemy, the eternall king of the saints, god almighty. and amongst these
 bodily paines, is to be reckoned also to every one of the wicked a
 second death. for though the scripture bee clear for an universall
 resurrection; yet wee do not read, that to any of the reprobate is
 promised an eternall life. for whereas st. paul (1 cor. 15.42, 43.) to
 the question concerning what bodies men shall rise with again, saith,
 that "the body is sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption; it
 is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weaknesse, it
 is raised in power;" glory and power cannot be applyed to the bodies of
 the wicked: nor can the name of second death, bee applyed to those
 that can never die but once: and although in metaphoricall speech, a
 calamitous life everlasting, may bee called an everlasting death yet it
 cannot well be understood of second death. the fire prepared for the
 wicked, is an everlasting fire: that is to say, the estate wherein
 man can be without torture, both of body and mind, after the
 resurrection, shall endure for ever; and in that sense the fire shall
 be unquenchable, and the torments everlasting: but it cannot thence be
 inferred, that hee who shall be cast into that fire, or be tormented
 with those torments, shall endure, and resist them so, as to be
 eternally burnt, and tortured, and yet never be destroyed, nor die. and
 though there be many places that affirm everlasting fire, and torments
 (into which men may be cast successively one after another for ever;)
 yet i find none that affirm there shall bee an eternall life therein of
 any individuall person; but on the contrary, an everlasting death, which
 is the second death: (apoc. 20. 13,14.) "for after death, and the grave
 shall have delivered up the dead which were in them, and every man be
 judged according to his works; death and the grave shall also be cast
 into the lake of fire. this is the second death." whereby it is
 evident, that there is to bee second death of every one that shall bee
 condemned at the day of judgement, after which hee shall die more.
 



the joyes of life eternall, and salvation the same thing,
 salvation from sin, and from misery, all one
 
the joyes of life eternall, are in scripture comprehended all under the
 name of salvation, or being saved. to be saved, is to be secured, either
 respectively, against speciall evills, or absolutely against all evill,
 comprehending want, sicknesse, and death it self. and because man
 was created in condition immortall, not subject to corruption, and
 consequently to nothing that tendeth to the dissolution of his nature;
 and fell from that happinesse by the of adam; it followeth, that
 to be saved from sin, is to be saved from all the evill, and calamities
 that sinne hath brought upon us. and therefore in the holy scripture,
 remission of sinne, and salvation from death and misery, is the same
 thing, as it appears by the words of our saviour, who having cured man
 sick of the palsey, by saying, (mat. 9.2.) "son be of good cheer, thy
 sins be forgiven thee;" and knowing that the scribes took for blasphemy,
 that man should pretend to forgive sins, asked them (v.5.) "whether
 it were easier to say, thy sinnes be forgiven thee, or, arise and walk;"
 signifying thereby, that it was all one, as to the saving of the sick,
 to say, "thy sins are forgiven," and "arise and walk;" and that used
 that form of speech, onely to shew had power to forgive sins. and
 it is besides evident in reason, that since death and misery, were the
 punishments of sin, the discharge of sinne, must also be discharge
 of death and misery; that is to say, salvation absolute, such as the
 faithfull are to enjoy after the day of judgment, by the power, and
 favour of jesus christ, who for that cause is called our saviour.
 
concerning particular salvations, such as are understood, 1 sam. 14.39.
 "as the lord liveth that saveth israel," that is, from their temporary
 enemies, and 2 sam. 22.4. "thou art my saviour, thou savest from
 violence;" and 2 kings 13.5. "god gave the israelites saviour, and
 so they were delivered from the hand of the assyrians," and the like,
 i need say nothing; there being neither difficulty, nor interest, to
 corrupt the interpretation of texts of that kind.
 



the place of eternall salvation
 
but concerning the generall salvation, because it must be in the
 kingdome of heaven, there is great difficulty concerning the place.
 on one side, by kingdome (which is an estate ordained by men for their
 perpetuall security against enemies, and want) it seemeth that this
 salvation should be on earth. for by salvation is set forth unto us,
 glorious reign of our king, by conquest; not safety by escape:
 and therefore there where we look for salvation, we must look also
 for triumph; and before triumph, for victory; and before victory, for
 battell; which cannot well be supposed, shall be in heaven. but how good
 soever this reason may be, i will not trust to it, without very evident
 places of scripture. the state of salvation is described at large,
 isaiah, 33. ver. 20,21,22,23,24.
 
"look upon zion, the city of our solemnities, thine eyes shall see
 jerusalem quiet habitation, tabernacle that shall not be taken down;
 not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any
 of the cords thereof be broken.
 
but there the glorious lord will be unto us place of broad rivers, and
 streams; wherein shall goe gally with oares; neither shall gallant
 ship passe thereby.
 
for the lord is our judge, the lord is our lawgiver, the lord is our
 king, will save us.
 
thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast;
 they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of great spoil
 divided; the lame take the prey.
 
and the inhabitant shall not say, i am sicke; the people that shall
 dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity."
 
in which words wee have the place from whence salvation is to proceed,
 "jerusalem, quiet habitation;" the eternity of it, "a tabernacle that
 shall not be taken down," &c. the saviour of it, "the lord, their judge,
 their lawgiver, their king, will save us;" the salvation, "the lord
 shall be to them as broad mote of swift waters," &c. the condition of
 their enemies, "their tacklings are loose, their masts weake, the
 lame shal take the spoil of them." the condition of the saved,
 "the inhabitants shall not say, i am sick:" and lastly, all this is
 comprehended in forgivenesse of sin, "the people that dwell therein
 shall be forgiven their iniquity." by which it is evident, that
 salvation shall be on earth, then, when god shall reign, (at the coming
 again of christ) in jerusalem; and from jerusalem shall proceed the
 salvation of the gentiles that shall be received into gods kingdome; as
 is also more expressely declared by the same prophet, chap. 66.20, 21.
 "and they," (that is, the gentiles who had any jew in bondage) "shall
 bring all your brethren, for an offering to the lord, out of all
 nations, upon horses, and in charets, and in litters, and upon mules,
 and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain, jerusalem, saith the lord,
 as the children of israel bring an offering in clean vessell into
 the house of the lord. and i will also take of them for priests and for
 levites, saith the lord:" whereby it is manifest, that the chief seat of
 gods kingdome (which is the place, from whence the salvation of us that
 were gentiles, shall proceed) shall be jerusalem; and the same is also
 confirmed by our saviour, in his discourse with the woman of samaria,
 concerning the place of gods worship; to whom saith, john 4.22. that
 the samaritans worshipped they know not what, but the jews worship what
 they knew, "for salvation is of the jews (ex judais, that is, begins at
 the jews): as if should say, you worship god, but know not by whom
 wil save you, as we doe, that know it shall be one of the tribe
 of judah, jew, not samaritan. and therefore also the woman not
 impertinently answered him again, "we know the messias shall come." so
 that which our saviour saith, "salvation is from the jews," is the
 same that paul sayes (rom. 1.16,17.) "the gospel is the power of god to
 salvation to every one that beleeveth; to the jew first, and also to the
 greek. for therein is the righteousnesse of god revealed from faith to
 faith;" from the faith of the jew, to the faith of the gentile. in
 the like sense the prophet joel describing the day of judgment, (chap.
 2.30,31.) that god would "shew wonders in heaven, and in earth, bloud,
 and fire, and pillars of smoak. the sun should be turned to darknesse,
 and the moon into bloud, before the great and terrible day of the lord
 come," addeth verse 32. "and it shall come to passe, that whosoever
 shall call upon the name of the lord, shall be saved. for in mount zion,
 and in jerusalem shall be salvation." and obadiah verse 17 saith
 the same, "upon mount zion shall be deliverance; and there shall be
 holinesse, and the house of jacob shall possesse their possessions,"
 that is, the possessions of the heathen, which possessions expresseth
 more particularly in the following verses, by the mount of esau, the
 land of the philistines, the fields of ephraim, of samaria, gilead, and
 the cities of the south, and concludes with these words, "the kingdom
 shall be the lords." all these places are for salvation, and the
 kingdome of god (after the day of judgement) upon earth. on the other
 side, i have not found any text that can probably be drawn, to prove
 any ascension of the saints into heaven; that is to say, into any coelum
 empyreum, or other aetheriall region; saving that it is called the
 kingdome of heaven; which name it may have, because god, that was king
 of the jews, governed them by his commands, sent to moses by angels from
 heaven, to reduce them to their obedience; and shall send him thence
 again, to rule both them, and all other faithfull men, from the day of
 judgment, everlastingly: or from that, that the throne of this our great
 king is in heaven; whereas the earth is but his footstoole. but that the
 subjects of god should have any place as high as his throne, or higher
 than his footstoole, it seemeth not sutable to the dignity of king,
 nor can i find any evident text for it in holy scripture.
 
from this that hath been said of the kingdom of god, and of salvation,
 it is not hard to interpret, what is meant by the world to come. there
 are three worlds mentioned in scripture, the old world, the present
 world, and the world to come. of the first, st. peter speaks, (2 pet.
 2.5.) "if god spared not the old world, but saved noah the eighth
 person, preacher of righteousnesse, bringing the flood upon the world
 of the ungodly," &c. so the first world, was from adam to the generall
 flood. of the present world, our saviour speaks (john 18.36.) "my
 kingdome is not of this world." for came onely to teach men the way
 of salvation, and to renew the kingdome of his father, by his doctrine.
 of the world to come, st. peter speaks, (2 pet. 3. 13.) "neverthelesse
 we according to his promise look for new heavens, and new earth." this
 is that world, wherein christ coming down from heaven, in the clouds,
 with great power, and glory, shall send his angels, and shall gather
 together his elect, from the four winds, and from the uttermost parts
 of the earth, and thence forth reign over them, (under his father)
 everlastingly.
 



redemption
 
salvation of sinner, supposeth precedent redemption; for that is
 once guilty of sin, is obnoxious to the penalty of the same; and must
 pay (or some other for him) such ransome, as that is offended, and
 has him in his power, shall require. and seeing the person offended, is
 almighty god, in whose power are all things; such ransome is to be paid
 before salvation can be acquired, as god hath been pleased to require.
 by this ransome, is not intended satisfaction for sin, equivalent to
 the offence, which sinner for himselfe, nor righteous man can ever be
 able to make for another; the dammage man does to another, may make
 amends for by restitution, or recompence, but cannot be taken
 away by recompence; for that were to make the liberty to sin, thing
 vendible. but sins may bee pardoned to the repentant, either gratis, or
 upon such penalty, as god is pleased to accept. that which god usually
 accepted in the old testament, was some sacrifice, or oblation. to
 forgive is not an act of injustice, though the punishment have
 been threatned. even amongst men, though the promise of good, bind the
 promiser; yet threats, that is to say, promises, of evill, bind them
 not; much lesse shall they bind god, who is infinitely more mercifull
 then men. our saviour christ therefore to redeem us, did not in that
 sense satisfie for the sins of men, as that his death, of its own
 vertue, could make it unjust in god to punish sinners with eternall
 death; but did make that sacrifice, and oblation of himself, at his
 first coming, which god was pleased to require, for the salvation at his
 second coming, of such as in the mean time should repent, and beleeve in
 him. and though this act of our redemption, be not alwaies in scripture
 called sacrifice, and oblation, but sometimes price, yet by price
 we are not to understand any thing, by the value whereof, could claim
 right to pardon for us, from his offended father, but that price which
 god the father was pleased in mercy to demand.
 


chapter xxxix. of the signification in scripture of the word church
 



church the lords house
 
the word church, (ecclesia) signifieth in the books of holy scripture
 divers things. sometimes (though not often) it is taken for gods house,
 that is to say, for temple, wherein christians assemble to perform
 holy duties publiquely; as, 1 cor. 14. ver. 34. "let your women keep
 silence in the churches:" but this is metaphorically put, for the
 congregation there assembled; and hath been since used for the
 edifice it self, to distinguish between the temples of christians, and
 idolaters. the temple of jerusalem was gods house, and the house of
 prayer; and so is any edifice dedicated by christians to the worship of
 christ, christs house: and therefore the greek fathers call it kuriake,
 the lords house; and thence, in our language it came to be called kyrke,
 and church.
 



ecclesia properly what
 
church (when not taken for house) signifieth the same that ecclesia
 signified in the grecian common-wealths; that is to say, congregation,
 or an assembly of citizens, called forth, to hear the magistrate speak
 unto them; and which in the common-wealth of rome was called concio, as
 that spake was called ecclesiastes, and concionator. and when they
 were called forth by lawfull authority, (acts 19.39.) it was ecclesia
 legitima, lawfull church, ennomos ecclesia. but when they were excited
 by tumultuous, and seditious clamor, then it was confused church,
 ecclesia sugkechumene.
 
it is taken also sometimes for the men that have right to be of the
 congregation, though not actually assembled; that is to say, for the
 whole multitude of christian men, how far soever they be dispersed: as
 (act. 8.3.) where it is said, that "saul made havock of the church:" and
 in this sense is christ said to be head of the church. and sometimes for
 certain part of christians, as (col. 4.15.) "salute the church that is
 in his house." sometimes also for the elect onely; as (ephes. 5.27.) "a
 glorious church, without spot, or wrinkle, holy, and without blemish;"
 which is meant of the church triumphant, or, church to come. sometimes,
 for congregation assembled, of professors of christianity, whether
 their profession be true, or counterfeit, as it is understood, mat.
 18.17. where it is said, "tell it to the church, and if hee neglect to
 hear the church, let him be to thee as gentile, or publican."
 



in what sense the church is one person church defined
 
and in this last sense only it is that the church can be taken for one
 person; that is to say, that it can be said to have power to will, to
 pronounce, to command, to be obeyed, to make laws, or to doe any other
 action whatsoever; for without authority from lawfull congregation,
 whatsoever act be done in concourse of people, it is the particular
 act of every one of those that were present, and gave their aid to the
 performance of it; and not the act of them all in grosse, as of one
 body; much lesse that act of them that were absent, or that being
 present, were not willing it should be done. according to this sense, i
 define church to be, "a company of men professing christian religion,
 united in the person of one soveraign; at whose command they ought to
 assemble, and without whose authority they ought not to assemble." and
 because in all common-wealths, that assembly, which is without warrant
 from the civil soveraign, is unlawful; that church also, which is
 assembled in any common-wealth, that hath forbidden them to assemble, is
 an unlawfull assembly.
 



christian common-wealth, and church all one
 
it followeth also, that there is on earth, such universall church as
 all christians are bound to obey; because there is power on earth, to
 which all other common-wealths are subject: there are christians, in
 the dominions of severall princes and states; but every one of them
 is subject to that common-wealth, whereof is himself member; and
 consequently, cannot be subject to the commands of any other person.
 and therefore church, such as one as is capable to command, to judge,
 absolve, condemn, or do any other act, is the same thing with civil
 common-wealth, consisting of christian men; and is called civill
 state, for that the subjects of it are men; and church, for that the
 subjects thereof are christians. temporall and spirituall government,
 are but two words brought into the world, to make men see double, and
 mistake their lawfull soveraign. it is true, that the bodies of the
 faithfull, after the resurrection shall be not onely spirituall, but
 eternall; but in this life they are grosse, and corruptible. there
 is therefore other government in this life, neither of state, nor
 religion, but temporall; nor teaching of any doctrine, lawfull to any
 subject, which the governour both of the state, and of the religion,
 forbiddeth to be taught: and that governor must be one; or else there
 must needs follow faction, and civil war in the common-wealth, between
 the church and state; between spiritualists, and temporalists; between
 the sword of justice, and the shield of faith; and (which is more) in
 every christian mans own brest, between the christian, and the man.
 the doctors of the church, are called pastors; so also are civill
 soveraignes: but if pastors be not subordinate one to another, so
 as that there may bee one chief pastor, men will be taught contrary
 doctrines, whereof both may be, and one must be false. who that one
 chief pastor is, according to the law of nature, hath been already
 shewn; namely, that it is the civill soveraign; and to whom the
 scripture hath assigned that office, we shall see in the chapters
 following.
 



chapter xl of the rights of the kingdome of god, in abraham, moses,
 high priests, and the kings of judah
 



the soveraign rights of abraham
 
the father of the faithfull, and first in the kingdome of god by
 covenant, was abraham. for with him was the covenant first made; wherein
 obliged himself, and his seed after him, to acknowledge and obey the
 commands of god; not onely such, as could take notice of, (as morall
 laws,) by the light of nature; but also such, as god should in speciall
 manner deliver to him by dreams and visions. for as to the morall law,
 they were already obliged, and needed not have been contracted withall,
 by promise of the land of canaan. nor was there any contract, that could
 adde to, or strengthen the obligation, by which both they, and all
 men else were bound naturally to obey god almighty: and therefore the
 covenant which abraham made with god, was to take for the commandement
 of god, that which in the name of god was commanded him, in dream, or
 vision, and to deliver it to his family, and cause them to observe the
 same.
 



abraham had the sole power of ordering the religion of his own people
 
in this contract of god with abraham, wee may observe three points of
 important consequence in the government of gods people. first, that at
 the making of this covenant, god spake onely to abraham; and therefore
 contracted not with any of his family, or seed, otherwise then as their
 wills (which make the essence of all covenants) were before the contract
 involved in the will of abraham; who was therefore supposed to have had
 lawfull power, to make them perform all that covenanted for them.
 according whereunto (gen 18.18, 19.) god saith, "all the nations of the
 earth shall be blessed in him, for i know him that will command his
 children and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the
 lord." from whence may be concluded this first point, that they to
 whom god hath not spoken immediately, are to receive the positive
 commandements of god, from their soveraign; as the family and seed of
 abraham did from abraham their father, and lord, and civill soveraign.
 and consequently in every common-wealth, they who have supernaturall
 revelation to the contrary, ought to obey the laws of their own
 soveraign, in the externall acts and profession of religion. as for the
 inward thought, and beleef of men, which humane governours can take no
 notice of, (for god onely knoweth the heart) they are not voluntary, nor
 the effect of the laws, but of the unrevealed will, and of the power of
 god; and consequently fall not under obligation.
 



pretence of private spirit against the religion of abraham
 
from whence proceedeth another point, that it was not unlawfull for
 abraham, when any of his subjects should pretend private vision, or
 spirit, or other revelation from god, for the countenancing of any
 doctrine which abraham should forbid, or when they followed, or adhered
 to any such pretender, to punish them; and consequently that it is
 lawfull now for the soveraign to punish any man that shall oppose his
 private spirit against the laws: for hee hath the same place in the
 common-wealth, that abraham had in his own family.
 



abraham sole judge, and interpreter of what god spake
 
there ariseth also from the same, third point; that as none but
 abraham in his family, so none but the soveraign in christian
 common-wealth, can take notice what is, or what is not the word of god.
 for god spake onely to abraham; and it was onely, that was able
 to know what god said, and to interpret the same to his family: and
 therefore also, they that have the place of abraham in common-wealth,
 are the onely interpreters of what god hath spoken.
 



the authority of moses whereon grounded
 
the same covenant was renewed with isaac; and afterwards with jacob; but
 afterwards more, till the israelites were freed from the egyptians,
 and arrived at the foot of mount sinai: and then it was renewed by moses
 (as i have said before, chap. 35.) in such manner, as they became from
 that time forward the peculiar kingdome of god; whose lieutenant was
 moses, for his owne time; and the succession to that office was setled
 upon aaron, and his heirs after him, to bee to god sacerdotall
 kingdome for ever.
 
by this constitution, kingdome is acquired to god. but seeing moses
 had authority to govern the israelites, as successor to the right
 of abraham, because could not claim it by inheritance; it appeareth
 not as yet, that the people were obliged to take him for gods
 lieutenant, longer than they beleeved that god spake unto him. and
 therefore his authority (notwithstanding the covenant they made with
 god) depended yet merely upon the opinion they had of his sanctity,
 and of the reality of his conferences with god, and the verity of his
 miracles; which opinion coming to change, they were more obliged to
 take any thing for the law of god, which propounded to them in gods
 name. we are therefore to consider, what other ground there was, of
 their obligation to obey him. for it could not be the commandement of
 god that could oblige them; because god spake not to them immediately,
 but by the mediation of moses himself; and our saviour saith of himself,
 (john 5. 31.) "if i bear witnesse of my self, my witnesse is not true,"
 much lesse if moses bear witnesse of himselfe, (especially in claim of
 kingly power over gods people) ought his testimony to be received. his
 authority therefore, as the authority of all other princes, must be
 grounded on the consent of the people, and their promise to obey him.
 and so it was: for "the people" (exod. 20.18.) "when they saw the
 thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noyse of the trumpet, and the
 mountaine smoaking, removed, and stood far off. and they said unto
 moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not god speak with
 us lest we die." here was their promise of obedience; and by this it was
 they obliged themselves to obey whatsoever should deliver unto them
 for the commandement of god.
 



moses was (under god) soveraign of the jews, all his own time, though
 aaron had the priesthood
 
and notwithstanding the covenant constituted sacerdotall kingdome,
 that is to say, kingdome hereditary to aaron; yet that is to be
 understood of the succession, after moses should bee dead. for
 whosoever ordereth, and establisheth the policy, as first founder of
 common-wealth (be it monarchy, aristocracy, or democracy) must needs
 have soveraign power over the people all the while is doing of it.
 and that moses had that power all his own time, is evidently affirmed in
 the scripture. first, in the text last before cited, because the people
 promised obedience, not to aaron but to him. secondly, (exod. 24.1, 2.)
 "and god said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron, nadab
 and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel. and moses alone shall
 come neer the lord, but they shall not come nigh, neither shall the
 people goe up with him." by which it is plain, that moses who was alone
 called up to god, (and not aaron, nor the other priests, nor the seventy
 elders, nor the people who were forbidden to come up) was alone he, that
 represented to the israelites the person of god; that is to say, was
 their sole soveraign under god. and though afterwards it be said (verse
 9.) "then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the
 elders of israel, and they saw the god of israel, and there was under
 his feet, as it were paved work of saphire stone," &c. yet this was
 not till after moses had been with god before, and had brought to
 the people the words which god had said to him. onely went for the
 businesse of the people; the others, as the nobles of his retinue, were
 admitted for honour to that speciall grace, which was not allowed to
 the people; which was, (as in the verse after appeareth) to see god and
 live. "god laid not his hand upon them, they saw god and did eat and
 drink" (that is, did live), but did not carry any commandement from
 him to the people. again, it is every where said, "the lord spake unto
 moses," as in all other occasions of government; so also in the ordering
 of the ceremonies of religion, contained in the 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
 and 31 chapters of exodus, and throughout leviticus: to aaron seldome.
 the calfe that aaron made, moses threw into the fire. lastly, the
 question of the authority of aaron, by occasion of his and miriams
 mutiny against moses, was (numbers 12.) judged by god himself for moses.
 so also in the question between moses, and the people, when corah,
 dathan, and abiram, and two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly
 "gathered themselves together" (numbers 16. 3) "against moses, and
 against aaron, and said unto them, ‘ye take too much upon you, seeing
 all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the lord is
 amongst them, why lift you up your selves above the congregation of the
 lord?’" god caused the earth to swallow corah, dathan, and abiram with
 their wives and children alive, and consumed those two hundred and fifty
 princes with fire. therefore neither aaron, nor the people, nor any
 aristocracy of the chief princes of the people, but moses alone had next
 under god the soveraignty over the israelites: and that not onely in
 causes of civill policy, but also of religion; for moses onely spake
 with god, and therefore onely could tell the people, what it was that
 god required at their hands. man upon pain of death might be so
 presumptuous as to approach the mountain where god talked with moses.
 "thou shalt set bounds" (saith the lord, exod 19. 12.) "to the people
 round about, and say, take heed to your selves that you goe not up into
 the mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the mount shall
 surely be put to death." and again (verse 21.) "get down, charge the
 people, lest they break through unto the lord to gaze." out of which we
 may conclude, that whosoever in christian common-wealth holdeth the
 place of moses, is the sole messenger of god, and interpreter of
 his commandements. and according hereunto, man ought in the
 interpretation of the scripture to proceed further then the bounds which
 are set by their severall soveraigns. for the scriptures since god now
 speaketh in them, are the mount sinai; the bounds whereof are the laws
 of them that represent gods person on earth. to look upon them and
 therein to behold the wondrous works of god, and learn to fear him is
 allowed; but to interpret them; that is, to pry into what god saith to
 him whom appointeth to govern under him, and make themselves judges
 whether govern as god commandeth him, or not, is to transgresse the
 bounds god hath set us, and to gaze upon god irreverently.
 



all spirits were subordinate to the spirit of moses
 
there was prophet in the time of moses, nor pretender to the spirit
 of god, but such as moses had approved, and authorized. for there were
 in his time but seventy men, that are said to prophecy by the spirit of
 god, and these were of all moses his election; concerning whom god saith
 to moses (numb. 11.16.) "gather to mee seventy of the elders of israel,
 whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people." to these god imparted
 his spirit; but it was not different spirit from that of moses; for
 it is said (verse 25.) "god came down in cloud, and took of the spirit
 that was upon moses, and gave it to the seventy elders." but as i have
 shewn before (chap. 36.) by spirit, is understood the mind; so that the
 sense of the place is other than this, that god endued them with
 mind conformable, and subordinate to that of moses, that they might
 prophecy, that is to say, speak to the people in gods name, in such
 manner, as to set forward (as ministers of moses, and by his authority)
 such doctrine as was agreeable to moses his doctrine. for they were but
 ministers; and when two of them prophecyed in the camp, it was thought
 new and unlawfull thing; and as it is in the 27. and 28. verses of
 the same chapter, they were accused of it, and joshua advised moses to
 forbid them, as not knowing that it was by moses his spirit that they
 prophecyed. by which it is manifest, that subject ought to pretend to
 prophecy, or to the spirit, in opposition to the doctrine established by
 him, whom god hath set in the place of moses.
 



after moses the soveraignty was in the high priest
 
aaron being dead, and after him also moses, the kingdome, as being a
 sacerdotall kingdome, descended by vertue of the covenant, to aarons
 son, eleazar the high priest: and god declared him (next under himself)
 for soveraign, at the same time that appointed joshua for the
 generall of their army. for thus god saith expressely (numb. 27.21.)
 concerning joshua; "he shall stand before eleazar the priest, who shall
 ask counsell for him, before the lord, at his word shall they goe out,
 and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the children of
 israel with him:" therefore the supreme power of making war and peace,
 was in the priest. the supreme power of judicature belonged also to
 the high priest: for the book of the law was in their keeping; and the
 priests and levites onely were the subordinate judges in causes civill,
 as appears in deut. 17.8, 9, 10. and for the manner of gods worship,
 there was never doubt made, but that the high priest till the time
 of saul, had the supreme authority. therefore the civill and
 ecclesiasticall power were both joined together in one and the same
 person, the high priest; and ought to bee so, in whosoever governeth by
 divine right; that is, by authority immediate from god.
 



of the soveraign power between the time of joshua and of saul
 
after the death of joshua, till the time of saul, the time between is
 noted frequently in the book of judges, "that there was in those dayes
 king in israel;" and sometimes with this addition, that "every
 man did that which was right in his own eyes." by which is to bee
 understood, that where it is said, "there was king," is meant, "there
 was soveraign power" in israel. and so it was, if we consider the
 act, and exercise of such power. for after the death of joshua, &
 eleazar, "there arose another generation" (judges 2.10.) "that knew not
 the lord, nor the works which had done for israel, but did evill in
 the sight of the lord, and served baalim." and the jews had that quality
 which st. paul noteth, "to look for sign," not onely before they would
 submit themselves to the government of moses, but also after they had
 obliged themselves by their submission. whereas signs, and miracles had
 for end to procure faith, not to keep men from violating it, when they
 have once given it; for to that men are obliged by the law of nature.
 but if we consider not the exercise, but the right of governing, the
 soveraign power was still in the high priest. therefore whatsoever
 obedience was yeelded to any of the judges, (who were men chosen by god
 extraordinarily, to save his rebellious subjects out of the hands of
 the enemy,) it cannot bee drawn into argument against the right the high
 priest had to the soveraign power, in all matters, both of policy and
 religion. and neither the judges, nor samuel himselfe had an ordinary,
 but extraordinary calling to the government; and were obeyed by the
 israelites, not out of duty, but out of reverence to their favour
 with god, appearing in their wisdome, courage, or felicity. hitherto
 therefore the right of regulating both the policy, and the religion,
 were inseparable.
 



of the rights of the kings of israel
 
to the judges, succeeded kings; and whereas before, all authority, both
 in religion, and policy, was in the high priest; so now it was all in
 the king. for the soveraignty over the people, which was before, not
 onely by vertue of the divine power, but also by particular pact of
 the israelites in god, and next under him, in the high priest, as his
 viceregent on earth, was cast off by the people, with the consent of god
 himselfe. for when they said to samuel (1 sam. 8.5.) "make us king to
 judge us, like all the nations," they signified that they would no
 more bee governed by the commands that should bee laid upon them by the
 priest, in the name of god; but by one that should command them in the
 same manner that all other nations were commanded; and consequently in
 deposing the high priest of royall authority, they deposed that peculiar
 government of god. and yet god consented to it, saying to samuel (verse
 7.) "hearken unto the voice of the people, in all that they shall say
 unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected mee,
 that i should not reign over them." having therefore rejected god, in
 whose right the priests governed, there was authority left to the
 priests, but such as the king was pleased to allow them; which was
 more, or lesse, according as the kings were good, or evill. and for the
 government of civill affaires, it is manifest, it was all in the hands
 of the king. for in the same chapter, verse 20. they say they will be
 like all the nations; that their king shall be their judge, and goe
 before them, and fight their battells; that is, shall have the
 whole authority, both in peace and war. in which is contained also the
 ordering of religion; for there was other word of god in that time,
 by which to regulate religion, but the law of moses, which was their
 civill law. besides, we read (1 kings 2.27.) that solomon "thrust out
 abiathar from being priest before the lord:" had therefore authority
 over the high priest, as over any other subject; which is great
 mark of supremacy in religion. and we read also (1 kings 8.) that hee
 dedicated the temple; that blessed the people; and that himselfe
 in person made that excellent prayer, used in the consecrations of all
 churches, and houses of prayer; which is another great mark of supremacy
 in religion. again, we read (2 kings 22.) that when there was question
 concerning the book of the law found in the temple, the same was not
 decided by the high priest, but josiah sent both him, and others to
 enquire concerning it, of hulda, the prophetesse; which is another mark
 of the supremacy in religion. lastly, wee read (1 chro. 26.30.) that
 david made hashabiah and his brethren, hebronites, officers of israel
 among them westward, "in all businesse of the lord, and in the service
 of the king." likewise (verse 32.) that hee made other hebronites,
 "rulers over the reubenites, the gadites, and the halfe tribe of
 manasseh" (these were the rest of israel that dwelt beyond jordan) "for
 every matter pertaining to god, and affairs of the king." is not this
 full power, both temporall and spirituall, as they call it, that would
 divide it? to conclude; from the first institution of gods kingdome, to
 the captivity, the supremacy of religion, was in the same hand with that
 of the civill soveraignty; and the priests office after the election of
 saul, was not magisteriall, but ministeriall.
 



the practice of supremacy in religion, was not in the time of the kings,
 according to the right thereof
 
notwithstanding the government both in policy and religion, were joined,
 first in the high priests, and afterwards in the kings, so far forth as
 concerned the right; yet it appeareth by the same holy history, that the
 people understood it not; but there being amongst them great part, and
 probably the greatest part, that longer than they saw great miracles,
 or (which is equivalent to miracle) great abilities, or great felicity
 in the enterprises of their governours, gave sufficient credit, either
 to the fame of moses, or to the colloquies between god and the priests;
 they took occasion as oft as their governours displeased them, by
 blaming sometimes the policy, sometimes the religion, to change the
 government, or revolt from their obedience at their pleasure: and from
 thence proceeded from time to time the civill troubles, divisions, and
 calamities of the nation. as for example, after the death of eleazar and
 joshua, the next generation which had not seen the wonders of god, but
 were left to their own weak reason, not knowing themselves obliged
 by the covenant of sacerdotall kingdome, regarded more the
 commandement of the priest, nor any law of moses, but did every man that
 which was right in his own eyes; and obeyed in civill affairs, such
 men, as from time to time they thought able to deliver them from the
 neighbour nations that oppressed them; and consulted not with god (as
 they ought to doe,) but with such men, or women, as they guessed to bee
 prophets by their praedictions of things to come; and thought they had
 an idol in their chappel, yet if they had levite for their chaplain,
 they made account they worshipped the god of israel.
 
and afterwards when they demanded king, after the manner of the
 nations; yet it was not with design to depart from the worship of god
 their king; but despairing of the justice of the sons of samuel, they
 would have king to judg them in civill actions; but not that they
 would allow their king to change the religion which they thought was
 recommended to them by moses. so that they alwaies kept in store a
 pretext, either of justice, or religion, to discharge themselves of
 their obedience, whensoever they had hope to prevaile. samuel was
 displeased with the people, for that they desired king, (for god was
 their king already, and samuel had but an authority under him); yet did
 samuel, when saul observed not his counsell, in destroying agag as god
 had commanded, anoint another king, namely david, to take the succession
 from his heirs. rehoboam was idolater; but when the people thought
 him an oppressor; that civil pretence carried from him ten tribes to
 jeroboam an idolater. and generally through the whole history of the
 kings, as well of judah, as of israel, there were prophets that alwaies
 controlled the kings, for transgressing the religion; and sometimes also
 for errours of state; (2 chro. 19. 2.) as jehosaphat was reproved by
 the prophet jehu, for aiding the king of israel against the syrians;
 and hezekiah, by isaiah, for shewing his treasures to the ambassadors of
 babylon. by all which it appeareth, that though the power both of state
 and religion were in the kings; yet none of them were uncontrolled
 in the use of it, but such as were gracious for their own naturall
 abilities, or felicities. so that from the practise of those times,
 there can argument be drawn, that the right of supremacy in religion
 was not in the kings, unlesse we place it in the prophets; and conclude,
 that because hezekiah praying to the lord before the cherubins, was not
 answered from thence, nor then, but afterwards by the prophet isaiah,
 therefore isaiah was supreme head of the church; or because josiah
 consulted hulda the prophetesse, concerning the book of the law, that
 therefore neither he, nor the high priest, but hulda the prophetesse had
 the supreme authority in matter of religion; which i thinke is not the
 opinion of any doctor.
 



after the captivity the jews had setled common-wealth
 
during the captivity, the jews had common-wealth at all: and after
 their return, though they renewed their covenant with god, yet there
 was promise made of obedience, neither to esdras, nor to any other;
 and presently after they became subjects to the greeks (from whose
 customes, and daemonology, and from the doctrine of the cabalists,
 their religion became much corrupted): in such sort as nothing can be
 gathered from their confusion, both in state and religion, concerning
 the supremacy in either. and therefore so far forth as concerneth the
 old testament, we may conclude, that whosoever had the soveraignty of
 the common-wealth amongst the jews, the same had also the supreme
 authority in matter of gods externall worship; and represented gods
 person; that is the person of god the father; though were not called
 by the name of father, till such time as sent into the world his son
 jesus christ, to redeem mankind from their sins, and bring them into
 his everlasting kingdome, to be saved for evermore. of which we are to
 speak in the chapter following.
 


chapter xli. of the office of our blessed saviour
 



three parts of the office of christ
 
we find in holy scripture three parts of the office of the messiah: the
 first of redeemer, or saviour: the second of pastor, counsellour,
 or teacher, that is, of prophet sent from god, to convert such as god
 hath elected to salvation; the third of king, and eternall king, but
 under his father, as moses and the high priests were in their severall
 times. and to these three parts are corespondent three times. for our
 redemption wrought at his first coming, by the sacrifice, wherein
 offered up himself for our sinnes upon the crosse: our conversion
 wrought partly then in his own person; and partly worketh now by his
 ministers; and will continue to work till his coming again. and after
 his coming again, shall begin that his glorious reign over his elect,
 which is to last eternally.
 



his office as redeemer
 
to the office of redeemer, that is, of one that payeth the ransome of
 sin, (which ransome is death,) it appertaineth, that was sacrificed,
 and thereby bare upon his own head, and carryed away from us our
 iniquities, in such sort as god had required. not that the death of one
 man, though without sinne, can satisfie for the offences of all men,
 in the rigour of justice, but in the mercy of god, that ordained such
 sacrifices for sin, as was pleased in his mercy to accept. in the old
 law (as we may read, leviticus the 16.) the lord required, that there
 should every year once, bee made an atonement for the sins of all
 israel, both priests, and others; for the doing whereof, aaron alone was
 to sacrifice for himself and the priests young bullock; and for the
 rest of the people, was to receive from them two young goates, of
 which was to sacrifice one; but as for the other, which was the scape
 goat, was to lay his hands on the head thereof, and by confession
 of the iniquities of the people, to lay them all on that head, and then
 by some opportune man, to cause the goat to be led into the wildernesse,
 and there to escape, and carry away with him the iniquities of the
 people. as the sacrifice of the one goat was sufficient (because an
 acceptable) price for the ransome of all israel; so the death of the
 messiah, is sufficient price, for the sins of all mankind, because
 there was more required. our saviour christs sufferings seem to be
 here figured, as cleerly, as in the oblation of isaac, or in any other
 type of him in the old testament: was both the sacrificed goat, and
 the scape goat; "hee was oppressed, and was afflicted (isa. 53.7.);
 opened not his mouth; brought as lamb to the slaughter, and as a
 sheep is dumbe before the shearer, so opened not his mouth:" here he
 is the sacrificed goat. "he hath born our griefs, (ver.4.) and carried
 our sorrows;" and again, (ver. 6.) "the lord hath laid upon him the
 iniquities of us all:" and so is the scape goat. "he was cut off from
 the land of the living (ver. 8.) for the transgression of my people:"
 there again is the sacrificed goat. and again (ver. 11.) "he shall
 bear their sins:" hee is the scape goat. thus is the lamb of god
 equivalent to both those goates; sacrificed, in that dyed; and
 escaping, in his resurrection; being raised opportunely by his father,
 and removed from the habitation of men in his ascension.
 



christs kingdome not of this world
 
for as much therefore, as that redeemeth, hath title to the thing
 redeemed, before the redemption, and ransome paid; and this ransome was
 the death of the redeemer; it is manifest, that our saviour (as man) was
 not king of those that redeemed, before hee suffered death; that is,
 during that time hee conversed bodily on the earth. i say, was not
 then king in present, by vertue of the pact, which the faithfull make
 with him in baptisme; neverthelesse, by the renewing of their pact with
 god in baptisme, they were obliged to obey him for king, (under his
 father) whensoever should be pleased to take the kingdome upon him.
 according whereunto, our saviour himself expressely saith, (john 18.36.)
 "my kingdome is not of this world." now seeing the scripture maketh
 mention but of two worlds; this that is now, and shall remain to the day
 of judgment, (which is therefore also called, the last day;) and that
 which shall bee new heaven, and new earth; the kingdome of christ
 is not to begin till the general resurrection. and that is it which our
 saviour saith, (mat. 16.27.) "the of man shall come in the glory
 of his father, with his angels; and then shall reward every man
 according to his works." to reward every man according to his works, is
 to execute the office of king; and this is not to be till come in
 the glory of his father, with his angells. when our saviour saith,
 (mat. 23.2.) "the scribes and pharisees sit in moses seat; all therefore
 whatsoever they bid you doe, that observe and doe;" hee declareth
 plainly, that hee ascribeth kingly power, for that time, not to
 himselfe, but to them. and so hee hath also, where saith, (luke
 12.14.) "who made mee judge, or divider over you?" and (john 12.47.)
 "i came not to judge the world, but to save the world." and yet our
 saviour came into this world that hee might bee king, and judge in
 the world to come: for hee was the messiah, that is, the christ, that
 is, the anointed priest, and the soveraign prophet of god; that is to
 say, was to have all the power that was in moses the prophet, in the
 high priests that succeeded moses, and in the kings that succeeded the
 priests. and st. john saies expressely (chap. 5. ver. 22.) "the father
 judgeth man, but hath committed all judgment to the son." and this is
 not repugnant to that other place, "i came not to judge the world:" for
 this is spoken of the world present, the other of the world to come; as
 also where it is said, that at the second coming of christ, (mat. 19.
 28.) "yee that have followed in the regeneration, when the of
 man shall sit in the throne of his glory, yee shall also sit on twelve
 thrones, judging the twelve tribes of israel."
 



the end of christs comming was to renew the covenant of the kingdome
 of god, and to perswade the elect to imbrace it, which was the second
 part of his office
 
if then christ while hee was on earth, had kingdome in this world,
 to what end was his first coming? it was to restore unto god, by new
 covenant, the kingdome, which being his by the old covenant, had been
 cut off by the rebellion of the israelites in the election of saul.
 which to doe, was to preach unto them, that was the messiah, that
 is, the king promised to them by the prophets; and to offer himselfe in
 sacrifice for the sinnes of them that should by faith submit themselves
 thereto; and in case the nation generally should refuse him, to call
 to his obedience such as should beleeve in him amongst the gentiles. so
 that there are two parts of our saviours office during his aboad upon
 the earth; one to proclaim himself the christ; and another by teaching,
 and by working of miracles, to perswade, and prepare men to live so, as
 to be worthy of the immortality beleevers were to enjoy, at such time as
 should come in majesty, to take possession of his fathers kingdome.
 and therefore it is, that the time of his preaching, is often by himself
 called the regeneration; which is not properly kingdome, and thereby
 warrant to deny obedience to the magistrates that then were, (for
 hee commanded to obey those that sate then in moses chaire, and to pay
 tribute to caesar;) but onely an earnest of the kingdome of god that was
 to come, to those to whom god had given the grace to be his disciples,
 and to beleeve in him; for which cause the godly are said to bee already
 in the kingdome of grace, as naturalized in that heavenly kingdome.
 



the preaching of christ not contrary to the then law of the jews, nor
 of caesar
 
hitherto therefore there is nothing done, or taught by christ, that
 tendeth to the diminution of the civill right of the jewes, or of
 caesar. for as touching the common-wealth which then was amongst
 the jews, both they that bare rule amongst them, that they that were
 governed, did all expect the messiah, and kingdome of god; which they
 could not have done if their laws had forbidden him (when came) to
 manifest, and declare himself. seeing therefore did nothing, but by
 preaching, and miracles go about to prove himselfe to be that messiah,
 hee did therein nothing against their laws. the kingdome hee claimed was
 to bee in another world; taught all men to obey in the mean time them
 that sate in moses seat: allowed them to give caesar his tribute, and
 refused to take upon himselfe to be judg. how then could his words,
 or actions bee seditious, or tend to the overthrow of their then civill
 government? but god having determined his sacrifice, for the reduction
 of his elect to their former covenanted obedience, for the means,
 whereby would bring the same to effect, made use of their malice,
 and ingratitude. nor was it contrary to the laws of caesar. for though
 pilate himself (to gratifie the jews) delivered him to be crucified; yet
 before did so, pronounced openly, that found fault in him:
 and put for title of his condemnation, not as the jews required, "that
 pretended to be king;" but simply, "that hee was king of the jews;"
 and notwithstanding their clamour, refused to alter it; saying, "what i
 have written, i have written."
 



the third part of his office was to be king (under his father) of the
 elect
 
as for the third part of his office, which was to be king, i have
 already shewn that his kingdome was not to begin till the resurrection.
 but then shall be king, not onely as god, in which sense is
 king already, and ever shall be, of all the earth, in vertue of his
 omnipotence; but also peculiarly of his own elect, by vertue of the
 pact they make with him in their baptisme. and therefore it is, that
 our saviour saith (mat. 19.28.) that his apostles should sit upon twelve
 thrones, judging the twelve tribes of israel, "when the of man shall
 sit in the throne of his glory;" whereby signified that should
 reign then in his humane nature; and (mat. 16.27.) "the of man shall
 come in the glory of his father, with his angels, and then shall
 reward every man according to his works." the same we may read, marke
 13..26. and 14.26. and more expressely for the time, luke 22.29, 30. "i
 appoint unto you kingdome, as my father hath appointed to mee, that
 you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdome, and sit on thrones
 judging the twelve tribes of israel." by which it is manifest that the
 kingdome of christ appointed to him by his father, is not to be before
 the of man shall come in glory, and make his apostles judges of
 the twelve tribes of israel. but man may here ask, seeing there is
 marriage in the kingdome of heaven, whether men shall then eat, and
 drink; what eating therefore is meant in this place? this is expounded
 by our saviour (john 6.27.) where saith, "labour not for the meat
 which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting
 life, which the of man shall give you." so that by eating at christs
 table, is meant the eating of the tree of life; that is to say, the
 enjoying of immortality, in the kingdome of the of man. by which
 places, and many more, it is evident, that our saviours kingdome is to
 bee exercised by him in his humane nature.
 



christs authority in the kingdome of god subordinate to his father
 
again, is to be king then, otherwise than as subordinate, or
 viceregent of god the father, as moses was in the wildernesse; and as
 the high priests were before the reign of saul; and as the kings were
 after it. for it is one of the prophecies concerning christ, that he
 should be like (in office) to moses; "i will raise them up prophet
 (saith the lord, deut. 18.18.) from amongst their brethren like unto
 thee, and will put my words into his mouth," and this similitude with
 moses, is also apparent in the actions of our saviour himself, whilest
 was conversant on earth. for as moses chose twelve princes of the
 tribes, to govern under him; so did our saviour choose twelve apostles,
 who shall sit on twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of israel;
 and as moses authorized seventy elders, to receive the spirit of god,
 and to prophecy to the people, that is, (as i have said before,) to
 speak unto them in the name of god; so our saviour also ordained seventy
 disciples, to preach his kingdome, and salvation to all nations. and as
 when complaint was made to moses, against those of the seventy that
 prophecyed in the camp of israel, justified them in it, as being
 subservient therein to his government; so also our saviour, when st.
 john complained to him of certain man that cast out devills in his
 name, justified him therein, saying, (luke 9.50.) "forbid him not, for
 hee that is not against us, is on our part."
 
again, our saviour resembled moses in the institution of sacraments,
 both of admission into the kingdome of god, and of commemoration of his
 deliverance of his elect from their miserable condition. as the children
 of israel had for sacrament of their reception into the kingdome of god,
 before the time of moses, the rite of circumcision, which rite having
 been omitted in the wildernesse, was again restored as soon as they came
 into the land of promise; so also the jews, before the coming of our
 saviour, had rite of baptizing, that is, of washing with water all
 those that being gentiles, embraced the god of israel. this rite st.
 john the baptist used in the reception of all them that gave their names
 to the christ, whom hee preached to bee already come into the world; and
 our saviour instituted the same for sacrament to be taken by all that
 beleeved in him. from what cause the rite of baptisme first proceeded,
 is not expressed formally in the scripture; but it may be probably
 thought to be an imitation of the law of moses, concerning leprousie;
 wherein the leprous man was commanded to be kept out of the campe of
 israel for certain time; after which time being judged by the priest
 to be clean, hee was admitted into the campe after solemne washing.
 and this may therefore bee type of the washing in baptisme; wherein
 such men as are cleansed of the leprousie of by faith, are received
 into the church with the solemnity of baptisme. there is another
 conjecture drawn from the ceremonies of the gentiles, in certain case
 that rarely happens; and that is, when man that was thought dead,
 chanced to recover, other men made scruple to converse with him, as they
 would doe to converse with ghost, unlesse hee were received again into
 the number of men, by washing, as children new born were washed from
 the uncleannesse of their nativity, which was kind of new birth. this
 ceremony of the greeks, in the time that judaea was under the dominion
 of alexander, and the greeks his successors, may probably enough have
 crept into the religion of the jews. but seeing it is not likely our
 saviour would countenance heathen rite, it is most likely it proceeded
 from the legall ceremony of washing after leprosie. and for the other
 sacraments, of eating the paschall lambe, it is manifestly imitated in
 the sacrament of the lords supper; in which the breaking of the bread,
 and the pouring out of the wine, do keep in memory our deliverance from
 the misery of sin, by christs passion, as the eating of the paschall
 lambe, kept in memory the deliverance of the jewes out of the bondage of
 egypt. seeing therefore the authority of moses was but subordinate, and
 hee but lieutenant to god; it followeth, that christ, whose authority,
 as man, was to bee like that of moses, was more but subordinate to
 the authority of his father. the same is more expressely signified, by
 that that hee teacheth us to pray, "our father, let thy kingdome come;"
 and, "for thine is the kingdome, the power and the glory;" and by that
 it is said, that "hee shall come in the glory of his father;" and by
 that which st. paul saith, (1 cor. 15.24.) "then commeth the end, when
 hee shall have delivered up the kingdome to god, even the father;" and
 by many other most expresse places.
 



one and the same god is the person represented by moses, and by christ
 
our saviour therefore, both in teaching, and reigning, representeth (as
 moses did) the person of god; which god from that time forward, but
 not before, is called the father; and being still one and the same
 substance, is one person as represented by moses, and another person as
 represented by his sonne the christ. for person being relative to a
 representer, it is consequent to plurality of representers, that there
 bee plurality of persons, though of one and the same substance.
 


chapter xlii. of power ecclesiasticall
 

for the understanding of power ecclesiasticall, what, and in whom it is,
 we are to distinguish the time from the ascension of our saviour, into
 two parts; one before the conversion of kings, and men endued with
 soveraign civill power; the other after their conversion. for it was
 long after the ascension, before any king, or civill soveraign embraced,
 and publiquely allowed the teaching of christian religion.
 



of the holy spirit that fel on the apostles
 
and for the time between, it is manifest, that the power
 ecclesiasticall, was in the apostles; and after them in such as were by
 them ordained to preach the gospell, and to convert men to christianity,
 and to direct them that were converted in the way of salvation; and
 after these the power was delivered again to others by these ordained,
 and this was done by imposition of hands upon such as were ordained; by
 which was signified the giving of the holy spirit, or spirit of god, to
 those whom they ordained ministers of god, to advance his kingdome.
 so that imposition of hands, was nothing else but the seal of their
 commission to preach christ, and teach his doctrine; and the giving of
 the holy ghost by that ceremony of imposition of hands, was an imitation
 of that which moses did. for moses used the same ceremony to his
 minister joshua, as wee read deuteronomy 34. ver. 9. "and joshua the son
 of nun was full of the spirit of wisdome; for moses had laid his
 hands upon him." our saviour therefore between his resurrection, and
 ascension, gave his spirit to the apostles; first, by "breathing on
 them, and saying," (john 20.22.) "receive yee the holy spirit;" and after
 his ascension (acts 2.2, 3.) by sending down upon them, "mighty wind,
 and cloven tongues of fire;" and not by imposition of hands; as neither
 did god lay his hands on moses; and his apostles afterward, transmitted
 the same spirit by imposition of hands, as moses did to joshua. so that
 it is manifest hereby, in whom the power ecclesiasticall continually
 remained, in those first times, where there was not any christian
 common-wealth; namely, in them that received the same from the apostles,
 by successive laying on of hands.
 



of the trinity
 
here wee have the person of god born now the third time. for as moses,
 and the high priests, were gods representative in the old testament;
 and our saviour himselfe as man, during his abode on earth: so the holy
 ghost, that is to say, the apostles, and their successors, in the office
 of preaching, and teaching, that had received the holy spirit, have
 represented him ever since. but person, (as i have shewn before,
 [chapt. 16.].) is that is represented, as often as hee is
 represented; and therefore god, who has been represented (that is,
 personated) thrice, may properly enough be said to be three persons;
 though neither the word person, nor trinity be ascribed to him in the
 bible. st. john indeed (1 epist. 5.7.) saith, "there be three that bear
 witnesse in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy spirit; and these
 three are one:" but this disagreeth not, but accordeth fitly with three
 persons in the proper signification of persons; which is, that which is
 represented by another. for so god the father, as represented by moses,
 is one person; and as represented by his sonne, another person, and as
 represented by the apostles, and by the doctors that taught by authority
 from them derived, is third person; and yet every person here, is
 the person of one and the same god. but man may here ask, what it was
 whereof these three bare witnesse. st. john therefore tells us (verse
 11.) that they bear witnesse, that "god hath given us eternall life
 in his son." again, if it should be asked, wherein that testimony
 appeareth, the answer is easie; for hath testified the same by the
 miracles wrought, first by moses; secondly, by his himself; and
 lastly by his apostles, that had received the holy spirit; all which
 in their times represented the person of god; and either prophecyed, or
 preached jesus christ. and as for the apostles, it was the character
 of the apostleship, in the twelve first and great apostles, to bear
 witnesse of his resurrection; as appeareth expressely (acts 1. ver.
 21,22.) where st peter, when new apostle was to be chosen in the place
 of judas iscariot, useth these words, "of these men which have companied
 with us all the time that the lord jesus went in and out amongst us,
 beginning at the baptisme of john, unto that same day that hee was
 taken up from us, must one bee ordained to be witnesse with us of his
 resurrection:" which words interpret the bearing of witnesse, mentioned
 by st. john. there is in the same place mentioned another trinity of
 witnesses in earth. for (ver. 8.) saith, "there are three that bear
 witnesse in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the bloud; and these
 three agree in one:" that is to say, the graces of gods spirit, and the
 two sacraments, baptisme, and the lords supper, which all agree in one
 testimony, to assure the consciences of beleevers, of eternall life; of
 which testimony saith (verse 10.) "he that beleeveth on the of
 man hath the witnesse in himselfe." in this trinity on earth the unity
 is not of the thing; for the spirit, the water, and the bloud, are not
 the same substance, though they give the same testimony: but in the
 trinity of heaven, the persons are the persons of one and the same god,
 though represented in three different times and occasions. to conclude,
 the doctrine of the trinity, as far as can be gathered directly from
 the scripture, is in substance this; that god who is alwaies one and the
 same, was the person represented by moses; the person represented by
 his incarnate; and the person represented by the apostles. as
 represented by the apostles, the holy spirit by which they spake, is
 god; as represented by his (that was god and man), the is that
 god; as represented by moses, and the high priests, the father, that is
 to say, the father of our lord jesus christ, is that god: from whence
 we may gather the reason why those names father, son, and holy spirit in
 the signification of the godhead, are never used in the old testament:
 for they are persons, that is, they have their names from representing;
 which could not be, till divers men had represented gods person in
 ruling, or in directing under him.
 
thus wee see how the power ecclesiasticall was left by our saviour
 to the apostles; and how they were (to the end they might the better
 exercise that power,) endued with the holy spirit, which is therefore
 called sometime in the new testament paracletus which signifieth an
 assister, or one called to for helpe, though it bee commonly translated
 comforter. let us now consider the power it selfe, what it was, and
 over whom.
 



the power ecclesiasticall is but the power to teach
 
cardinall bellarmine in his third generall controversie, hath handled a
 great many questions concerning the ecclesiasticall power of the pope
 of rome; and begins with this, whether it ought to be monarchicall,
 aristocraticall, or democraticall. all which sorts of power, are
 soveraign, and coercive. if now it should appear, that there is no
 coercive power left them by our saviour; but onely power to proclaim
 the kingdom of christ, and to perswade men to submit themselves
 thereunto; and by precepts and good counsell, to teach them that have
 submitted, what they are to do, that they may be received into the
 kingdom of god when it comes; and that the apostles, and other ministers
 of the gospel, are our schoolemasters, and not our commanders, and their
 precepts not laws, but wholesome counsells then were all that dispute in
 vain.
 



an argument thereof, the power of christ himself
 
i have shewn already (in the last chapter,) that the kingdome of christ
 is not of this world: therefore neither can his ministers (unlesse they
 be kings,) require obedience in his name. for if the supreme king, have
 not his regall power in this world; by what authority can obedience be
 required to his officers? as my father sent me, (so saith our saviour)
 i send you. but our saviour was sent to perswade the jews to return to,
 and to invite the gentiles, to receive the kingdome of his father, and
 not to reign in majesty, not, as his fathers lieutenant, till the day
 of judgment.
 



from the name of regeneration
 
the time between the ascension, and the generall resurrection, is
 called, not reigning, but regeneration; that is, preparation
 of men for the second and glorious coming of christ, at the day of
 judgment; as appeareth by the words of our saviour, mat. 19.28. "you
 that have followed in the regeneration, when the of man shall sit
 in the throne of his glory, you shall also sit upon twelve thrones;" and
 of st. paul (ephes. 6.15.) "having your feet shod with the preparation
 of the gospell of peace."
 



from the comparison of it, with fishing, leaven, seed
 
and is compared by our saviour, to fishing; that is, to winning men
 to obedience, not by coercion, and punishing; but by perswasion: and
 therefore said not to his apostles, hee would make them so many
 nimrods, hunters of men; but fishers of men. it is compared also to
 leaven; to sowing of seed, and to the multiplication of grain of
 mustard-seed; by all which compulsion is excluded; and consequently
 there can in that time be actual reigning. the work of christs
 ministers, is evangelization; that is, proclamation of christ, and
 preparation for his second comming; as the evangelization of john
 baptist, was preparation to his first coming.
 



from the nature of faith:
 
again, the office of christs ministers in this world, is to make men
 beleeve, and have faith in christ: but faith hath relation to, nor
 dependence at all upon compulsion, or commandement; but onely upon
 certainty, or probability of arguments drawn from reason, or from
 something men beleeve already. therefore the ministers of christ in this
 world, have power by that title, to punish any man for not beleeving,
 or for contradicting what they say; they have i say power by that
 title of christs ministers, to punish such: but if they have soveraign
 civill power, by politick institution, then they may indeed lawfully
 punish any contradiction to their laws whatsoever: and st. paul, of
 himselfe and other then preachers of the gospell saith in expresse
 words, (2 cor. 1.24.) "wee have dominion over your faith, but are
 helpers of your joy."
 



from the authority christ hath left to civill princes
 
another argument, that the ministers of christ in this present world
 have right of commanding, may be drawn from the lawfull authority
 which christ hath left to all princes, as well christians, as infidels.
 st. paul saith (col. 3.20.) "children obey your parents in all things;
 for this is well pleasing to the lord." and ver. 22. "servants obey in
 all things your masters according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as
 men-pleasers, but in singlenesse of heart, as fearing the lord;" this is
 spoken to them whose masters were infidells; and yet they are bidden
 to obey them in all things. and again, concerning obedience to princes.
 (rom. 13. the first 6. verses) exhorting to "be subject to the higher
 powers," saith, "that all power is ordained of god;" and "that we
 ought to be subject to them, not onely for" fear of incurring their
 "wrath, but also for conscience sake." and st. peter, (1 epist. chap. 2e
 ver. 13, 14, 15.) "submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the
 lords sake, whether it bee to the king, as supreme, or unto governours,
 as to them that be sent by him for the punishment of evill doers, and
 for the praise of them that doe well; for so is the will of god."
 and again st. paul (tit. 3.1.) "put men in mind to be subject to
 principalities, and powers, and to obey magistrates." these princes, and
 powers, whereof st. peter, and st. paul here speak, were all infidels;
 much more therefore we are to obey those christians, whom god hath
 ordained to have soveraign power over us. how then can wee be obliged
 to doe any thing contrary to the command of the king, or other soveraign
 representant of the common-wealth, whereof we are members, and by whom
 we look to be protected? it is therefore manifest, that christ hath not
 left to his ministers in this world, unlesse they be also endued with
 civill authority, any authority to command other men.
 



what christians may do to avoid persecution
 
but what (may some object) if king, or senate, or other soveraign
 person forbid us to beleeve in christ? to this i answer, that such
 forbidding is of effect, because beleef, and unbeleef never follow
 mens commands. faith is gift of god, which man can neither give, nor
 take away by promise of rewards, or menaces of torture. and if it be
 further asked, what if wee bee commanded by our lawfull prince, to say
 with our tongue, wee beleeve not; must we obey such command? profession
 with the tongue is but an externall thing, and more then any other
 gesture whereby we signifie our obedience; and wherein christian,
 holding firmely in his heart the faith of christ, hath the same liberty
 which the prophet elisha allowed to naaman the syrian. naaman was
 converted in his heart to the god of israel; for hee saith (2 kings
 5.17.) "thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor
 sacrifice unto other gods but unto the lord. in this thing the lord
 pardon thy servant, that when my master goeth into the house of rimmon
 to worship there, and leaneth on my hand, and i bow my selfe in the
 house of rimmon; when i bow my selfe in the house of rimmon, the lord
 pardon thy servant in this thing." this the prophet approved, and bid
 him "goe in peace." here naaman beleeved in his heart; but by bowing
 before the idol rimmon, denyed the true god in effect, as much as
 if had done it with his lips. but then what shall we answer to our
 saviours saying, "whosoever denyeth before men, i will deny him
 before my father which is in heaven?" this we may say, that whatsoever
 subject, as naaman was, is compelled to in obedience to his soveraign,
 and doth it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the laws of
 his country, that action is not his, but his soveraigns; nor is it he
 that in this case denyeth christ before men, but his governour, and the
 law of his countrey. if any man shall accuse this doctrine, as repugnant
 to true, and unfeigned christianity; i ask him, in case there should be
 subject in any christian common-wealth, that should be inwardly in his
 heart of the mahometan religion, whether if his soveraign command him to
 bee present at the divine service of the christian church, and that on
 pain of death, think that mamometan obliged in conscience to suffer
 death for that cause, rather than to obey that command of his lawful
 prince. if say, ought rather to suffer death, then authorizeth
 all private men, to disobey their princes, in maintenance of their
 religion, true, or false; if say, ought to bee obedient, then he
 alloweth to himself, that which hee denyeth to another, contrary to the
 words of our saviour, "whatsoever you would that men should doe unto
 you, that doe yee unto them;" and contrary to the law of nature, (which
 is the indubitable everlasting law of god) "do not to another, that
 which thou wouldest not should doe unto thee."
 



of martyrs
 
but what then shall we say of all those martyrs we read of in the
 history of the church, that they have needlessely cast away their lives?
 for answer hereunto, we are to distinguish the persons that have been
 for that cause put to death; whereof some have received calling to
 preach, and professe the kingdome of christ openly; others have had no
 such calling, nor more has been required of them than their owne faith.
 the former sort, if they have been put to death, for bearing witnesse to
 this point, that jesus christ is risen from the dead, were true martyrs;
 for martyr is, (to give the true definition of the word) witnesse of
 the resurrection of jesus the messiah; which none can be but those
 that conversed with him on earth, and saw him after was risen: for a
 witnesse must have seen what testifieth, or else his testimony is not
 good. and that none but such, can properly be called martyrs of christ,
 is manifest out of the words of st. peter, act. 1.21, 22. "wherefore of
 these men which have companyed with us all the time that the lord jesus
 went in and out amongst us, beginning from the baptisme of john unto
 that same day hee was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a
 martyr (that is witnesse) with us of his resurrection:" where we
 may observe, that which is to bee witnesse of the truth of
 the resurrection of christ, that is to say, of the truth of this
 fundamentall article of christian religion, that jesus was the christ,
 must be some disciple that conversed with him, and saw him before, and
 after his resurrection; and consequently must be one of his originall
 disciples: whereas they which were not so, can witnesse more, but
 that their antecessors said it, and are therefore but witnesses of
 other mens testimony; and are but second martyrs, or martyrs of christs
 witnesses.
 
he, that to maintain every doctrine which himself draweth out of
 the history of our saviours life, and of the acts, or epistles of the
 apostles; or which beleeveth upon the authority of private man,
 wil oppose the laws and authority of the civill state, is very far from
 being martyr of christ, or martyr of his martyrs. ’tis one article
 onely, which to die for, meriteth so honorable name; and that article
 is this, that jesus is the christ; that is to say, that hath redeemed
 us, and shall come again to give us salvation, and eternall life in his
 glorious kingdome. to die for every tenet that serveth the ambition,
 or profit of the clergy, is not required; nor is it the death of the
 witnesse, but the testimony it self that makes the martyr: for the word
 signifieth nothing else, but the man that beareth witnesse, whether he
 be put to death for his testimony, or not.
 
also that is not sent to preach this fundamentall article, but taketh
 it upon him of his private authority, though be witnesse, and
 consequently martyr, either primary of christ, or secondary of his
 apostles, disciples, or their successors; yet is not obliged to
 suffer death for that cause; because being not called thereto, tis
 not required at his hands; nor ought hee to complain, if loseth
 the reward expecteth from those that never set him on work. none
 therefore can be martyr, neither of the first, nor second degree, that
 have not warrant to preach christ come in the flesh; that is to say,
 none, but such as are sent to the conversion of infidels. for man
 is witnesse to him that already beleeveth, and therefore needs no
 witnesse; but to them that deny, or doubt, or have not heard it. christ
 sent his apostles, and his seventy disciples, with authority to preach;
 sent not all that beleeved: and sent them to unbeleevers; "i send
 you (saith he) as sheep amongst wolves;" not as sheep to other sheep.
 



argument from the points of their commission
 
lastly the points of their commission, as they are expressely set down
 in the gospel, contain none of them any authority over the congregation.
 



to preach
 
we have first (mat. 10.) that the twelve apostles were sent "to the
 lost sheep of the house of israel," and commanded to preach, "that the
 kingdome of god was at hand." now preaching in the originall, is that
 act, which crier, herald, or other officer useth to doe publiquely in
 proclaiming of king. but crier hath not right to command any man.
 and (luke 10.2.) the seventy disciples are sent out, "as labourers,
 not as lords of the harvest;" and are bidden (verse 9.) to say, "the
 kingdome of god is come nigh unto you;" and by kingdome here is meant,
 not the kingdome of grace, but the kingdome of glory; for they are
 bidden to denounce it (ver. 11.) to those cities which shall not receive
 them, as threatning, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for
 sodome, than for such city. and (mat. 20.28.) our saviour telleth his
 disciples, that sought priority of place, their office was to minister,
 even as the of man came, not to be ministred unto, but to minister.
 preachers therefore have not magisteriall, but ministeriall power: "bee
 not called masters, (saith our saviour, mat. 23.10) for one is your
 master, even christ."
 



and teach
 
another point of their commission, is, to teach all nations; as it is in
 mat. 28.19. or as in st. mark 16.15 "goe into all the world, and preach
 the gospel to every creature." teaching therefore, and preaching is the
 same thing. for they that proclaim the comming of king, must withall
 make known by what right commeth, if they mean men shall submit
 themselves unto him: as st. paul did to the jews of thessalonica,
 when "three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures,
 opening, and alledging that christ must needs have suffered, and risen
 again from the dead, and that this jesus is christ." but to teach out
 of the old testament that jesus was christ, (that is to say, king,)
 and risen from the dead, is not to say, that men are bound after they
 beleeve it, to obey those that tell them so, against the laws, and
 commands of their soveraigns; but that they shall doe wisely, to expect
 the coming of christ hereafter, in patience, and faith, with obedience
 to their present magistrates.
 



to baptize;
 
another point of their commission, is to baptize, "in the name of
 the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost." what is baptisme?
 dipping into water. but what is it to dip man into the water in the
 name of any thing? the meaning of these words of baptisme is this. he
 that is baptized, is dipped or washed, as sign of becomming new man,
 and loyall subject to that god, whose person was represented in old
 time by moses, and the high priests, when reigned over the jews; and
 to jesus christ, his sonne, god, and man, that hath redeemed us, and
 shall in his humane nature represent his fathers person in his eternall
 kingdome after the resurrection; and to acknowledge the doctrine of the
 apostles, who assisted by the spirit of the father, and of the son, were
 left for guides to bring us into that kingdome, to be the onely, and
 assured way thereunto. this, being our promise in baptisme; and the
 authority of earthly soveraigns being not to be put down till the day of
 judgment; (for that is expressely affirmed by s. paul 1 cor. 15. 22, 23,
 24. where saith, "as in adam all die, so in christ all shall be
 made alive. but every man in his owne order, christ the first fruits,
 afterward they that are christs, at his comming; then commeth the end,
 when shall have delivered up the kingdome of god, even the father,
 when shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power")
 it is manifest, that we do not in baptisme constitute over us another
 authority, by which our externall actions are to be governed in this
 life; but promise to take the doctrine of the apostles for our direction
 in the way to life eternall.
 



and to forgive, and retain sinnes
 
the power of remission, and retention of sinnes, called also the power
 of loosing, and binding, and sometimes the keyes of the kingdome of
 heaven, is consequence of the authority to baptize, or refuse to
 baptize. for baptisme is the sacrament of allegeance, of them that are
 to be received into the kingdome of god; that is to say, into eternall
 life; that is to say, to remission of sin: for as eternall life was lost
 by the committing, so it is recovered by the remitting of mens sins. the
 end of baptisme is remission of sins: and therefore st. peter, when they
 that were converted by his sermon on the day of pentecost, asked what
 they were to doe, advised them to "repent, and be baptized in the name
 of jesus, for the remission of sins." and therefore seeing to baptize
 is to declare the reception of men into gods kingdome; and to refuse to
 baptize is to declare their exclusion; it followeth, that the power
 to declare them cast out, or retained in it, was given to the same
 apostles, and their substitutes, and successors. and therefore after our
 saviour had breathed upon them, saying, (john 20.22.) "receive the holy
 ghost," hee addeth in the next verse, "whose soever sins ye remit,
 they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
 retained." by which words, is not granted an authority to forgive, or
 retain sins, simply and absolutely, as god forgiveth or retaineth them,
 who knoweth the heart of man, and truth of his penitence and conversion;
 but conditionally, to the penitent: and this forgivenesse, or
 absolution, in case the absolved have but feigned repentance, is
 thereby without other act, or sentence of the absolvent, made void,
 and hath effect at all to salvation, but on the contrary, to the
 aggravation of his sin. therefore the apostles, and their successors,
 are to follow but the outward marks of repentance; which appearing, they
 have authority to deny absolution; and if they appeare not, they have
 authority to absolve. the same also is to be observed in baptisme:
 for to converted jew, or gentile, the apostles had not the power to
 deny baptisme; nor to grant it to the un-penitent. but seeing man is
 able to discern the truth of another mans repentance, further than by
 externall marks, taken from his words, and actions, which are subject to
 hypocrisie; another question will arise, who it is that is constituted
 judge of those marks. and this question is decided by our saviour
 himself; (mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.) "if thy brother (saith he) shall
 trespasse against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee, and him
 alone; if shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. but if he
 will not hear thee, then take with thee one, or two more. and if he
 shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church, let him be unto
 thee as an heathen man, and publican." by which it is manifest, that
 the judgment concerning the truth of repentance, belonged not to any one
 man, but to the church, that is, to the assembly of the faithfull, or
 to them that have authority to bee their representant. but besides the
 judgment, there is necessary also the pronouncing of sentence: and
 this belonged alwaies to the apostle, or some pastor of the church,
 as prolocutor; and of this our saviour speaketh in the 18 verse,
 "whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
 whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven." and
 comformable hereunto was the practise of st. paul (1 cor. 5.3, 4, & 5.)
 where saith, "for i verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit,
 have determined already, as though i were present, concerning him that
 hath so done this deed; in the name of our lord jesus christ when ye
 are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our lord jesus
 christ, to deliver such one to satan;" that is to say, to cast him
 out of the church, as man whose sins are not forgiven. paul here
 pronounceth the sentence; but the assembly was first to hear the cause,
 (for st. paul was absent;) and by consequence to condemn him. but in
 the same chapter (ver. 11, 12.) the judgment in such case is more
 expressely attributed to the assembly: "but now i have written unto
 you, not to keep company, if any man that is called brother be a
 fornicator, &c. with such one not to eat. for what have i to do to
 judg them that are without? do not ye judg them that are within?"
 the sentence therefore by which man was put out of the church, was
 pronounced by the apostle, or pastor; but the judgment concerning the
 merit of the cause, was in the church; that is to say, (as the times
 were before the conversion of kings, and men that had soveraign
 authority in the common-wealth,) the assembly of the christians dwelling
 in the same city; as in corinth, in the assembly of the christians of
 corinth.
 



of excommunication
 
this part of the power of the keyes, by which men were thrust out from
 the kingdome of god, is that which is called excommunication; and to
 excommunicate, is in the originall, aposunagogon poiein, to cast out of
 the synagogue; that is, out of the place of divine service; word drawn
 from the custom of the jews, to cast out of their synagogues, such as
 they thought in manners, or doctrine, contagious, as lepers were by the
 law of moses separated from the congregation of israel, till such time
 as they should be by the priest pronounced clean.
 



the use of excommunication without civill power.
 
the use and effect of excommunication, whilest it was not yet
 strengthened with the civill power, was more, than that they, who
 were not excommunicate, were to avoid the company of them that were.
 it was not enough to repute them as heathen, that never had been
 christians; for with such they might eate, and drink; which with
 excommunicate persons they might not do; as appeareth by the words of
 st. paul, (1 cor. 5. ver. 9, 10, &c.) where telleth them, had
 formerly forbidden them to "company with fornicators;" but (because that
 could not bee without going out of the world,) restraineth it to such
 fornicators, and otherwise vicious persons, as were of the brethren;
 "with such one" (he saith) they ought not to keep company, "no, not to
 eat." and this is more than our saviour saith (mat. 18.17.) "let
 him be to thee as heathen, and as publican." for publicans (which
 signifieth farmers, and receivers of the revenue of the common-wealth)
 were so hated, and detested by the jews that were to pay for it, as
 that publican and sinner were taken amongst them for the same thing:
 insomuch, as when our saviour accepted the invitation of zacchaeus a
 publican; though it were to convert him, yet it was objected to him as
 crime. and therefore, when our saviour, to heathen, added publican, he
 did forbid them to eat with man excommunicate.
 
as for keeping them out of their synagogues, or places of assembly, they
 had power to do it, but that of the owner of the place, whether he
 were christian, or heathen. and because all places are by right, in the
 dominion of the common-wealth; as well hee that was excommunicated, as
 hee that never was baptized, might enter into them by commission from
 the civill magistrate; as paul before his conversion entred into their
 synagogues at damascus, (acts 9.2.) to apprehend christians, men and
 women, and to carry them bound to jerusalem, by commission from the high
 priest.
 



of effect upon an apostate
 
by which it appears, that upon christian, that should become an
 apostate, in place where the civill power did persecute, or not assist
 the church, the effect of excommunication had nothing in it, neither of
 dammage in this world, nor of terrour: not of terrour, because of their
 unbeleef; nor of dammage, because they returned thereby into the favour
 of the world; and in the world to come, were to be in worse estate,
 then they which never had beleeved. the dammage redounded rather to the
 church, by provocation of them they cast out, to freer execution of
 their malice.
 



but upon the faithfull only
 
excommunication therefore had its effect onely upon those, that beleeved
 that jesus christ was to come again in glory, to reign over, and to
 judge both the quick, and the dead, and should therefore refuse entrance
 into his kingdom, to those whose sins were retained; that is, to those
 that were excommunicated by the church. and thence it is that st. paul
 calleth excommunication, delivery of the excommunicate person to
 satan. for without the kingdom of christ, all other kingdomes after
 judgment, are comprehended in the kingdome of satan. this is it that the
 faithfull stood in fear of, as long as they stood excommunicate, that is
 to say, in an estate wherein their sins were not forgiven. whereby wee
 may understand, that excommunication in the time that christian religion
 was not authorized by the civill power, was used onely for correction
 of manners, not of errours in opinion: for it is punishment, whereof
 none could be sensible but such as beleeved, and expected the coming
 again of our saviour to judge the world; and they who so beleeved,
 needed other opinion, but onely uprightnesse of life, to be saved.
 



for what fault lyeth excommunication
 
there lyeth excommunication for injustice; as (mat. 18.) if thy brother
 offend thee, tell it him privately; then with witnesses; lastly, tell
 the church; and then if obey not, "let him be to thee as an heathen
 man, and publican." and there lyeth excommunication for scandalous
 life, as (1 cor. 5. 11.) "if any man that is called brother, be
 fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or drunkard, or an
 extortioner, with such one yee are not to eat." but to excommunicate a
 man that held this foundation, that jesus was the christ, for difference
 of opinion in other points, by which that foundation was not destroyed,
 there appeareth authority in the scripture, nor example in the
 apostles. there is indeed in st. paul (titus 3.10.) text that seemeth
 to be to the contrary. "a man that is an haeretique, after the first
 and second admonition, reject." for an haeretique, is he, that being a
 member of the church, teacheth neverthelesse some private opinion, which
 the church has forbidden: and such one, s. paul adviseth titus, after
 the first, and second admonition, to reject. but to reject (in this
 place) is not to excommunicate the man; but to give over admonishing
 him, to let him alone, to set by disputing with him, as one that is to
 be convinced onely by himselfe. the same apostle saith (2 tim. 2.23.)
 "foolish and unlearned questions avoid;" the word avoid in this place,
 and reject in the former, is the same in the originall, paraitou: but
 foolish questions may bee set by without excommunication. and again,
 (tit. 3.93) "avoid foolish questions," where the originall, periistaso,
 (set them by) is equivalent to the former word reject. there is no
 other place that can so much as colourably be drawn, to countenance
 the casting out of the church faithfull men, such as beleeved the
 foundation, onely for singular superstructure of their own, proceeding
 perhaps from good & pious conscience. but on the contrary, all such
 places as command avoiding such disputes, are written for lesson to
 pastors, (such as timothy and titus were) not to make new articles of
 faith, by determining every small controversie, which oblige men to a
 needlesse burthen of conscience, or provoke them to break the union of
 the church. which lesson the apostles themselves observed well. s. peter
 and s. paul, though their controversie were great, (as we may read
 in gal. 2.11.) yet they did not cast one another out of the church.
 neverthelesse, during the apostles time, there were other pastors that
 observed it not; as diotrephes (3 john 9. &c.) who cast out of the
 church, such as s. john himself thought fit to be received into it, out
 of pride took in praeeminence; so early it was, that vainglory, and
 ambition had found entrance into the church of christ.
 



of persons liable to excommunication
 
that man be liable to excommunication, there be many conditions
 requisite; as first, that be member of some commonalty, that is to
 say, of some lawfull assembly, that is to say, of some christian
 church, that hath power to judge of the cause for which hee is to
 bee excommunicated. for where there is community, there can bee no
 excommunication; nor where there is power to judge, can there bee any
 power to give sentence. from hence it followeth, that one church cannot
 be excommunicated by another: for either they have equall power
 to excommunicate each other, in which case excommunication is not
 discipline, nor an act of authority, but schisme, and dissolution of
 charity; or one is so subordinate to the other, as that they both
 have but one voice, and then they be but one church; and the part
 excommunicated, is more church, but dissolute number of
 individuall persons.
 
and because the sentence of excommunication, importeth an advice, not to
 keep company, nor so much as to eat with him that is excommunicate, if
 soveraign prince, or assembly bee excommunicate, the sentence is of no
 effect. for all subjects are bound to be in the company and presence of
 their own soveraign (when requireth it) by the law of nature; nor
 can they lawfully either expell him from any place of his own dominion,
 whether profane or holy; nor go out of his dominion, without his leave;
 much lesse (if call them to that honour,) refuse to eat with him. and
 as to other princes and states, because they are not parts of one and
 the same congregation, they need not any other sentence to keep
 them from keeping company with the state excommunicate: for the
 very institution, as it uniteth many men into one community; so it
 dissociateth one community from another: so that excommunication is
 not needfull for keeping kings and states asunder; nor has any further
 effect then is in the nature of policy it selfe; unlesse it be to
 instigate princes to warre upon one another.
 
nor is the excommunication of christian subject, that obeyeth the laws
 of his own soveraign, whether christian, or heathen, of any effect. for
 if beleeve that "jesus is the christ, hath the spirit of god" (1
 joh. 4.1.) "and god dwelleth in him, and in god," (1 joh. 4.15.) but
 hee that hath the spirit of god; hee that dwelleth in god; hee in
 whom god dwelleth, can receive harm by the excommunication of men.
 therefore, that beleeveth jesus to be the christ, is free from all
 the dangers threatned to persons excommunicate. that beleeveth it
 not, is christian. therefore true and unfeigned christian is not
 liable to excommunication; nor also that is professed christian,
 till his hypocrisy appear in his manners, that is, till his behaviour
 bee contrary to the law of his soveraign, which is the rule of manners,
 and which christ and his apostles have commanded us to be subject to.
 for the church cannot judge of manners but by externall actions, which
 actions can never bee unlawfull, but when they are against the law of
 the common-wealth.
 
if mans father, or mother, or master bee excommunicate, yet are not
 the children forbidden to keep them company, nor to eat with them; for
 that were (for the most part) to oblige them not to eat at all, for want
 of means to get food; and to authorise them to disobey their parents,
 and masters, contrary to the precept of the apostles.
 
in summe, the power of excommunication cannot be extended further than
 to the end for which the apostles and pastors of the church have
 their commission from our saviour; which is not to rule by command and
 coaction, but by teaching and direction of men in the way of salvation
 in the world to come. and as master in any science, may abandon his
 scholar, when hee obstinately neglecteth the practise of his rules; but
 not accuse him of injustice, because was never bound to obey him:
 so teacher of christian doctrine may abandon his disciples that
 obstinately continue in an unchristian life; but cannot say, they doe
 him wrong, because they are not obliged to obey him: for to teacher
 that shall so complain, may be applyed the answer of god to samuel in
 the like place, (1 sam. 8.) "they have not rejected thee, but mee."
 excommunication therefore when it wanteth the assistance of the civill
 power, as it doth, when christian state, or prince is excommunicate
 by forain authority, is without effect; and consequently ought to
 be without terrour. the name of fulmen excommunicationis (that is, the
 thunderbolt of excommunication) proceeded from an imagination of the
 bishop of rome, which first used it, that was king of kings, as the
 heathen made jupiter king of the gods; and assigned him in their poems,
 and pictures, thunderbolt, wherewith to subdue, and punish the giants,
 that should dare to deny his power: which imagination was grounded on
 two errours; one, that the kingdome of christ is of this world, contrary
 to our saviours owne words, "my kingdome is not of this world;" the
 other, that hee is christs vicar, not onely over his owne subjects,
 but over all the christians of the world; whereof there is ground in
 scripture, and the contrary shall bee proved in its due place.
 



of the interpreter of the scriptures before civill soveraigns became
 christians
 
st. paul coming to thessalonica, where was synagogue of the jews,
 (acts 17.2, 3.) "as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath
 dayes reasoned with them out of the scriptures, opening and alledging,
 that christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the dead; and
 that this jesus whom preached was the christ." the scriptures here
 mentioned were the scriptures of the jews, that is, the old testament.
 the men, to whom was to prove that jesus was the christ, and risen
 again from the dead, were also jews, and did beleeve already, that
 they were the word of god. hereupon (as it is verse 4.) some of them
 beleeved, and (as it is in the 5. ver.) some beleeved not. what was
 the reason, when they all beleeved the scripture, that they did not
 all beleeve alike; but that some approved, others disapproved the
 interpretation of st. paul that cited them; and every one interpreted
 them to himself? it was this; s. paul came to them without any legall
 commission, and in the manner of one that would not command, but
 perswade; which must needs do, either by miracles, as moses did
 to the israelites in egypt, that they might see his authority in gods
 works; or by reasoning from the already received scripture, that
 they might see the truth of his doctrine in gods word. but whosoever
 perswadeth by reasoning from principles written, maketh him to whom hee
 speaketh judge, both of the meaning of those principles, and also of the
 force of his inferences upon them. if these jews of thessalonica were
 not, who else was the judge of what s. paul alledged out of scripture?
 if s. paul, what needed to quote any places to prove his doctrine? it
 had been enough to have said, i find it so in scripture, that is to
 say, in your laws, of which i am interpreter, as sent by christ. the
 interpreter therefore of the scripture, to whose interpretation the
 jews of thessalonica were bound to stand, could be none: every one might
 beleeve, or not beleeve, according as the allegations seemed to himselfe
 to be agreeable, or not agreeable to the meaning of the places alledged.
 and generally in all cases of the world, hee that pretendeth any proofe,
 maketh judge of his proofe him to whom addresseth his speech. and as
 to the case of the jews in particular, they were bound by expresse words
 (deut. 17.) to receive the determination of all hard questions, from
 the priests and judges of israel for the time being. but this is to bee
 understood of the jews that were yet unconverted.
 
for the conversion of the gentiles, there was use of alledging the
 scriptures, which they beleeved not. the apostles therefore laboured by
 reason to confute their idolatry; and that done, to perswade them to the
 faith of christ, by their testimony of his life, and resurrection. so
 that there could not yet bee any controversie concerning the authority
 to interpret scripture; seeing man was obliged during his infidelity,
 to follow any mans interpretation of any scripture, except his
 soveraigns interpretation of the laws of his countrey.
 
let us now consider the conversion it self, and see what there was
 therein, that could be cause of such an obligation. men were converted
 to other thing then to the beleef of that which the apostles
 preached: and the apostles preached nothing, but that jesus was the
 christ, that is to say, the king that was to save them, and reign over
 them eternally in the world to come; and consequently that hee was not
 dead, but risen again from the dead, and gone up into heaven, and should
 come again one day to judg the world, (which also should rise again to
 be judged,) and reward every man according to his works. none of them
 preached that himselfe, or any other apostle was such an interpreter
 of the scripture, as all that became christians, ought to take their
 interpretation for law. for to interpret the laws, is part of the
 administration of present kingdome; which the apostles had not. they
 prayed then, and all other pastors ever since, "let thy kingdome come;"
 and exhorted their converts to obey their then ethnique princes. the new
 testament was not yet published in one body. every of the evangelists
 was interpreter of his own gospel; and every apostle of his own epistle;
 and of the old testament, our saviour himselfe saith to the jews (john
 5. 39.) "search the scriptures; for in them yee thinke to have eternall
 life, and they are they that testifie of me." if hee had not meant they
 should interpret them, hee would not have bidden them take thence the
 proof of his being the christ; would either have interpreted them
 himselfe, or referred them to the interpretation of the priests.
 
when difficulty arose, the apostles and elders of the church assembled
 themselves together, and determined what should bee preached, and
 taught, and how they should interpret the scriptures to the people;
 but took not from the people the liberty to read, and interpret them to
 themselves. the apostles sent divers letters to the churches, and other
 writings for their instruction; which had been in vain, if they had not
 allowed them to interpret, that is, to consider the meaning of them.
 and as it was in the apostles time, it must be till such time as
 there should be pastors, that could authorise an interpreter, whose
 interpretation should generally be stood to: but that could not be till
 kings were pastors, or pastors kings.
 



of the power to make scripture law
 
there be two senses, wherein writing may be said to be canonicall;
 for canon, signifieth rule; and rule is precept, by which man
 is guided, and directed in any action whatsoever. such precepts, though
 given by teacher to his disciple, or counsellor to his friend,
 without power to compell him to observe them, are neverthelesse canons;
 because they are rules: but when they are given by one, whom that
 receiveth them is bound to obey, then are those canons, not onely rules,
 but laws: the question therefore here, is of the power to make the
 scriptures (which are the rules of christian faith) laws.
 



of the ten commandements
 
that part of the scripture, which was first law, was the ten
 commandements, written in two tables of stone, and delivered by god
 himselfe to moses; and by moses made known to the people. before that
 time there was written law of god, who as yet having not chosen any
 people to bee his peculiar kingdome, had given law to men, but the
 law of nature, that is to say, the precepts of naturall reason, written
 in every mans own heart. of these two tables, the first containeth the
 law of soveraignty; 1. that they should not obey, nor honour the gods of
 other nations, in these words, "non habebis deos alienos coram me," that
 is, "thou shalt not have for gods, the gods that other nations worship;
 but onely me:" whereby they were forbidden to obey, or honor, as their
 king and governour, any other god, than him that spake unto them then by
 moses, and afterwards by the high priest. 2. that they "should not make
 any image to represent him;" that is to say, they were not to choose to
 themselves, neither in heaven, nor in earth, any representative of their
 own fancying, but obey moses and aaron, whom had appointed to that
 office. 3. that "they should not take the name of god in vain;" that is,
 they should not speak rashly of their king, nor dispute his right,
 nor the commissions of moses and aaron, his lieutenants. 4. that "they
 should every seventh day abstain from their ordinary labour," and employ
 that time in doing him publique honor. the second table containeth the
 duty of one man towards another, as "to honor parents; not to kill;
 not to commit adultery; not to steale; not to corrupt judgment by false
 witnesse;" and finally, "not so much as to designe in their heart the
 doing of any injury one to another." the question now is, who it was
 that gave to these written tables the obligatory force of lawes. there
 is doubt but that they were made laws by god himselfe: but because a
 law obliges not, nor is law to any, but to them that acknowledge it to
 be the act of the soveraign, how could the people of israel that were
 forbidden to approach the mountain to hear what god said to moses, be
 obliged to obedience to all those laws which moses propounded to them?
 some of them were indeed the laws of nature, as all the second table;
 and therefore to be acknowledged for gods laws; not to the israelites
 alone, but to all people: but of those that were peculiar to the
 israelites, as those of the first table, the question remains; saving
 that they had obliged themselves, presently after the propounding of
 them, to obey moses, in these words (exod. 20.19.) "speak them thou to
 us, and we will hear thee; but let not god speak to us, lest we die." it
 was therefore onely moses then, and after him the high priest, whom (by
 moses) god declared should administer this his peculiar kingdome, that
 had on earth, the power to make this short scripture of the decalogue
 to bee law in the common-wealth of israel. but moses, and aaron, and the
 succeeding high priests were the civill soveraigns. therefore hitherto,
 the canonizing, or making of the scripture law, belonged to the civill
 soveraigne.
 



of the judicial, and leviticall law
 
the judiciall law, that is to say, the laws that god prescribed to the
 magistrates of israel, for the rule of their administration of justice,
 and of the sentences, or judgments they should pronounce, in pleas
 between man and man; and the leviticall law, that is to say, the rule
 that god prescribed touching the rites and ceremonies of the priests and
 levites, were all delivered to them by moses onely; and therefore also
 became lawes, by vertue of the same promise of obedience to moses.
 whether these laws were then written, or not written, but dictated to
 the people by moses (after his forty dayes being with god in the mount)
 by word of mouth, is not expressed in the text; but they were all
 positive laws, and equivalent to holy scripture, and made canonicall by
 moses the civill soveraign.
 



the second law
 
after the israelites were come into the plains of moab over against
 jericho, and ready to enter into the land of promise, moses to the
 former laws added divers others; which therefore are called deuteronomy:
 that is, second laws. and are (as it is written, deut. 29.1.) "the words
 of covenant which the lord commanded moses to make with the children
 of israel, besides the covenant which made with them in horeb." for
 having explained those former laws, in the beginning of the book of
 deuteronomy, addeth others, that begin at the 12. cha. and continue
 to the end of the 26. of the same book. this law (deut. 27.1.) they were
 commanded to write upon great stones playstered over, at their passing
 over jordan: this law also was written by moses himself in book; and
 delivered into the hands of the "priests, and to the elders of israel,"
 (deut. 31.9.) and commanded (ve. 26.) "to be put in the side of the
 arke;" for in the ark it selfe was nothing but the ten commandements.
 this was the law, which moses (deuteronomy 17.18.) commanded the kings
 of israel should keep copie of: and this is the law, which having been
 long time lost, was found again in the temple in the time of josiah,
 and by his authority received for the law of god. but both moses at the
 writing, and josiah at the recovery thereof, had both of them the
 civill soveraignty. hitherto therefore the power of making scripture
 canonicall, was in the civill soveraign.
 
besides this book of the law, there was other book, from the time of
 moses, till after the captivity, received amongst the jews for the
 law of god. for the prophets (except few) lived in the time of the
 captivity it selfe; and the rest lived but little before it; and were
 so far from having their prophecies generally received for laws, as that
 their persons were persecuted, partly by false prophets, and partly by
 the kings which were seduced by them. and this book it self, which was
 confirmed by josiah for the law of god, and with it all the history of
 the works of god, was lost in the captivity, and sack of the city of
 jerusalem, as appears by that of 2 esdras 14.21. "thy law is burnt;
 therefor man knoweth the things that are done of thee, of the works
 that shall begin." and before the captivity, between the time when the
 law was lost, (which is not mentioned in the scripture, but may probably
 be thought to be the time of rehoboam, when shishak king of egypt took
 the spoils of the temple,(1 kings 14.26.)) and the time of josiah,
 when it was found againe, they had written word of god, but ruled
 according to their own discretion, or by the direction of such, as each
 of them esteemed prophets.
 



the old testament, when made canonicall
 
from whence we may inferre, that the scriptures of the old testament,
 which we have at this day, were not canonicall, nor law unto the jews,
 till the renovation of their covenant with god at their return from the
 captivity, and restauration of their common-wealth under esdras. but
 from that time forward they were accounted the law of the jews, and for
 such translated into greek by seventy elders of judaea, and put into the
 library of ptolemy at alexandria, and approved for the word of god. now
 seeing esdras was the high priest, and the high priest was their civill
 soveraigne, it is manifest, that the scriptures were never made laws,
 but by the soveraign civill power.
 
the new testament began to be canonicall under christian soveraigns by
 the writings of the fathers that lived in the time before that christian
 religion was received, and authorised by constantine the emperour, we
 may find, that the books wee now have of the new testament, were held by
 the christians of that time (except few, in respect of whose paucity
 the rest were called the catholique church, and others haeretiques) for
 the dictates of the holy ghost; and consequently for the canon, or rule
 of faith: such was the reverence and opinion they had of their teachers;
 as generally the reverence that the disciples bear to their first
 masters, in all manner of doctrine they receive from them, is not small.
 therefore there is doubt, but when s. paul wrote to the churches he
 had converted; or any other apostle, or disciple of christ, to those
 which had then embraced christ, they received those their writings for
 the true christian doctrine. but in that time, when not the power and
 authority of the teacher, but the faith of the hearer caused them
 to receive it, it was not the apostles that made their own writings
 canonicall, but every convert made them so to himself.
 
but the question here, is not what any christian made law, or canon
 to himself, (which might again reject, by the same right received
 it;) but what was so made canon to them, as without injustice they
 could not doe any thing contrary thereunto. that the new testament
 should in this sense be canonicall, that is to say, law in any place
 where the law of the common-wealth had not made it so, is contrary to
 the nature of law. for law, (as hath been already shewn) is the
 commandement of that man, or assembly, to whom we have given soveraign
 authority, to make such rules for the direction of our actions, as hee
 shall think fit; and to punish us, when we doe any thing contrary to the
 same. when therefore any other man shall offer unto us any other rules,
 which the soveraign ruler hath not prescribed, they are but counsell,
 and advice; which, whether good, or bad, hee that is counselled, may
 without injustice refuse to observe, and when contrary to the laws
 already established, without injustice cannot observe, how good soever
 conceiveth it to be. i say, cannot in this case observe the same
 in his actions, nor in his discourse with other men; though may
 without blame beleeve the his private teachers, and wish had the
 liberty to practise their advice; and that it were publiquely received
 for law. for internall faith is in its own nature invisible, and
 consequently exempted from all humane jurisdiction; whereas the words,
 and actions that proceed from it, as breaches of our civil obedience,
 are injustice both before god and man. seeing then our saviour hath
 denyed his kingdome to be in this world, seeing hath said, came
 not to judge, but to save the world, hath not subjected us to other
 laws than those of the common-wealth; that is, the jews to the law
 of moses, (which saith (mat. 5.) came not to destroy, but to
 fulfill,) and other nations to the laws of their severall soveraigns,
 and all men to the laws of nature; the observing whereof, both he
 himselfe, and his apostles have in their teaching recommended to us, as
 necessary condition of being admitted by him in the last day into his
 eternall kingdome, wherein shall be protection, and life everlasting.
 seeing then our saviour, and his apostles, left not new laws to oblige
 us in this world, but new doctrine to prepare us for the next; the books
 of the new testament, which containe that doctrine, untill obedience to
 them was commanded, by them that god hath given power to on earth to be
 legislators, were not obligatory canons, that is, laws, but onely good,
 and safe advice, for the direction of sinners in the way to salvation,
 which every man might take, and refuse at his owne perill, without
 injustice.
 
again, our saviour christs commission to his apostles, and disciples,
 was to proclaim his kingdome (not present, but) to come; and to teach
 all nations; and to baptize them that should beleeve; and to enter into
 the houses of them that should receive them; and where they were not
 received, to shake off the dust of their feet against them; but not
 to call for fire from heaven to destroy them, nor to compell them to
 obedience by the sword. in all which there is nothing of power, but of
 perswasion. sent them out as sheep unto wolves, not as kings to their
 subjects. they had not in commission to make laws; but to obey, and
 teach obedience to laws made; and consequently they could not make their
 writings obligatory canons, without the help of the soveraign civill
 power. and therefore the scripture of the new testament is there only
 law, where the lawfull civill power hath made it so. and there also the
 king, or soveraign, maketh it law to himself; by which subjecteth
 himselfe, not to the doctor, or apostle, that converted him, but to god
 himself, and his jesus christ, as immediately as did the apostles
 themselves.
 



of the power of councells to make the scripture law
 
that which may seem to give the new testament, in respect of those that
 have embraced christian doctrine, the force of laws, in the times, and
 places of persecution, is the decrees they made amongst themselves in
 their synods. for we read (acts 15.28.) the stile of the councell of the
 apostles, the elders, and the whole church, in this manner, "it seemed
 good to the holy ghost, and to us, to lay upon you greater burthen
 than these necessary things, &c." which is stile that signifieth a
 power to lay burthen on them that had received their doctrine. now
 "to lay burthen on another," seemeth the same that "to oblige;" and
 therefore the acts of that councell were laws to the then christians.
 neverthelesse, they were more laws than are these other precepts,
 "repent, be baptized; keep the commandements; beleeve the gospel; come
 unto me; sell all that thou hast; give it to the poor;" and "follow
 me;" which are not commands, but invitations, and callings of men to
 christianity, like that of esay 55.1. "ho, every man that thirsteth,
 come yee to the waters, come, and buy wine and milke without money."
 for first, the apostles power was other than that of our saviour,
 to invite men to embrace the kingdome of god; which they themselves
 acknowledged for kingdome (not present, but) to come; and they that
 have kingdome, can make laws. and secondly, if their acts of
 councell, were laws, they could not without be disobeyed. but we
 read not any where, that they who received not the doctrine of christ,
 did therein sin; but that they died in their sins; that is, that their
 sins against the laws to which they owed obedience, were not pardoned.
 and those laws were the laws of nature, and the civill laws of the
 state, whereto every christian man had by pact submitted himself. and
 therefore by the burthen, which the apostles might lay on such as they
 had converted, are not to be understood laws, but conditions, proposed
 to those that sought salvation; which they might accept, or refuse at
 their own perill, without new sin, though not without the hazard of
 being condemned, and excluded out of the kingdome of god for their sins
 past. and therefore of infidels, s. john saith not, the wrath of god
 shall "come" upon them, but "the wrath of god remaineth upon them;"
 and not that they shall be condemned; but that "they are condemned
 already."(john 3.36, 3.18) nor can it be conceived, that the benefit
 of faith, "is remission of sins" unlesse we conceive withall, that the
 dammage of infidelity, is "the retention of the same sins."
 
but to what end is it (may some man aske), that the apostles, and other
 pastors of the church, after their time, should meet together, to agree
 upon what doctrine should be taught, both for faith and manners, if no
 man were obliged to observe their decrees? to this may be answered, that
 the apostles, and elders of that councell, were obliged even by their
 entrance into it, to teach the doctrine therein concluded, and decreed
 to be taught, so far forth, as precedent law, to which they were
 obliged to yeeld obedience, was to the contrary; but not that all other
 christians should be obliged to observe, what they taught. for though
 they might deliberate what each of them should teach; yet they could
 not deliberate what others should do, unless their assembly had had
 legislative power; which none could have but civill soveraigns. for
 though god be the soveraign of all the world, we are not bound to take
 for his law, whatsoever is propounded by every man in his name; nor any
 thing contrary to the civill law, which god hath expressely commanded us
 to obey.
 
seeing then the acts of councell of the apostles, were then laws,
 but councells; much lesse are laws the acts of any other doctors,
 or councells since, if assembled without the authority of the civill
 soveraign. and consequently, the books of the new testament, though most
 perfect rules of christian doctrine, could not be made laws by any other
 authority then that of kings, or soveraign assemblies.
 
the first councell, that made the scriptures we now have, canon, is not
 extant: for that collection the first bishop of rome after s. peter, is
 subject to question: for though the canonicall books bee there reckoned
 up; yet these words, "sint vobis omnibus clericis & laicis libris
 venerandi, &c." containe distinction of clergy, and laity, that was
 not in use so neer st. peters time. the first councell for setling the
 canonicall scripture, that is extant, is that of laodicea, can. 59.
 which forbids the reading of other books then those in the churches;
 which is mandate that is not addressed to every christian, but to
 those onely that had authority to read any publiquely in the church;
 that is, to ecclesiastiques onely.
 



of the right of constituting ecclesiasticall officers in the time of
 the apostles
 
of ecclesiastical officers in the time of the apostles, some were
 magisteriall, some ministeriall. magisteriall were the offices
 of preaching of the gospel of the kingdom of god to infidels; of
 administring the sacraments, and divine service; and of teaching the
 rules of faith and manners to those that were converted. ministeriall
 was the office of deacons, that is, of them that were appointed to the
 administration of the secular necessities of the church, at such time
 as they lived upon common stock of mony, raised out of the voluntary
 contributions of the faithfull.
 
amongst the officers magisteriall, the first, and principall were the
 apostles; whereof there were at first but twelve; and these were chosen
 and constituted by our saviour himselfe; and their office was not onely
 to preach, teach, and baptize, but also to be martyrs, (witnesses of
 our saviours resurrection.) this testimony, was the specificall, and
 essentiall mark; whereby the apostleship was distinguished from other
 magistracy ecclesiasticall; as being necessary for an apostle, either to
 have seen our saviour after his resurrection, or to have conversed with
 him before, and seen his works, and other arguments of his divinity,
 whereby they might be taken for sufficient witnesses. and therefore at
 the election of new apostle in the place of judas iscariot, s. peter
 saith (acts 1.21,22.) "of these men that have companyed with us, all the
 time that the lord jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the
 baptisme of john unto that same day that was taken up from us, must
 one be ordained to be witnesse with us of his resurrection:" where, by
 this word must, is implyed necessary property of an apostle, to have
 companyed with the first and prime apostles in the time that our saviour
 manifested himself in the flesh.
 



matthias made apostle by the congregation.
 
the first apostle, of those which were not constituted by christ in the
 time was upon the earth, was matthias, chosen in this manner: there
 were assembled together in jerusalem about 120 christians (acts 1.15.)
 these appointed two, joseph the just, and matthias (ver. 23.) and caused
 lots to be drawn; "and (ver. 26.) the lot fell on matthias and was
 numbred with the apostles." so that here we see the ordination of this
 apostle, was the act of the congregation, and not of st. peter, nor of
 the eleven, otherwise then as members of the assembly.
 



paul and barnabas made apostles by the church of antioch
 
after him there was never any other apostle ordained, but paul and
 barnabas, which was done (as we read acts 13.1,2,3.) in this manner.
 "there were in the church that was at antioch, certaine prophets, and
 teachers; as barnabas, and simeon that was called niger, and lucius of
 cyrene, and manaen; which had been brought up with herod the tetrarch,
 and saul. as they ministred unto the lord, and fasted, the holy ghost
 said, ‘separate mee barnabas, and saul for the worke whereunto i have
 called them.’ and when they had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands
 on them, they sent them away."
 
by which it is manifest, that though they were called by the holy ghost,
 their calling was declared unto them, and their mission authorized by
 the particular church of antioch. and that this their calling was to
 the apostleship, is apparent by that, that they are both called (acts
 14.14.) apostles: and that it was by vertue of this act of the church of
 antioch, that they were apostles, s. paul declareth plainly (rom. 1.1.)
 in that hee useth the word, which the holy ghost used at his calling:
 for stileth himself, "an apostle separated unto the gospel of god;"
 alluding to the words of the holy ghost, "separate barnabas and saul,
 &c." but seeing the work of an apostle, was to be witnesse of
 the resurrection of christ, and man may here aske, how s. paul that
 conversed not with our saviour before his passion, could know was
 risen. to which it is easily answered, that our saviour himself appeared
 to him in the way to damascus, from heaven, after his ascension; "and
 chose him for vessell to bear his name before the gentiles, and kings,
 and children of israel;" and consequently (having seen the lord after
 his passion) was competent witnesse of his resurrection: and as for
 barnabas, was disciple before the passion. it is therefore evident
 that paul, and barnabas were apostles; and yet chosen, and authorized
 (not by the first apostles alone, but) by the church of antioch; as
 matthias was chosen, and authorized by the church of jerusalem.
 



what offices in the church are magisteriall
 
bishop, word formed in our language, out of the greek episcopus,
 signifieth an overseer, or superintendent of any businesse, and
 particularly pastor or shepherd; and thence by metaphor was taken, not
 only amongst the jews that were originally shepherds, but also amongst
 the heathen, to signifie the office of king, or any other ruler,
 or guide of people, whether ruled by laws, or doctrine. and so
 the apostles were the first christian bishops, instituted by christ
 himselfe: in which sense the apostleship of judas is called (acts 1.20.)
 his bishoprick. and afterwards, when there were constituted elders in
 the christian churches, with charge to guide christs flock by their
 doctrine, and advice; these elders were also called bishops. timothy was
 an elder (which word elder, in the new testament is name of office, as
 well as of age;) yet was also bishop. and bishops were then content
 with the title of elders. nay s. john himselfe, the apostle beloved of
 our lord, beginneth his second epistle with these words, "the elder to
 the elect lady." by which it is evident, that bishop, pastor, elder,
 doctor, that is to say, teacher, were but so many divers names of
 the same office in the time of the apostles. for there was then no
 government by coercion, but only by doctrine, and perswading. the
 kingdome of god was yet to come, in new world; so that there could
 be authority to compell in any church, till the common-wealth
 had embraced the christian faith; and consequently diversity of
 authority, though there were diversity of employments.
 
besides these magisteriall employments in the church, namely apostles,
 bishops, elders, pastors, and doctors, whose calling was to proclaim
 christ to the jews, and infidels, and to direct, and teach those that
 beleeved we read in the new testament of other. for by the names
 of evangelists and prophets, is not signified any office, but severall
 gifts, by which severall men were profitable to the church: as
 evangelists, by writing the life and acts of our saviour; such as were
 s. matthew and s. john apostles, and s. marke and s. luke disciples, and
 whosoever else wrote of that subject, (as s. thomas, and s. barnabas are
 said to have done, though the church have not received the books
 that have gone under their names:) and as prophets, by the gift of
 interpreting the old testament; and sometimes by declaring their
 speciall revelations to the church. for neither these gifts, nor the
 gifts of languages, nor the gift of casting out devils, or of curing
 other diseases, nor any thing else did make an officer in the church,
 save onely the due calling and election to the charge of teaching.
 



ordination of teachers
 
as the apostles, matthias, paul, and barnabas, were not made by our
 saviour himself, but were elected by the church, that is, by the
 assembly of christians; namely, matthias by the church of jerusalem,
 and paul, and barnabas by the church of antioch; so were also the
 presbyters, and pastors in other cities, elected by the churches of
 those cities. for proof whereof, let us consider, first, how s. paul
 proceeded in the ordination of presbyters, in the cities where had
 converted men to the christian faith, immediately after and barnabas
 had received their apostleship. we read (acts 14.23.) that "they
 ordained elders in every church;" which at first sight may be taken for
 an argument, that they themselves chose, and gave them their authority:
 but if we consider the originall text, it will be manifest, that they
 were authorized, and chosen by the assembly of the christians of each
 city. for the words there are, "cheirotonesantes autoispresbuterous kat
 ekklesian," that is, "when they had ordained them elders by the holding
 up of hands in every congregation." now it is well enough known, that in
 all those cities, the manner of choosing magistrates, and officers,
 was by plurality of suffrages; and (because the ordinary way of
 distinguishing the affirmative votes from the negatives, was by holding
 up of hands) to ordain an officer in any of the cities, was more
 but to bring the people together, to elect them by plurality of votes,
 whether it were by plurality of elevated hands, or by plurality of
 voices, or plurality of balls, or beans, or small stones, of which every
 man cast in one, into vessell marked for the affirmative, or negative;
 for divers cities had divers customes in that point. it was therefore
 the assembly that elected their own elders: the apostles were onely
 presidents of the assembly to call them together for such election, and
 to pronounce them elected, and to give them the benediction, which now
 is called consecration. and for this cause they that were presidents
 of the assemblies, as (in the absence of the apostles) the elders were,
 were called proestotes, and in latin antistities; which words signifie
 the principall person of the assembly, whose office was to number the
 votes, and to declare thereby who was chosen; and where the votes were
 equall, to decide the matter in question, by adding his own; which is
 the office of president in councell. and (because all the churches
 had their presbyters ordained in the same manner,) where the word is
 constitute, (as titus 1.5.) "ina katasteses kata polin presbuterous,"
 "for this cause left i thee in crete, that thou shouldest constitute
 elders in every city," we are to understand the same thing; namely, that
 hee should call the faithfull together, and ordain them presbyters by
 plurality of suffrages. it had been strange thing, if in town, where
 men perhaps had never seen any magistrate otherwise chosen then by an
 assembly, those of the town becomming christians, should so much as have
 thought on any other way of election of their teachers, and guides, that
 is to say, of their presbyters, (otherwise called bishops,) then this of
 plurality of suffrages, intimated by s. paul (acts 14.23.) in the word
 cheirotonesantes: nor was there ever any choosing of bishops, (before
 the emperors found it necessary to regulate them in order to the keeping
 of the peace amongst them,) but by the assemblies of the christians in
 every severall town.
 
the same is also confirmed by the continuall practise even to this day,
 in the election of the bishops of rome. for if the bishop of any place,
 had the right of choosing another, to the succession of the pastorall
 office, in any city, at such time as went from thence, to plant the
 same in another place; much more had had the right, to appoint his
 successour in that place, in which last resided and dyed: and we find
 not, that ever any bishop of rome appointed his successor. for they were
 long time chosen by the people, as we may see by the sedition raised
 about the election, between damascus, and ursinicus; which ammianus
 marcellinus saith was so great, that juventius the praefect, unable to
 keep the peace between them, was forced to goe out of the city; and that
 there were above an hundred men found dead upon that occasion in the
 church it self. and though they afterwards were chosen, first, by the
 whole clergy of rome, and afterwards by the cardinalls; yet never any
 was appointed to the succession by his predecessor. if therefore they
 pretended right to appoint their successors, i think i may reasonably
 conclude, they had right to appoint the new power; which none could
 take from the church to bestow on them, but such as had lawfull
 authority, not onely to teach, but to command the church; which none
 could doe, but the civill soveraign.
 



ministers of the church what
 
the word minister in the originall diakonos signifieth one that
 voluntarily doth the businesse of another man; and differeth from a
 servant onely in this, that servants are obliged by their condition,
 to what is commanded them; whereas ministers are obliged onely by
 their undertaking, and bound therefore to more than that they have
 undertaken: so that both they that teach the word of god, and they that
 administer the secular affairs of the church, are both ministers, but
 they are ministers of different persons. for the pastors of the church,
 called (acts 6.4.) "the ministers of the word," are ministers of christ,
 whose word it is: but the ministery of deacon, which is called (verse
 2. of the same chapter) "serving of tables," is service done to the
 church, or congregation: so that neither any one man, nor the whole
 church, could ever of their pastor say, was their minister; but of
 deacon, whether the charge undertook were to serve tables, or
 distribute maintenance to the christians, when they lived in each city
 on common stock, or upon collections, as in the first times, or to
 take care of the house of prayer, or of the revenue, or other worldly
 businesse of the church, the whole congregation might properly call him
 their minister.
 
for their employment, as deacons, was to serve the congregation; though
 upon occasion they omitted not to preach the gospel, and maintain the
 doctrine of christ, every one according to his gifts, as s. steven did;
 and both to preach, and baptize, as philip did: for that philip, which
 (act. 8. 5.) preached the gospel at samaria, and (verse 38.) baptized
 the eunuch, was philip the deacon, not philip the apostle. for it is
 manifest (verse 1.) that when philip preached in samaria, the apostles
 were at jerusalem, and (verse 14.) "when they heard that samaria had
 received the word of god, sent peter and john to them;" by imposition of
 whose hands, they that were baptized (verse 15.) received (which before
 by the baptisme of philip they had not received) the holy ghost. for it
 was necessary for the conferring of the holy ghost, that their baptisme
 should be administred, or confirmed by minister of the word, not by a
 minister of the church. and therefore to confirm the baptisme of those
 that philip the deacon had baptized, the apostles sent out of their own
 number from jerusalem to samaria, peter, and john; who conferred on them
 that before were but baptized, those graces that were signs of the holy
 spirit, which at that time did accompany all true beleevers; which what
 they were may be understood by that which s. marke saith (chap. 16.17.)
 "these signs follow them that beleeve in my name; they shall cast out
 devills; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents,
 and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall
 lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." this to doe, was it that
 philip could not give; but the apostles could, and (as appears by this
 place) effectually did to every man that truly beleeved, and was by
 minister of christ himself baptized: which power either christs
 ministers in this age cannot conferre, or else there are very few true
 beleevers, or christ hath very few ministers.
 



and how chosen what
 
that the first deacons were chosen, not by the apostles, but by a
 congregation of the disciples; that is, of christian men of all sorts,
 is manifest out of acts 6. where we read that the twelve, after the
 number of disciples was multiplyed, called them together, and having
 told them, that it was not fit that the apostles should leave the word
 of god, and serve tables, said unto them (verse 3.) "brethren looke you
 out among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy ghost, and of
 wisdome, whom we may appoint over this businesse." here it is manifest,
 that though the apostles declared them elected; yet the congregation
 chose them; which also, (verse the fift) is more expressely said, where
 it is written, that "the saying pleased the multitude, and they chose
 seven, &c."
 



of ecclesiasticall revenue, under the law of moses
 
under the old testament, the tribe of levi were onely capable of the
 priesthood, and other inferiour offices of the church. the land
 was divided amongst the other tribes (levi excepted,) which by the
 subdivision of the tribe of joseph, into ephraim and manasses, were
 still twelve. to the tribe of levi were assigned certain cities for
 their habitation, with the suburbs for their cattell: but for their
 portion, they were to have the tenth of the fruits of the land of their
 brethren. again, the priests for their maintenance had the tenth of that
 tenth, together with part of the oblations, and sacrifices. for god had
 said to aaron (numb. 18. 20.) "thou shalt have inheritance in their
 land, neither shalt thou have any part amongst them, i am thy part, and
 thine inheritance amongst the children of israel." for god being then
 king, and having constituted the tribe of levi to be his publique
 ministers, allowed them for their maintenance, the publique revenue,
 that is to say, the part that god had reserved to himself; which were
 tythes, and offerings: and that it is which is meant, where god saith, i
 am thine inheritance. and therefore to the levites might not unfitly
 be attributed the name of clergy from kleros, which signifieth lot, or
 inheritance; not that they were heirs of the kingdome of god, more than
 other; but that gods inheritance, was their maintenance. now seeing
 in this time god himself was their king, and moses, aaron, and the
 succeeding high priests were his lieutenants; it is manifest, that the
 right of tythes, and offerings was constituted by the civill power.
 
after their rejection of god in the demand of king, they enjoyed still
 the same revenue; but the right thereof was derived from that, that the
 kings did never take it from them: for the publique revenue was at
 the disposing of him that was the publique person; and that (till the
 captivity) was the king. and again, after the return from the captivity,
 they paid their tythes as before to the priest. hitherto therefore
 church livings were determined by the civill soveraign.
 



in our saviours time, and after
 
of the maintenance of our saviour, and his apostles, we read onely they
 had purse, (which was carried by judas iscariot;) and, that of the
 apostles, such as were fisher-men, did sometimes use their trade; and
 that when our saviour sent the twelve apostles to preach, forbad them
 "to carry gold, and silver, and brasse in their purses, for that
 the workman is worthy of his hire:" (mat. 10. 9,10.) by which it
 is probable, their ordinary maintenance was not unsuitable to their
 employment; for their employment was (ver. 8.) "freely to give, because
 they had freely received;" and their maintenance was the free gift of
 those that beleeved the good tyding they carryed about of the coming
 of the messiah their saviour. to which we may adde, that which was
 contributed out of gratitude, by such as our saviour had healed of
 diseases; of which are mentioned "certain women (luke 8. 2,3.) which had
 been healed of evill spirits and infirmities; mary magdalen, out of whom
 went seven devills; and joanna the wife of chuza, herods steward; and
 susanna, and many others, which ministred unto him of their substance.
 
after our saviours ascension, the christians of every city lived in
 common, (acts 4. 34.) upon the mony which was made of the sale of their
 lands and possessions, and laid down at the feet of the apostles, of
 good will, not of duty; for "whilest the land remained (saith s. peter
 to ananias acts 5.4.) was it not thine? and after it was sold, was it
 not in thy power?" which sheweth needed not to have saved his land,
 nor his money by lying, as not being bound to contribute any thing at
 all, unlesse had pleased. and as in the time of the apostles, so also
 all the time downward, till after constantine the great, we shall
 find, that the maintenance of the bishops, and pastors of the christian
 church, was nothing but the voluntary contribution of them that had
 embraced their doctrine. there was yet mention of tythes: but
 such was in the time of constantine, and his sons, the affection of
 christians to their pastors, as ammianus marcellinus saith (describing
 the sedition of damasus and ursinicus about the bishopricke,) that it
 was worth their contention, in that the bishops of those times by the
 liberality of their flock, and especially of matrons, lived splendidly,
 were carryed in coaches, and sumptuous in their fare and apparell.
 
the ministers of the gospel lived on the benevolence of their flocks
 but here may some ask, whether the pastor were then bound to live upon
 voluntary contribution, as upon almes, "for who (saith s. paul 1 cor. 9.
 7.) goeth to war at his own charges? or who feedeth flock, and eatheth
 not of the milke of the flock?" and again, (1 cor. 9. 13.) "doe ye not
 know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
 the temple; and they which wait at the altar, partake with the altar;"
 that is to say, have part of that which is offered at the altar for
 their maintenance? and then concludeth, "even so hath the lord
 appointed, that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.
 from which place may be inferred indeed, that the pastors of the church
 ought to be maintained by their flocks; but not that the pastors were to
 determine, either the quantity, or the kind of their own allowance, and
 be (as it were) their own carvers. their allowance must needs therefore
 be determined, either by the gratitude, and liberality of every
 particular man of their flock, or by the whole congregation. by the
 whole congregation it could not be, because their acts were then no
 laws: therefore the maintenance of pastors, before emperours and civill
 soveraigns had made laws to settle it, was nothing but benevolence. they
 that served at the altar lived on what was offered. in what court should
 they sue for it, who had tribunalls? or if they had arbitrators
 amongst themselves, who should execute their judgments, when they had no
 power to arme their officers? it remaineth therefore, that there could
 be certaine maintenance assigned to any pastors of the church, but by
 the whole congregation; and then onely, when their decrees should have
 the force (not onely of canons, but also) of laws; which laws could not
 be made, but by emperours, kings, or other civill soveraignes. the right
 of tythes in moses law, could not be applyed to the then ministers
 of the gospell; because moses and the high priests were the civill
 soveraigns of the people under god, whose kingdom amongst the jews was
 present; whereas the kingdome of god by christ is yet to come.
 
hitherto hath been shewn what the pastors of the church are; what are
 the points of their commission (as that they were to preach, to teach,
 to baptize, to be presidents in their severall congregations;) what is
 ecclesiasticall censure, viz. excommunication, that is to say, in those
 places where christianity was forbidden by the civill laws, putting
 of themselves out of the company of the excommunicate, and where
 christianity was by the civill law commanded, putting the
 excommunicate out of the congregations of christians; who elected the
 pastors and ministers of the church, (that it was, the congregation);
 who consecrated and blessed them, (that it was the pastor); what was
 their due revenue, (that it was none but their own possessions,
 and their own labour, and the voluntary contributions of devout and
 gratefull christians). we are to consider now, what office those persons
 have, who being civill soveraignes, have embraced also the christian
 faith.
 



the civill soveraign being christian hath the right of appointing
 pastors
 
and first, we are to remember, that the right of judging what
 doctrines are fit for peace, and to be taught the subjects, is in all
 common-wealths inseparably annexed (as hath been already proved cha.
 18.) to the soveraign power civill, whether it be in one man, or in one
 assembly of men. for it is evident to the meanest capacity, that mens
 actions are derived from the opinions they have of the good, or evill,
 which from those actions redound unto themselves; and consequently,
 men that are once possessed of an opinion, that their obedience to
 the soveraign power, will bee more hurtfull to them, than their
 disobedience, will disobey the laws, and thereby overthrow the
 common-wealth, and introduce confusion, and civill war; for the avoiding
 whereof, all civill government was ordained. and therefore in all
 common-wealths of the heathen, the soveraigns have had the name of
 pastors of the people, because there was subject that could lawfully
 teach the people, but by their permission and authority.
 
this right of the heathen kings, cannot bee thought taken from them by
 their conversion to the faith of christ; who never ordained, that kings
 for beleeving in him, should be deposed, that is, subjected to any but
 himself, or (which is all one) be deprived of the power necessary for
 the conservation of peace amongst their subjects, and for their defence
 against foraign enemies. and therefore christian kings are still the
 supreme pastors of their people, and have power to ordain what pastors
 they please, to teach the church, that is, to teach the people committed
 to their charge.
 
again, let the right of choosing them be (as before the conversion
 of kings) in the church, for so it was in the time of the apostles
 themselves (as hath been shewn already in this chapter); even so also
 the right will be in the civill soveraign, christian. for in that is
 christian, allowes the teaching; and in that is the soveraign
 (which is as much as to say, the church by representation,) the
 teachers hee elects, are elected by the church. and when an assembly of
 christians choose their pastor in christian common-wealth, it is the
 soveraign that electeth him, because tis done by his authority; in the
 same manner, as when town choose their maior, it is the act of him
 that hath the soveraign power: for every act done, is the act of him,
 without whose consent it is invalid. and therefore whatsoever examples
 may be drawn out of history, concerning the election of pastors, by the
 people, or by the clergy, they are arguments against the right of
 any civill soveraign, because they that elected them did it by his
 authority.
 
seeing then in every christian common-wealth, the civill soveraign is
 the supreme pastor, to whose charge the whole flock of his subjects is
 committed, and consequently that it is by his authority, that all
 other pastors are made, and have power to teach, and performe all
 other pastorall offices; it followeth also, that it is from the civill
 soveraign, that all other pastors derive their right of teaching,
 preaching, and other functions pertaining to that office; and that they
 are but his ministers; in the same manner as the magistrates of towns,
 judges in courts of justice, and commanders of armies, are all but
 ministers of him that is the magistrate of the whole common-wealth,
 judge of all causes, and commander of the whole militia, which is
 alwayes the civill soveraign. and the reason hereof, is not because they
 that teach, but because they that are to learn, are his subjects.
 for let it be supposed, that christian king commit the authority of
 ordaining pastors in his dominions to another king, (as divers christian
 kings allow that power to the pope;) doth not thereby constitute a
 pastor over himself, nor soveraign pastor over his people; for that
 were to deprive himself of the civill power; which depending on the
 opinion men have of their duty to him, and the fear they have of
 punishment in another world, would depend also on the skill, and loyalty
 of doctors, who are lesse subject, not only to ambition, but also
 to ignorance, than any other sort of men. so that where stranger hath
 authority to appoint teachers, it is given him by the soveraign in
 whose dominions teacheth. christian doctors are our schoolmasters
 to christianity; but kings are fathers of families, and may receive
 schoolmasters for their subjects from the recommendation of stranger,
 but not from the command; especially when the ill teaching them shall
 redound to the great and manifest profit of him that recommends them:
 nor can they be obliged to retain them, longer than it is for the
 publique good; the care of which they stand so long charged withall, as
 they retain any other essentiall right of the soveraignty.
 



the pastorall authority of soveraigns only is jure divino, that of
 other pastors is jure civili
 
if man therefore should ask pastor, in the execution of his office,
 as the chief priests and elders of the people (mat. 21.23.) asked our
 saviour, "by what authority dost thou these things, and who gave thee
 this authority:" can make other just answer, but that doth
 it by the authority of the common-wealth, given him by the king, or
 assembly that representeth it. all pastors, except the supreme, execute
 their charges in the right, that is by the authority of the civill
 soveraign, that is, jure civili. but the king, and every other soveraign
 executeth his office of supreme pastor, by immediate authority from god,
 that is to say, in gods right, or jure divino. and therefore none but
 kings can put into their titles (a mark of their submission to god onely
 ) dei gratia rex, &c. bishops ought to say in the beginning of their
 mandates, "by the favour of the kings majesty, bishop of such a
 diocesse;" or as civill ministers, "in his majesties name." for in
 saying, divina providentia, which is the same with dei gratia, though
 disguised, they deny to have received their authority from the civill
 state; and sliely slip off the collar of their civill subjection,
 contrary to the unity and defence of the common-wealth.
 



christian kings have power to execute all manner of pastoral function
 
but if every christian soveraign be the supreme pastor of his own
 subjects, it seemeth that hath also the authority, not only to preach
 (which perhaps man will deny;) but also to baptize, and to administer
 the sacrament of the lords supper; and to consecrate both temples, and
 pastors to gods service; which most men deny; partly because they use
 not to do it; and partly because the administration of sacraments,
 and consecration of persons, and places to holy uses, requireth the
 imposition of such mens hands, as by the like imposition successively
 from the time of the apostles have been ordained to the like ministery.
 for proof therefore that christian kings have power to baptize, and to
 consecrate, i am to render reason, both why they use not to doe it,
 and how, without the ordinary ceremony of imposition of hands, they are
 made capable of doing it, when they will.
 
there is doubt but any king, in case were skilfull in the
 sciences, might by the same right of his office, read lectures of
 them himself, by which authorizeth others to read them in the
 universities. neverthelesse, because the care of the summe of the
 businesse of the common-wealth taketh up his whole time, it were not
 convenient for him to apply himself in person to that particular. king
 may also if please, sit in judgment, to hear and determine all manner
 of causes, as well as give others authority to doe it in his name; but
 that the charge that lyeth upon him of command and government, constrain
 him to bee continually at the helm, and to commit the ministeriall
 offices to others under him. in the like manner our saviour (who surely
 had power to baptize) baptized none himselfe, but sent his apostles and
 disciples to baptize. (john 4.2.) so also s. paul, by the necessity of
 preaching in divers and far distant places, baptized few: amongst all
 the corinthians baptized only crispus, cajus, and stephanus; (1
 cor.1.14,16.) and the reason was, because his principall charge was to
 preach. (1 cor. 1.17.) whereby it is manifest, that the greater charge,
 (such as is the government of the church,) is dispensation for the
 lesse. the reason therefore why christian kings use not to baptize, is
 evident, and the same, for which at this day there are few baptized by
 bishops, and by the pope fewer.
 
and as concerning imposition of hands, whether it be needfull, for the
 authorizing of king to baptize, and consecrate, we may consider thus.
 
imposition of hands, was most ancient publique ceremony amongst the
 jews, by which was designed, and made certain, the person, or other
 thing intended in mans prayer, blessing, sacrifice, consecration,
 condemnation, or other speech. so jacob in blessing the children of
 joseph (gen. 48.14.) "laid his right hand on ephraim the younger, and
 his left hand on manasseh the first born;" and this did wittingly
 (though they were so presented to him by joseph, as was forced in
 doing it to stretch out his arms acrosse) to design to whom intended
 the greater blessing. so also in the sacrificing of the burnt offering,
 aaron is commanded (exod. 29.10.) "to lay his hands on the head of the
 bullock;" and (ver. 15.) "to lay his hand on the head of the ramme."
 the same is also said again, levit. 1.4. & 8.14. likewise moses when he
 ordained joshua to be captain of the israelites, that is, consecrated
 him to gods service, (numb. 27.23.) "laid his hands upon him, and gave
 him his charge," designing and rendring certain, who it was they were
 to obey in war. and in the consecration of the levites (numb. 8.10.) god
 commanded that "the children of israel should put their hands upon the
 levites." and in the condemnation of him that had blasphemed the lord
 (levit. 24.14.) god commanded that "all that heard him should lay their
 hands on his head, and that all the congregation should stone him." and
 why should they only that heard him, lay their hands upon him, and not
 rather priest, levite, or other minister of justice, but that
 none else were able to design, and demonstrate to the eyes of the
 congregation, who it was that had blasphemed, and ought to die? and
 to design man, or any other thing, by the hand to the eye is lesse
 subject to mistake, than when it is done to the eare by name.
 
and so much was this ceremony observed, that in blessing the whole
 congregation at once, which cannot be done by laying on of hands, yet
 "aaron (levit. 9.22.) did lift up his hand towards the people when he
 blessed them." and we read also of the like ceremony of consecration of
 temples amongst the heathen, as that the priest laid his hands on
 some post of the temple, all the while was uttering the words of
 consecration. so naturall it is to design any individuall thing, rather
 by the hand, to assure the eyes, than by words to inform the eare in
 matters of gods publique service.
 
this ceremony was not therefore new in our saviours time. for jairus
 (mark 5.23.) whose daughter was sick, besought our saviour (not to heal
 her, but) "to lay his hands upon her, that shee might bee healed." and
 (matth. 19.13.) "they brought unto him little children, that hee should
 put his hands on them, and pray."
 
according to this ancient rite, the apostles, and presbyters, and the
 presbytery it self, laid hands on them whom they ordained pastors, and
 withall prayed for them that they might receive the holy ghost; and that
 not only once, but sometimes oftner, when new occasion was presented:
 but the end was still the same, namely punctuall, and religious
 designation of the person, ordained either to the pastorall charge
 in general, or to particular mission: so (act. 6.6.) "the apostles
 prayed, and laid their hands" on the seven deacons; which was done,
 not to give them the holy ghost, (for they were full of the holy ghost
 before thy were chosen, as appeareth immediately before, verse 3.) but
 to design them to that office. and after philip the deacon had converted
 certain persons in samaria, peter and john went down (act. 8.17.)" and
 laid their hands on them, and they received the holy ghost." and not
 only an apostle, but presbyter had this power: for s. paul adviseth
 timothy (1 tim. 5.22.) "lay hands suddenly on man;" that is, designe
 man rashly to the office of pastor. the whole presbytery laid their
 hands on timothy, as we read 1 tim. 4.14. but this is to be understood,
 as that some did it by the appointment of the presbytery, and most
 likely their proestos, or prolocutor, which it may be was st. paul
 himself. for in his 2 epist. to tim. ver. 6. saith to him, "stirre up
 the gift of god which is in thee, by the laying on of my hands:" where
 note by the way, that by the holy ghost, is not meant the third person
 in the trinity, but the gifts necessary to the pastorall office. we read
 also, that st. paul had imposition of hands twice; once from ananias at
 damascus (acts 9.17,18.) at the time of his baptisme; and again (acts
 13.3.) at antioch, when was first sent out to preach. the use then of
 this ceremony considered in the ordination of pastors, was to design
 the person to whom they gave such power. but if there had been then any
 christian, that had had the power of teaching before; the baptizing of
 him, that is the making of him christian, had given him new power,
 but had onely caused him to preach true doctrine, that is, to use
 his power aright; and therefore the imposition of hands had been
 unnecessary; baptisme it selfe had been sufficient. but every soveraign,
 before christianity, had the power of teaching, and ordaining teachers;
 and therefore christianity gave them new right, but only directed
 them in the way of teaching truth; and consequently they needed
 imposition of hands (besides that which is done in baptisme) to
 authorize them to exercise any part of the pastorall function, as
 namely, to baptize, and consecrate. and in the old testament, though
 the priest only had right to consecrate, during the time that the
 soveraignty was in the high priest; yet it was not so when the
 soveraignty was in the king: for we read (1 kings 8.) that solomon
 blessed the people, consecrated the temple, and pronounced that publique
 prayer, which is the pattern now for consecration of all christian
 churches, and chappels: whereby it appears, had not only the right
 of ecclesiasticall government; but also of exercising ecclesiasticall
 functions.
 



the civill soveraigne if christian, is head of the church in his own
 dominions
 
from this consolidation of the right politique, and ecclesiastique in
 christian soveraigns, it is evident, they have all manner of power over
 their subjects, that can be given to man, for the government of mens
 externall actions, both in policy, and religion; and may make such
 laws, as themselves shall judge fittest, for the government of their
 own subjects, both as they are the common-wealth, and as they are the
 church: for both state, and church are the same men.
 
if they please therefore, they may (as many christian kings now doe)
 commit the government of their subjects in matters of religion to
 the pope; but then the pope is in that point subordinate to them, and
 exerciseth that charge in anothers dominion jure civili, in the right of
 the civill soveraign; not jure divino, in gods right; and may therefore
 be discharged of that office, when the soveraign for the good of his
 subjects shall think it necessary. they may also if they please,
 commit the care of religion to one supreme pastor, or to an assembly of
 pastors; and give them what power over the church, or one over another,
 they think most convenient; and what titles of honor, as of bishops,
 archbishops, priests, or presbyters, they will; and make such laws for
 their maintenance, either by tithes, or otherwise, as they please,
 so they doe it out of sincere conscience, of which god onely is
 the judge. it is the civill soveraign, that is to appoint judges, and
 interpreters of the canonicall scriptures; for it is that maketh them
 laws. it is also that giveth strength to excommunications; which but
 for such laws and punishments, as may humble obstinate libertines, and
 reduce them to union with the rest of the church, would bee
 contemned. in summe, hath the supreme power in all causes, as well
 ecclesiasticall, as civill, as far as concerneth actions, and words, for
 these onely are known, and may be accused; and of that which cannot be
 accused, there is judg at all, but god, that knoweth the heart.
 and these rights are incident to all soveraigns, whether monarchs, or
 assemblies: for they that are the representants of christian people,
 are representants of the church: for church, and common-wealth of
 christian people, are the same thing.
 



cardinal bellarmines books summo pontifice considered
 
though this that i have here said, and in other places of this book,
 seem cleer enough for the asserting of the supreme ecclesiasticall power
 to christian soveraigns; yet because the pope of romes challenge to that
 power universally, hath been maintained chiefly, and i think as strongly
 as is possible, by cardinall bellarmine, in his controversie summo
 pontifice; i have thought it necessary, as briefly as i can, to examine
 the grounds, and strength of his discourse.
 



the first book
 
of five books hath written of this subject, the first containeth
 three questions: one, which is simply the best government, monarchy,
 aristocracy, or democracy; and concludeth for neither, but for a
 government mixt of all there: another, which of these is the best
 government of the church; and concludeth for the mixt, but which should
 most participate of monarchy: the third, whether in this mixt monarchy,
 st. peter had the place of monarch. concerning his first conclusion, i
 have already sufficiently proved (chapt. 18.) that all governments which
 men are bound to obey, are simple, and absolute. in monarchy there is
 but one man supreme; and all other men that have any kind of power in
 the state, have it by his commission, during his pleasure; and execute
 it in his name: and in aristocracy, and democracy, but one supreme
 assembly, with the same power that in monarchy belongeth to the monarch,
 which is not mixt, but an absolute soveraignty. and of the three
 sorts, which is the best, is not to be disputed, where any one of them
 is already established; but the present ought alwaies to be preferred,
 maintained, and accounted best; because it is against both the law of
 nature, and the divine positive law, to doe any thing tending to the
 subversion thereof. besides, it maketh nothing to the power of
 any pastor, (unlesse have the civill soveraignty,) what kind of
 government is the best; because their calling is not to govern men by
 commandement, but to teach them, and perswade them by arguments, and
 leave it to them to consider, whether they shall embrace, or reject the
 doctrine taught. for monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, do mark out
 unto us three sorts of soveraigns, not of pastors; or, as we may say,
 three sorts of masters of families, not three sorts of schoolmasters for
 their children.
 
and therefore the second conclusion, concerning the best form of
 government of the church, is nothing to the question of the popes power
 without his own dominions: for in all other common-wealths his power (if
 hee have any at all) is that of the schoolmaster onely, and not of the
 master of the family.
 
for the third conclusion, which is, that st. peter was monarch of the
 church, bringeth for his chiefe argument the place of s. matth.
 (chap. 16.18, 19.) "thou art peter, and upon this rock i will build my
 church, &c. and i will give thee the keyes of heaven; whatsoever thou
 shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt
 loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven." which place well considered,
 proveth more, but that the church of christ hath for foundation one
 onely article; namely, that which peter in the name of all the apostles
 professing, gave occasion to our saviour to speak the words here cited;
 which that wee may cleerly understand, we are to consider, that our
 saviour preached by himself, by john baptist, and by his apostles,
 nothing but this article of faith, "that was the christ;" all other
 articles requiring faith otherwise, than as founded on that. john
 began first, (mat. 3.2.) preaching only this, "the kingdome of god is at
 hand." then our saviour himself (mat. 4.17.) preached the same: and to
 his twelve apostles, when gave them their commission (mat. 10.7.)
 there is mention of preaching any other article but that. this was
 the fundamentall article, that is the foundation of the churches faith.
 afterwards the apostles being returned to him, asketh them all, (mat.
 16.13) not peter onely, "who men said was;" and they answered, that
 "some said was john the baptist, some elias, and others jeremias,
 or one of the prophets:" then (ver. 15.) asked them all again, (not
 peter onely) "whom say yee that i am?" therefore peter answered (for
 them all) "thou art christ, the of the living god;" which i said is
 the foundation of the faith of the whole church; from which our saviour
 takes the occasion of saying, "upon this stone i will build my church;"
 by which it is manifest, that by the foundation-stone of the church, was
 meant the fundamentall article of the churches faith. but why then (will
 some object) doth our saviour interpose these words, "thou art peter"?
 if the originall of this text had been rigidly translated, the reason
 would easily have appeared: we are therefore to consider, that the
 apostle simon, was surnamed stone, (which is the signification of
 the syriacke word cephas, and of the greek word petrus). our saviour
 therefore after the confession of that fundamentall article, alluding
 to his name, said (as if it were in english) thus, thou art "stone," and
 upon this stone i will build my church: which is as much as to say, this
 article, that "i am the christ," is the foundation of all the faith i
 require in those that are to bee members of my church: neither is this
 allusion to name, an unusuall thing in common speech: but it had been
 strange, and obscure speech, if our saviour intending to build his
 church on the person of st. peter, had said, "thou art stone, and
 upon this stone i will build my church," when it was so obvious without
 ambiguity to have said, "i will build my church on thee; and yet there
 had been still the same allusion to his name.
 
and for the following words, "i will give thee the keyes of heaven, &c."
 it is more than what our saviour gave also to all the rest of his
 disciples (matth. 18.18.) "whatsoever yee shall bind on earth, shall be
 bound in heaven. and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed
 in heaven." but howsoever this be interpreted, there is doubt but
 the power here granted belongs to all supreme pastors; such as are all
 christian civill soveraignes in their own dominions. in so much, as if
 st. peter, or our saviour himself had converted any of them to beleeve
 him, and to acknowledge his kingdome; yet because his kingdome is not of
 this world, had left the supreme care of converting his subjects to
 none but him; or else hee must have deprived him of the soveraignty,
 to which the right of teaching is inseparably annexed. and thus much in
 refutation of his first book, wherein hee would prove st. peter to have
 been the monarch universall of the church, that is to say, of all the
 christians in the world.
 



the second book
 
the second book hath two conclusions: one, that s. peter was bishop
 of rome, and there dyed: the other, that the popes of rome are his
 successors. both which have been disputed by others. but supposing them
 to be true; yet if by bishop of rome bee understood either the
 monarch of the church, or the supreme pastor of it; not silvester, but
 constantine (who was the first christian emperour) was that bishop; and
 as constantine, so all other christian emperors were of right supreme
 bishops of the roman empire; i say of the roman empire, not of all
 christendome: for other christian soveraigns had the same right in their
 severall territories, as to an office essentially adhaerent to their
 soveraignty. which shall serve for answer to his second book.
 



the third book
 
in the third book, handleth the question whether the pope be
 antichrist. for my part, i see argument that proves is so, in that
 sense that scripture useth the name: nor will i take any argument from
 the quality of antichrist, to contradict the authority exerciseth,
 or hath heretofore exercised in the dominions of any other prince, or
 state.
 
it is evident that the prophets of the old testament foretold, and the
 jews expected messiah, that is, christ, that should re-establish
 amongst them the kingdom of god, which had been rejected by them in
 the time of samuel, when they required king after the manner of
 other nations. this expectation of theirs, made them obnoxious to the
 imposture of all such, as had both the ambition to attempt the attaining
 of the kingdome, and the art to deceive the people by counterfeit
 miracles, by hypocriticall life, or by orations and doctrine plausible.
 our saviour therefore, and his apostles forewarned men of false
 prophets, and of false christs. false christs, are such as pretend to
 be the christ, but are not, and are called properly antichrists, in such
 sense, as when there happeneth schisme in the church by the election
 of two popes, the one calleth the other antipapa, or the false pope.
 and therefore antichrist in the proper signification hath two essentiall
 marks; one, that denyeth jesus to be christ; and another that he
 professeth himselfe to bee christ. the first mark is set down by s. john
 in his 1 epist. 4. ch. 3. ver. "every spirit that confesseth not that
 jesus christ is come in the flesh, is not of god; and this is the spirit
 of antichrist." the other mark is expressed in the words of our saviour,
 (mat. 24.5.) "many shall come in my name, saying, i am christ;" and
 again, "if any man shall say unto you, loe, here is christ, there is
 christ beleeve it not." and therefore antichrist must be false christ,
 that is, some one of them that shall pretend themselves to be christ.
 and out of these two marks, "to deny jesus to be the christ," and to
 "affirm himselfe to be the christ," it followeth, that must also be
 an "adversary of the true christ," which is another usuall signification
 of the word antichrist. but of these many antichrists, there is one
 speciall one, antichristos, the antichrist, or antichrist definitely,
 as one certaine person; not indefinitely an antichrist. now seeing the
 pope of rome, neither pretendeth himself, nor denyeth jesus to be the
 christ, i perceive not how can be called antichrist; by which word
 is not meant, one that falsely pretendeth to be his lieutenant, or vicar
 generall, but to be hee. there is also some mark of the time of this
 speciall antichrist, as (mat. 24.15.) when that abominable destroyer,
 spoken of by daniel, (dan. 9. 27.) shall stand in the holy place, and
 such tribulation as was not since the beginning of the world, nor ever
 shall be again, insomuch as if it were to last long, (ver. 22.) "no
 flesh could be saved; but for the elects sake those days shall be
 shortened" (made fewer). but that tribulation is not yet come; for it
 is to be followed immediately (ver. 29.) by darkening of the sun
 and moon, falling of the stars, concussion of the heavens, and the
 glorious coming again of our saviour, in the cloudes. and therefore the
 antichrist is not yet come; whereas, many popes are both come and gone.
 it is true, the pope in taking upon him to give laws to all christian
 kings, and nations, usurpeth kingdome in this world, which christ took
 not on him: but doth it not as christ, but as for christ, wherein
 there is nothing of the antichrist.
 



the fourth book
 
in the fourth book, to prove the pope to be the supreme judg in all
 questions of faith and manners, (which is as much as to be the absolute
 monarch of all christians in the world,) be bringeth three propositions:
 the first, that his judgments are infallible: the second, that can
 make very laws, and punish those that observe them not: the third, that
 our saviour conferred all jurisdiction ecclesiasticall on the pope of
 rome.
 



texts for the infallibility of the popes judgement in points of faith
 
for the infallibility of his judgments, alledgeth the scriptures: and
 first, that of luke 22.31. "simon, simon, satan hath desired you that
 hee may sift you as wheat; but i have prayed for thee, that thy faith
 faile not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." this,
 according to bellarmines exposition, is, that christ gave here to simon
 peter two priviledges: one, that neither his faith should fail, neither
 he, nor any of his successors should ever define any point concerning
 faith, or manners erroneously, or contrary to the definition of former
 pope: which is strange, and very much strained interpretation. but he
 that with attention readeth that chapter, shall find there is place
 in the whole scripture, that maketh more against the popes authority,
 than this very place. the priests and scribes seeking to kill our
 saviour at the passeover, and judas possessed with resolution to
 betray him, and the day of killing the passeover being come, our saviour
 celebrated the same with his apostles, which said, till the kingdome
 of god was come hee would doe more; and withall told them, that one
 of them was to betray him: hereupon they questioned, which of them it
 should be; and withall (seeing the next passeover their master would
 celebrate should be when was king) entred into contention, who
 should then be the greater man. our saviour therefore told them, that
 the kings of the nations had dominion over their subjects, and are
 called by name (in hebrew) that signifies bountifull; but i cannot
 be so to you, you must endeavour to serve one another; i ordain you a
 kingdome, but it is such as my father hath ordained mee; kingdome that
 i am now to purchase with my blood, and not to possesse till my second
 coming; then yee shall eat and drink at my table, and sit on thrones,
 judging the twelve tribes of israel: and then addressing himself to
 st. peter, saith, simon, simon, satan seeks by suggesting present
 domination, to weaken your faith of the future; but i have prayed for
 thee, that thy faith shall not fail; thou therefore (note this,) being
 converted, and understanding my kingdome as of another world, confirm
 the same faith in thy brethren: to which s. peter answered (as one that
 more expected any authority in this world) "lord i am ready to goe
 with thee, not onely to prison, but to death." whereby it is manifest,
 s. peter had not onely jurisdiction given him in this world, but a
 charge to teach all the other apostles, that they also should have none.
 and for the infallibility of st. peters sentence definitive in matter
 of faith, there is more to be attributed to it out of this text, than
 that peter should continue in the beleef of this point, namely, that
 christ should come again, and possesse the kingdome at the day of
 judgement; which was not given by the text to all his successors; for
 wee see they claim it in the world that now is.
 
the second place is that of matth. 16. "thou art peter, and upon this
 rocke i will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
 against it." by which (as i have already shewn in this chapter) is
 proved more, than that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
 the confession of peter, which gave occasion to that speech; namely
 this, that jesus is christ the sonne of god.
 
the third text is john 21. ver. 16,17. "feed my sheep;" which contains
 more but commission of teaching: and if we grant the rest of the
 apostles to be contained in that name of sheep; then it is the supreme
 power of teaching: but it was onely for the time that there were no
 christian soveraigns already possessed of that supremacy. but i have
 already proved, that christian soveraignes are in their owne dominions
 the supreme pastors, and instituted thereto, by vertue of their being
 baptized, though without other imposition of hands. for such imposition
 being ceremony of designing the person, is needlesse, when hee is
 already designed to the power of teaching what doctrine will, by his
 institution to an absolute power over his subjects. for as i have proved
 before, soveraigns are supreme teachers (in generall) by their office
 and therefore oblige themselves (by their baptisme) to teach the
 doctrine of christ: and when they suffer others to teach their people,
 they doe it at the perill of their own souls; for it is at the hands
 of the heads of families that god will require the account of the
 instruction of his children and servants. it is of abraham himself,
 not of hireling, that god saith (gen. 18.19) "i know him that will
 command his children, and his houshold after him, that they keep the way
 of the lord, and do justice and judgement.
 
the fourth place is that of exod. 28.30. "thou shalt put in the
 breastplate of judgment, the urim and the thummin:" which hee saith is
 interpreted by the septuagint, delosin kai aletheian, that is, evidence
 and truth: and thence concludeth, god had given evidence, and truth,
 (which is almost infallibility,) to the high priest. but be it evidence
 and truth it selfe that was given; or be it but admonition to the priest
 to endeavour to inform himself cleerly, and give judgment uprightly;
 yet in that it was given to the high priest, it was given to the civill
 soveraign: for next under god was the high priest in the common-wealth
 of israel; and is an argument for evidence and truth, that is, for the
 ecclesiasticall supremacy of civill soveraigns over their own subjects,
 against the pretended power of the pope. these are all the texts hee
 bringeth for the infallibility of the judgement of the pope, in point of
 faith.
 



texts for the same in point of manners
 
for the infallibility of his judgment concerning manners, hee bringeth
 one text, which is that of john 16.13. "when the spirit of truth is
 come, hee will lead you into all truth" where (saith he) by all truth,
 is meant, at least, all truth necessary to salvation. but with this
 mitigation, attributeth more infallibility to the pope, than to
 any man that professeth christianity, and is not to be damned: for
 if any man erre in any point, wherein not to erre is necessary to
 salvation, it is impossible should be saved; for that onely is
 necessary to salvation, without which to be saved is impossible. what
 points these are, i shall declare out of the scripture in the chapter
 following. in this place i say more, but that though it were granted,
 the pope could not possibly teach any error at all, yet doth not this
 entitle him to any jurisdiction in the dominions of another prince,
 unlesse we shall also say, man is obliged in conscience to set on
 work upon all occasions the best workman, even then also when hath
 formerly promised his work to another.
 
besides the text, argueth from reason, thus, if the pope could erre
 in necessaries, then christ hath not sufficiently provided for the
 churches salvation; because hath commanded her to follow the popes
 directions. but this reason is invalid, unlesse shew when, and where
 christ commanded that, or took at all any notice of pope: nay granting
 whatsoever was given to s. peter was given to the pope; yet seeing there
 is in the scripture command to any man to obey st. peter, man can
 bee just, that obeyeth him, when his commands are contrary to those of
 his lawfull soveraign.
 
lastly, it hath not been declared by the church, nor by the pope
 himselfe, that is the civill soveraign of all the christians in the
 world; and therefore all christians are not bound to acknowledge his
 jurisdiction in point of manners. for the civill soveraignty, and
 supreme judicature in controversies of manners, are the same thing: and
 the makers of civill laws, are not onely declarers, but also makers
 of the justice, and injustice of actions; there being nothing in mens
 manners that makes them righteous, or unrighteous, but their conformity
 with the law of the soveraign. and therefore when the pope challengeth
 supremacy in controversies of manners, hee teacheth men to disobey the
 civill soveraign; which is an erroneous doctrine, contrary to the
 many precepts of our saviour and his apostles, delivered to us in the
 scripture.
 
to prove the pope has power to make laws, alledgeth many places; as
 first, deut. 17.12. "the man that will doe presumptuously, and will not
 hearken unto the priest, (that standeth to minister there before the
 lord thy god, or unto the judge,) even that man shall die, and thou
 shalt put away the evill from israel." for answer whereunto, we are to
 remember that the high priest (next and immediately under god) was the
 civill soveraign; and all judges were to be constituted by him. the
 words alledged sound therefore thus. "the man that will presume to
 disobey the civill soveraign for the time being, or any of his officers
 in the execution of their places, that man shall die, &c." which is
 cleerly for the civill soveraignty, against the universall power of the
 pope.
 
secondly, alledgeth that of matth. 16. "whatsoever yee shall bind,
 &c." and interpreteth it for such binding as is attributed (matth.
 23.4.) to the scribes and pharisees, "they bind heavy burthens, and
 grievous to be born, and lay them on mens shoulders;" by which is meant
 (he sayes) making of laws; and concludes thence, the pope can make
 laws. but this also maketh onely for the legislative power of civill
 soveraigns: for the scribes, and pharisees sat in moses chaire,
 but moses next under god was soveraign of the people of israel: and
 therefore our saviour commanded them to doe all that they should say,
 but not all that they should do. that is, to obey their laws, but not
 follow their example.
 
the third place, is john 21.16. "feed my sheep;" which is not power
 to make laws, but command to teach. making laws belongs to the lord of
 the family; who by his owne discretion chooseth his chaplain, as also a
 schoolmaster to teach his children.
 
the fourth place john 20.21. is against him. the words are, "as my
 father sent me, so send i you." but our saviour was sent to redeem (by
 his death) such as should beleeve; and by his own, and his apostles
 preaching to prepare them for their entrance into his kingdome; which he
 himself saith, is not of this world, and hath taught us to pray for the
 coming of it hereafter, though hee refused (acts 1.6,7.) to tell his
 apostles when it should come; and in which, when it comes, the twelve
 apostles shall sit on twelve thrones (every one perhaps as high as that
 of st. peter) to judge the twelve tribes of israel. seeing then god the
 father sent not our saviour to make laws in this present world, wee may
 conclude from the text, that neither did our saviour send s. peter to
 make laws here, but to perswade men to expect his second comming with
 stedfast faith; and in the mean time, if subjects, to obey their
 princes; and if princes, both to beleeve it themselves, and to do their
 best to make their subjects doe the same; which is the office of a
 bishop. therefore this place maketh most strongly for the joining of the
 ecclesiasticall supremacy to the civill soveraignty, contrary to that
 which cardinall bellarmine alledgeth it for.
 
the fift place is acts 15.28. "it hath seemed good to the holy spirit,
 and to us, to lay upon you greater burden, than these necessary
 things, that yee abstaine from meats offered to idols, and from bloud,
 and from things strangled, and from fornication." here hee notes the
 word laying of burdens for the legislative power. but who is there,
 that reading this text, can say, this stile of the apostles may not as
 properly be used in giving counsell, as in making laws? the stile of a
 law is, we command: but, we think good, is the ordinary stile of them,
 that but give advice; and they lay burthen that give advice, though
 it bee conditionall, that is, if they to whom they give it, will
 attain their ends: and such is the burthen, of abstaining from things
 strangled, and from bloud; not absolute, but in case they will not
 erre. i have shewn before (chap. 25.) that law, is distinguished from
 counsell, in this, that the reason of law, is taken from the designe,
 and benefit of him that prescribeth it; but the reason of counsell,
 from the designe, and benefit of him, to whom the counsell is given. but
 here, the apostles aime onely at the benefit of the converted gentiles,
 namely their salvation; not at their own benefit; for having done their
 endeavour, they shall have their reward, whether they be obeyed, or not.
 and therefore the acts of this councell, were not laws, but counsells.
 
the sixt place is that of rom. 13. "let every soul be subject to the
 higher powers, for there is power but of god;" which is meant, he
 saith not onely of secular, but also of ecclesiasticall princes. to
 which i answer, first, that there are ecclesiasticall princes but
 those that are also civill soveraignes; and their principalities exceed
 not the compasse of their civill soveraignty; without those bounds
 though they may be received for doctors, they cannot be acknowledged for
 princes. for if the apostle had meant, we should be subject both to our
 own princes, and also to the pope, had taught us doctrine, which
 christ himself hath told us is impossible, namely, "to serve two
 masters." and though the apostle say in another place, "i write these
 things being absent, lest being present i should use sharpnesse,
 according to the power which the lord hath given me;" it is not, that
 challenged power either to put to death, imprison, banish, whip,
 or fine any of them, which are punishments; but onely to excommunicate,
 which (without the civill power) is more but leaving of their
 company, and having more to doe with them, than with heathen man,
 or publican; which in many occasions might be greater pain to the
 excommunicant, than to the excommunicate.
 
the seventh place is 1 cor. 4.21. "shall i come unto you with rod, or
 in love, and the spirit of lenity?" but here again, it is not the power
 of magistrate to punish offenders, that is meant by rod; but
 onely the power of excommunication, which is not in its owne nature
 punishment, but onely denouncing of punishment, that christ shall
 inflict, when shall be in possession of his kingdome, at the day of
 judgment. nor then also shall it bee properly punishment, as upon a
 subject that hath broken the law; but revenge, as upon an enemy, or
 revolter, that denyeth the right of our saviour to the kingdome: and
 therefore this proveth not the legislative power of any bishop, that has
 not also the civill power.
 
the eighth place is, timothy 3.2. "a bishop must be the husband but of
 one wife, vigilant, sober, &c." which saith was law. i thought that
 none could make law in the church, but the monarch of the church, st.
 peter. but suppose this precept made by the authority of st. peter;
 yet i see reason why to call it law, rather than an advice, seeing
 timothy was not subject, but disciple of st. paul; nor the flock
 under the charge of timothy, his subjects in the kingdome, but his
 scholars in the schoole of christ: if all the precepts giveth
 timothy, be laws, why is not this also law, "drink longer water,
 but use little wine for thy healths sake"? and why are not also
 the precepts of good physitians, so many laws? but that it is not the
 imperative manner of speaking, but an absolute subjection to person,
 that maketh his precept laws.
 
in like manner, the ninth place, 1 tim. 5. 19. "against an elder
 receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses," is wise
 precept, but not law.
 
the tenth place is, luke 10.16. "he that heareth you, heareth mee; and
 that despiseth you, despiseth me." and there is doubt, but that
 despiseth the counsell of those that are sent by christ, despiseth
 the counsell of christ himself. but who are those now that are sent by
 christ, but such as are ordained pastors by lawfull authority? and who
 are lawfully ordained, that are not ordained by the soveraign
 pastor? and who is ordained by the soveraign pastor in christian
 common-wealth, that is not ordained by the authority of the soveraign
 thereof? out of this place therefore it followeth, that which heareth
 his soveraign being christian, heareth christ; and hee that despiseth
 the doctrine which his king being christian, authorizeth, despiseth
 the doctrine of christ (which is not that which bellarmine intendeth
 here to prove, but the contrary). but all this is nothing to law. nay
 more, christian king, as pastor, and teacher of his subjects, makes
 not thereby his doctrines laws. cannot oblige men to beleeve; though
 as civill soveraign may make laws suitable to his doctrine, which
 may oblige men to certain actions, and sometimes to such as they would
 not otherwise do, and which ought not to command; and yet when
 they are commanded, they are laws; and the externall actions done in
 obedience to them, without the inward approbation, are the actions of
 the soveraign, and not of the subject, which is in that case but as
 an instrument, without any motion of his owne at all; because god hath
 commanded to obey them.
 
the eleventh, is every place, where the apostle for counsell, putteth
 some word, by which men use to signifie command; or calleth the
 following of his counsell, by the name of obedience. and therefore they
 are alledged out of 1 cor. 11.2. "i commend you for keeping my precepts
 as i delivered them to you." the greek is, "i commend you for keeping
 those things i delivered to you, as i delivered them." which is far from
 signifying that they were laws, or any thing else, but good counsell.
 and that of 1 thess. 4.2. "you know what commandements we gave you:"
 where the greek word is paraggelias edokamen, equivalent to paredokamen,
 what wee delivered to you, as in the place next before alledged, which
 does not prove the traditions of the apostles, to be any more than
 counsells; though as is said in the 8th verse, "he that despiseth them,
 despiseth not man, but god": for our saviour himself came not to judge,
 that is, to be king in this world; but to sacrifice himself for sinners,
 and leave doctors in his church, to lead, not to drive men to christ,
 who never accepteth forced actions, (which is all the law produceth,)
 but the inward conversion of the heart; which is not the work of laws,
 but of counsell, and doctrine.
 
and that of 2 thess. 3.14. "if any man obey not our word by this
 epistle, note that man, and have company with him, that may bee
 ashamed": where from the word obey, would inferre, that this epistle
 was law to the thessalonians. the epistles of the emperours were
 indeed laws. if therefore the epistle of s. paul were also law, they
 were to obey two masters. but the word obey, as it is in the greek
 upakouei, signifieth hearkening to, or putting in practice, not onely
 that which is commanded by him that has right to punish, but also that
 which is delivered in way of counsell for our good; and therefore st.
 paul does not bid kill him that disobeys, nor beat, nor imprison, nor
 amerce him, which legislators may all do; but avoid his company, that
 may bee ashamed: whereby it is evident, it was not the empire of an
 apostle, but his reputation amongst the faithfull, which the christians
 stood in awe of.
 
the last place is that of heb. 13.17. "obey your leaders, and submit
 your selves to them, for they watch for your souls, as they that must
 give account:" and here also is intended by obedience, following of
 their counsell: for the reason of our obedience, is not drawn from the
 will and command of our pastors, but from our own benefit, as being the
 salvation of our souls they watch for, and not for the exaltation of
 their own power, and authority. if it were meant here, that all they
 teach were laws, then not onely the pope, but every pastor in his parish
 should have legislative power. again, they that are bound to obey, their
 pastors, have power to examine their commands. what then shall wee
 say to st. john who bids us (1 epist. chap. 4. ver. 1.) "not to beleeve
 every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they are of god, because
 many false prophets are gone out into the world"? it is therefore
 manifest, that wee may dispute the doctrine of our pastors; but man
 can dispute law. the commands of civill soveraigns are on all sides
 granted to be laws: if any else can make law besides himselfe, all
 common-wealth, and consequently all peace, and justice must cease; which
 is contrary to all laws, both divine and humane. nothing therefore can
 be drawn from these, or any other places of scripture, to prove the
 decrees of the pope, where has not also the civill soveraignty, to be
 laws.
 
the question of superiority between the pope and other bishops the last
 point hee would prove, is this, "that our saviour christ has committed
 ecclesiasticall jurisdiction immediately to none but the pope." wherein
 handleth not the question of supremacy between the pope and christian
 kings, but between the pope and other bishops. and first, sayes it is
 agreed, that the jurisdiction of bishops, is at least in the generall
 jure divino, that is, in the right of god; for which alledges s.
 paul, ephes. 4.11. where hee sayes, that christ after his ascension
 into heaven, "gave gifts to men, some apostles, some prophets, and some
 evangelists, and some pastors, and some teachers:" and thence inferres,
 they have indeed their jurisdiction in gods right; but will not grant
 they have it immediately from god, but derived through the pope. but if
 man may be said to have his jurisdiction jure divino, and yet not
 immediately; what lawfull jurisdiction, though but civill, is there in a
 christian common-wealth, that is not also jure divino? for christian
 kings have their civill power from god immediately; and the magistrates
 under him exercise their severall charges in vertue of his commission;
 wherein that which they doe, is lesse jure divino mediato, than
 that which the bishops doe, in vertue of the popes ordination. all
 lawfull power is of god, immediately in the supreme governour, and
 mediately in those that have authority under him: so that either hee
 must grant every constable in the state, to hold his office in the right
 of god; or must not hold that any bishop holds his so, besides the
 pope himselfe.
 
but this whole dispute, whether christ left the jurisdiction to the pope
 onely, or to other bishops also, if considered out of these places where
 the pope has the civill soveraignty, is contention lana caprina:
 for none of them (where they are not soveraigns) has any jurisdiction
 at all. for jurisdiction is the power of hearing and determining causes
 between man and man; and can belong to none, but him that hath the power
 to prescribe the rules of right and wrong; that is, to make laws;
 and with the sword of justice to compell men to obey his decisions,
 pronounced either by himself, or by the judges ordaineth thereunto;
 which none can lawfully do, but the civill soveraign.
 
therefore when alledgeth out of the 6 of luke, that our saviour
 called his disciples together, and chose twelve of them which named
 apostles, proveth that elected them (all, except matthias, paul
 and barnabas,) and gave them power and command to preach, but not
 to judge of causes between man and man: for that is power which
 refused to take upon himselfe, saying, "who made judge, or a
 divider, amongst you?" and in another place, "my kingdome is not of this
 world." but hee that hath not the power to hear, and determine causes
 between man and man, cannot be said to have any jurisdiction at all. and
 yet this hinders not, but that our saviour gave them power to preach and
 baptize in all parts of the world, supposing they were not by their own
 lawfull soveraign forbidden: for to our own soveraigns christ himself,
 and his apostles have in sundry places expressely commanded us in all
 things to be obedient.
 
the arguments by which would prove, that bishops receive their
 jurisdiction from the pope (seeing the pope in the dominions of other
 princes hath jurisdiction himself,) are all in vain. yet because they
 prove, on the contrary, that all bishops receive jurisdiction when they
 have it from their civill soveraigns, i will not omit the recitall of
 them.
 
the first, is from numbers 11. where moses not being able alone to
 undergoe the whole burthen of administring the affairs of the people of
 israel, god commanded him to choose seventy elders, and took part of
 the spirit of moses, to put it upon those seventy elders: by which it is
 understood, not that god weakened the spirit of moses, for that had not
 eased him at all; but that they had all of them their authority from
 him; wherein doth truly, and ingenuously interpret that place. but
 seeing moses had the entire soveraignty in the common-wealth of the
 jews, it is manifest, that it is thereby signified, that they had their
 authority from the civill soveraign: and therefore that place proveth,
 that bishops in every christian common-wealth have their authority from
 the civill soveraign; and from the pope in his own territories only, and
 not in the territories of any other state.
 
the second argument, is from the nature of monarchy; wherein all
 authority is in one man, and in others by derivation from him: but the
 government of the church, says, is monarchicall. this also makes for
 christian monarchs. for they are really monarchs of their own people;
 that is, of their own church (for the church is the same thing with a
 christian people;) whereas the power of the pope, though hee were
 s. peter, is neither monarchy, nor hath any thing of archicall, nor
 craticall, but onely of didacticall; for god accepteth not forced, but
 willing obedience.
 
the third, is, from that the of s. peter is called by s. cyprian,
 the head, the source, the roote, the sun, from whence the authority
 of bishops is derived. but by the law of nature (which is better
 principle of right and wrong, than the word of any doctor that is but
 man) the civill soveraign in every common-wealth, is the head, the
 source, the root, and the sun, from which all jurisdiction is derived.
 and therefore, the jurisdiction of bishops, is derived from the civill
 soveraign.
 
the fourth, is taken from the inequality of their jurisdictions: for
 if god (saith he) had given it them immediately, had given aswell
 equality of jurisdiction, as of order: but wee see, some are bishops but
 of own town, some of hundred towns, and some of many whole provinces;
 which differences were not determined by the command of god; their
 jurisdiction therefore is not of god, but of man; and one has a
 greater, another lesse, as it pleaseth the prince of the church. which
 argument, if had proved before, that the pope had had an universall
 jurisdiction over all christians, had been for his purpose. but seeing
 that hath not been proved, and that it is notoriously known, the large
 jurisdiction of the pope was given him by those that had it, that is,
 by the emperours of rome, (for the patriarch of constantinople, upon the
 same title, namely, of being bishop of the capitall city of the empire,
 and seat of the emperour, claimed to be equal to him,) it followeth,
 that all other bishops have their jurisdiction from the soveraigns of
 the place wherein they exercise the same: and as for that cause they
 have not their authority jure divino; so neither hath the pope his de
 jure divino, except onely where hee is also the civill soveraign.
 
his fift argument is this, "if bishops have their jurisdiction
 immediately from god, the pope could not take it from them, for can
 doe nothing contrary to gods ordination;" and this consequence is good,
 and well proved. "but, (saith he) the pope can do this, and has done
 it." this also is granted, so doe it in his own dominions, or in the
 dominions of any other prince that hath given him that power; but not
 universally, in right of the popedome: for that power belongeth to
 every christian soveraign, within the bounds of his owne empire, and is
 inseparable from the soveraignty. before the people of israel had (by
 the commandment of god to samuel) set over themselves king, after the
 manner of other nations, the high priest had the civill government; and
 none but could make, nor depose an inferiour priest: but that power
 was afterwards in the king, as may be proved by this same argument of
 bellarmine; for if the priest (be the high priest or any other) had
 his jurisdiction immediately from god, then the king could not take it
 from him; "for could do nothing contrary to gods ordinance: but it
 is certain, that king solomon (1 kings 2.26.) deprived abiathar the high
 priest of his office, and placed zadok (verse 35.) in his room. kings
 therefore may in the like manner ordaine, and deprive bishops, as they
 shall thinke fit, for the well governing of their subjects.
 
his sixth argument is this, if bishops have their jurisdiction jure
 divino (that is, immediately from god,) they that maintaine it, should
 bring some word of god to prove it: but they can bring none. the
 argument is good; i have therefore nothing to say against it. but it
 is an argument lesse good, to prove the pope himself to have no
 jurisdiction in the dominion of any other prince.
 
lastly, hee bringeth for argument, the testimony of two popes, innocent,
 and leo; and i doubt not but hee might have alledged, with as good
 reason, the testimonies of all the popes almost since s. peter: for
 considering the love of power naturally implanted in mankind, whosoever
 were made pope, would be tempted to uphold the same opinion.
 neverthelesse, they should therein but doe, as innocent, and leo did,
 bear witnesse of themselves, and therefore their witness should not be
 good.
 



of the popes temporall power
 
in the fift book hath four conclusions. the first is, "that the pope
 in not lord of all the world:" the second, "that the pope is not lord
 of all the christian world:" the third, "that the pope (without his owne
 territory) has not any temporall jurisdiction directly:" these three
 conclusions are easily granted. the fourth is, "that the pope has (in
 the dominions of other princes) the supreme temporall power indirectly:"
 which is denyed; unlesse mean by indirectly, that has gotten it by
 indirect means; then is that also granted. but i understand, that
 when saith hath it indirectly, means, that such temporall
 jurisdiction belongeth to him of right, but that this right is but a
 consequence of his pastorall authority, the which could not exercise,
 unlesse have the other with it: and therefore to the pastorall power
 (which calls spirituall) the supreme power civill is necessarily
 annexed; and that thereby hee hath right to change kingdomes, giving
 them to one, and taking them from another, when shall think it
 conduces to the salvation of souls.
 
before i come to consider the arguments by which hee would prove this
 doctrine, it will not bee amisse to lay open the consequences of it;
 that princes, and states, that have the civill soveraignty in their
 severall common-wealths, may bethink themselves, whether it bee
 convenient for them, and conducing to the good of their subjects, of
 whom they are to give an account at the day of judgment, to admit the
 same.
 
when it is said, the pope hath not (in the territories of other states)
 the supreme civill power directly; we are to understand, doth
 not challenge it, as other civill soveraigns doe, from the originall
 submission thereto of those that are to be governed. for it is evident,
 and has already been sufficiently in this treatise demonstrated, that
 the right of all soveraigns, is derived originally from the consent of
 every one of those that are to bee governed; whether they that choose
 him, doe it for their common defence against an enemy, as when they
 agree amongst themselves to appoint man, or an assembly of men to
 protect them; or whether they doe it, to save their lives, by submission
 to conquering enemy. the pope therefore, when disclaimeth the
 supreme civill power over other states directly, denyeth more, but
 that his right cometh to him by that way; ceaseth not for all that,
 to claime it another way; and that is, (without the consent of them
 that are to be governed) by right given him by god, (which hee calleth
 indirectly,) in his assumption to the papacy. but by what way soever he
 pretend, the power is the same; and may (if it bee granted to be his
 right) depose princes and states, as often as it is for the salvation
 of soules, that is, as often as will; for claimeth also the sole
 power to judge, whether it be to the salvation of mens souls, or not.
 and this is the doctrine, not onely that bellarmine here, and many other
 doctors teach in their sermons and books, but also that some
 councells have decreed, and the popes have decreed, and the popes have
 accordingly, when the occasion hath served them, put in practise. for
 the fourth councell of lateran held under pope innocent the third, (in
 the third chap. haereticis,) hath this canon. "if king at the
 popes admonition, doe not purge his kingdome of haeretiques, and being
 excommunicate for the same, make not satisfaction within year, his
 subjects are absolved of their obedience." and the practise hereof hath
 been seen on divers occasions; as in the deposing of chilperique, king
 of france; in the translation of the roman empire to charlemaine; in
 the oppression of john king of england; in transferring the kingdome
 of navarre; and of late years, in the league against henry the third of
 france, and in many more occurrences. i think there be few princes that
 consider not this as injust, and inconvenient; but i wish they would
 all resolve to be kings, or subjects. men cannot serve two masters: they
 ought therefore to ease them, either by holding the reins of government
 wholly in their own hands; or by wholly delivering them into the
 hands of the pope; that such men as are willing to be obedient, may be
 protected in their obedience. for this distinction of temporall, and
 spirituall power is but words. power is as really divided, and as
 dangerously to all purposes, by sharing with another indirect power, as
 with direct one. but to come now to his arguments.
 
the first is this, "the civill power is subject to the spirituall:
 therefore that hath the supreme power spirituall, hath right to
 command temporall princes, and dispose of their temporalls in order to
 the spirituall. as for the distinction of temporall, and spirituall,
 let us consider in what sense it may be said intelligibly, that the
 temporall, or civill power is subject to the spirituall. there be but
 two ways that those words can be made sense. for when wee say, one power
 is subject to another power, the meaning either is, that which hath
 the one, is subject to him that hath the other; or that the one power is
 to the other, as the means to the end. for wee cannot understand, that
 one power hath power over another power; and that one power can have
 right or command over another: for subjection, command, right, and
 power are accidents, not of powers, but of persons: one power may be
 subordinate to another, as the art of sadler, to the art of rider.
 if then it be granted, that the civill government be ordained as means
 to bring us to spirituall felicity; yet it does not follow, that if a
 king have the civill power, and the pope the spirituall, that therefore
 the king is bound to obey the pope, more then every sadler is bound to
 obey every rider. therefore as from subordination of an art, cannot be
 inferred the subjection of the professor; so from the subordination of
 government, cannot be inferred the subjection of the governor. when
 therefore saith, the civill power is subject to the spirituall, his
 meaning is, that the civill soveraign, is subject to the spirituall
 soveraign. and the argument stands thus, "the civil soveraign, is
 subject to the spirituall; therefore the spirituall prince may
 command temporall princes." where the conclusion is the same, with the
 antecedent should have proved. but to prove it, alledgeth
 first, this reason, "kings and popes, clergy and laity make but one
 common-wealth; that is to say, but one church: and in all bodies the
 members depend one upon another: but things spirituall depend not
 of things temporall: therefore, temporall depend on spirituall. and
 therefore are subject to them." in which argumentation there be two
 grosse errours: one is, that all christian kings, popes, clergy, and all
 other christian men, make but one common-wealth: for it is evident that
 france is one common-wealth, spain another, and venice third, &c. and
 these consist of christians; and therefore also are severall bodies
 of christians; that is to say, severall churches: and their severall
 soveraigns represent them, whereby they are capable of commanding and
 obeying, of doing and suffering, as natural man; which generall or
 universall church is, till it have representant; which it hath not on
 earth: for if it had, there is doubt but that all christendome were
 one common-wealth, whose soveraign were that representant, both in
 things spirituall and temporall: and the pope, to make himself this
 representant, wanteth three things that our saviour hath not given
 him, to command, and to judge, and to punish, otherwise than (by
 excommunication) to run from those that will not learn of him: for
 though the pope were christs onely vicar, yet cannot exercise his
 government, till our saviours second coming: and then also it is not the
 pope, but st. peter himselfe, with the other apostles, that are to be
 judges of the world.
 
the other errour in this his first argument is, that sayes, the
 members of every common-wealth, as of naturall body, depend one of
 another: it is true, they cohaere together; but they depend onely on the
 soveraign, which is the soul of the common-wealth; which failing, the
 common-wealth is dissolved into civill war, one man so much
 as cohaering to another, for want of common dependance on known
 soveraign; just as the members of the naturall body dissolve into earth,
 for want of soul to hold them together. therefore there is nothing in
 this similitude, from whence to inferre dependance of the laity on the
 clergy, or of the temporall officers on the spirituall; but of both on
 the civill soveraign; which ought indeed to direct his civill commands
 to the salvation of souls; but is not therefore subject to any but god
 himselfe. and thus you see the laboured fallacy of the first argument,
 to deceive such men as distinguish not between the subordination of
 actions in the way to the end; and the subjection of persons one to
 another in the administration of the means. for to every end, the means
 are determined by nature, or by god himselfe supernaturally: but the
 power to make men use the means, is in every nation resigned (by the
 law of nature, which forbiddeth men to violate their faith given) to the
 civill soveraign.
 
his second argument is this, "every common-wealth, (because it is
 supposed to be perfect and sufficient in it self,) may command any
 other common-wealth, not subject to it, and force it to change the
 administration of the government, nay depose the prince, and set another
 in his room, if it cannot otherwise defend it selfe against the injuries
 goes about to doe them: much more may spirituall common-wealth
 command temporall one to change the administration of their
 government, and may depose princes, and institute others, when they
 cannot otherwise defend the spirituall good."
 
that common-wealth, to defend it selfe against injuries, may lawfully
 doe all that hath here said, is very true; and hath already in that
 which hath gone before been sufficiently demonstrated. and if it were
 also true, that there is now in this world spirituall common-wealth,
 distinct from civill common-wealth, then might the prince thereof,
 upon injury done him, or upon want of caution that injury be not done
 him in time to come, repaire, and secure himself by warre; which is in
 summe, deposing, killing, or subduing, or doing any act of hostility.
 but by the same reason, it would be lesse lawfull for civill
 soveraign, upon the like injuries done, or feared, to make warre
 upon the spirituall soveraign; which i beleeve is more than cardinall
 bellarmine would have inferred from his own proposition.
 
but spirituall common-wealth there is none in this world: for it is the
 same thing with the kingdome of christ; which himselfe saith, is not
 of this world; but shall be in the next world, at the resurrection, when
 they that have lived justly, and beleeved that was the christ, shall
 (though they died naturall bodies) rise spirituall bodies; and then it
 is, that our saviour shall judge the world, and conquer his adversaries,
 and make spirituall common-wealth. in the mean time, seeing there are
 men on earth, whose bodies are spirituall; there can be spirituall
 common-wealth amongst men that are yet in the flesh; unlesse wee call
 preachers, that have commission to teach, and prepare men for
 their reception into the kingdome of christ at the resurrection, a
 common-wealth; which i have proved to bee none.
 
the third argument is this; "it is not lawfull for christians to
 tolerate an infidel, or haereticall king, in case endeavour to draw
 them to his haeresie, or infidelity. but to judge whether king draw
 his subjects to haeresie, or not, belongeth to the pope. therefore hath
 the pope right, to determine whether the prince be to be deposed, or not
 deposed."
 
to this i answer, that both these assertions are false. for christians,
 (or men of what religion soever,) if they tolerate not their king,
 whatsoever law hee maketh, though it bee concerning religion, doe
 violate their faith, contrary to the divine law, both naturall and
 positive: nor is there any judge of haeresie amongst subjects, but
 their own civill soveraign; for "haeresie is nothing else, but private
 opinion, obstinately maintained, contrary to the opinion which the
 publique person (that is to say, the representant of the common-wealth)
 hath commanded to bee taught." by which it is manifest, that an
 opinion publiquely appointed to bee taught, cannot be haeresie; nor the
 soveraign princes that authorize them, haeretiques. for haeretiques are
 none but private men, that stubbornly defend some doctrine, prohibited
 by their lawful soveraigns.
 
but to prove that christians are not to tolerate infidell, or
 haereticall kings, alledgeth place in deut. 17. where god
 forbiddeth the jews, when they shall set king over themselves, to
 choose stranger; and from thence inferreth, that it is unlawfull for
 christian, to choose king, that is not christian. and ’tis true,
 that that is christian, that is, hee that hath already obliged
 himself to receive our saviour when shall come, for his king, shal
 tempt god too much in choosing for king in this world, one that hee
 knoweth will endeavour, both by terrour, and perswasion to make him
 violate his faith. but, it is (saith hee) the same danger, to choose one
 that is not christian, for king, and not to depose him, when hee
 is chosen. to this i say, the question is not of the danger of not
 deposing; but of the justice of deposing him. to choose him, may in some
 cases bee unjust; but to depose him, when is chosen, is in case
 just. for it is alwaies violation of faith, and consequently against the
 law of nature, which is the eternal law of god. nor doe wee read, that
 any such doctrine was accounted christian in the time of the apostles;
 nor in the time of the romane emperours, till the popes had the civill
 soveraignty of rome. but to this hath replyed, that the christians of
 old, deposed not nero, nor diocletian, nor julian, nor valens an arrian,
 for this cause onely, that they wanted temporall forces. perhaps so. but
 did our saviour, who for calling for, might have had twelve legions
 of immortall, invulnerable angels to assist him, want forces to depose
 caesar, or at least pilate, that unjustly, without finding fault in him,
 delivered him to the jews to bee crucified? or if the apostles wanted
 temporall forces to depose nero, was it therefore necessary for them in
 their epistles to the new made christians, to teach them, (as they did)
 to obey the powers constituted over them, (whereof nero in that time was
 one,) and that they ought to obey them, not for fear of their wrath,
 but for conscience sake? shall we say they did not onely obey, but also
 teach what they meant not, for want of strength? it is not therefore
 for want of strength, but for conscience sake, that christians are to
 tolerate their heathen princes, or princes (for i cannot call any one
 whose doctrine is the publique doctrine, an haeretique) that authorize
 the teaching of an errour. and whereas for the temporall power of the
 pope, alledgeth further, that st. paul (1 cor. 6.) appointed judges
 under the heathen princes of those times, such as were not ordained by
 those princes; it is not true. for st. paul does but advise them,
 to take some of their brethren to compound their differences, as
 arbitrators, rather than to goe to law one with another before the
 heathen judges; which is wholsome precept, and full of charity, fit
 to bee practised also in the best christian common-wealths. and for
 the danger that may arise to religion, by the subjects tolerating of an
 heathen, or an erring prince, it is point, of which subject is no
 competent judge; or if hee bee, the popes temporall subjects may judge
 also of the popes doctrine. for every christian prince, as i have
 formerly proved, is lesse supreme pastor of his own subjects, than
 the pope of his.
 
the fourth argument, is taken from the baptisme of kings; wherein, that
 they may be made christians they submit their scepters to christ; and
 promise to keep, and defend the christian faith. this is true; for
 christian kings are more but christs subjects: but they may, for all
 that, bee the popes fellowes; for they are supreme pastors of their own
 subjects; and the pope is more but king, and pastor, even in rome it
 selfe.
 
the fifth argument, is drawn from the words spoken by our saviour, feed
 my sheep; by which was give all power necessary for pastor; as the
 power to chase away wolves, such as are haeretiques; the power to shut
 up rammes, if they be mad, or push at the other sheep with their hornes,
 such as are evill (though christian) kings; and power to give the flock
 convenient food: from whence hee inferreth, that st. peter had these
 three powers given him by christ. to which i answer, that the last of
 these powers, is more than the power, or rather command to teach.
 for the first, which is to chase away wolves, that is, haeretiques, the
 place hee quoteth is (matth. 7.15.) "beware of false prophets which
 come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves."
 but neither are haeretiques false prophets, or at all prophets: nor
 (admitting haeretiques for the wolves there meant,) were the apostles
 commanded to kill them, or if they were kings, to depose them; but to
 beware of, fly, and avoid them: nor was it to st. peter, nor to any of
 the apostles, but to the multitude of the jews that followed him into
 the mountain, men for the most part not yet converted, that hee gave
 this counsell, to beware of false prophets: which therefore if it
 conferre power of chasing away kings, was given, not onely to private
 men; but to men that were not at all christians. and as to the power
 of separating, and shutting up of furious rammes, (by which hee meaneth
 christian kings that refuse to submit themselves to the roman pastor,)
 our saviour refused to take upon him that power in this world himself,
 but advised to let the corn and tares grow up together till the day of
 judgment: much lesse did hee give it to st. peter, or can s. peter give
 it to the popes. st. peter, and all other pastors, are bidden to esteem
 those christians that disobey the church, that is, (that disobey the
 christian soveraigne) as heathen men, and as publicans. seeing then men
 challenge to the pope authority over heathen princes, they ought to
 challenge none over those that are to bee esteemed as heathen.
 
but from the power to teach onely, hee inferreth also coercive power
 in the pope, over kings. the pastor (saith he) must give his flock
 convenient food: therefore the pope may, and ought to compell kings to
 doe their duty. out of which it followeth, that the pope, as pastor of
 christian men, is king of kings: which all christian kings ought indeed
 either to confesse, or else they ought to take upon themselves the
 supreme pastorall charge, every one in his own dominion.
 
his sixth, and last argument, is from examples. to which i answer,
 first, that examples prove nothing; secondly, that the examples he
 alledgeth make not so much as probability of right. the fact of
 jehoiada, in killing athaliah (2 kings 11.) was either by the authority
 of king joash, or it was horrible crime in the high priest, which
 (ever after the election of king saul) was mere subject. the fact of
 st. ambrose, in excommunicating theodosius the emperour, (if it were
 true hee did so,) was capitall crime. and for the popes, gregory 1.
 greg. 2. zachary, and leo 3. their judgments are void, as given in their
 own cause; and the acts done by them conformably to this doctrine, are
 the greatest crimes (especially that of zachary) that are incident to
 humane nature. and thus much of power ecclesiasticall; wherein i had
 been more briefe, forbearing to examine these arguments of bellarmine,
 if they had been his, as private man, and not as the champion of the
 papacy, against all other christian princes, and states.
 


chapter xliii. of what is necessary for mans reception into the
 kingdome of heaven.
 



the difficulty of obeying god and man both at once
 
the most frequent praetext of sedition, and civill warre, in christian
 common-wealths hath long time proceeded from difficulty, not yet
 sufficiently resolved, of obeying at once, both god, and man, then
 when their commandements are one contrary to the other. it is manifest
 enough, that when man receiveth two contrary commands, and knows that
 one of them is gods, ought to obey that, and not the other, though
 it be the command even of his lawfull soveraign (whether monarch, or
 soveraign assembly,) or the command of his father. the difficulty
 therefore consisteth in this, that men when they are commanded in the
 name of god, know not in divers cases, whether the command be from god,
 or whether that commandeth, doe but abuse gods name for some private
 ends of his own. for as there ware in the church of the jews, many false
 prophets, that sought reputation with the people, by feigned dreams, and
 visions; so there have been in all times in the church of christ, false
 teachers, that seek reputation with the people, by phantasticall and
 false doctrines; and by such reputation (as is the nature of ambition,)
 to govern them for their private benefit.
 



is none to them that distinguish between what is, and what is not
 necessary to salvation
 
but this difficulty of obeying both god, and the civill soveraign on
 earth, to those that can distinguish between what is necessary, and what
 is not necessary for their reception into the kingdome of god, is of no
 moment. for if the command of the civill soveraign bee such, as that it
 may be obeyed, without the forfeiture of life eternall; not to obey it
 is unjust; and the precept of the apostle takes place; "servants obey
 your masters in all things;" and, "children obey your parents in all
 things;" and the precept of our saviour, "the scribes and pharisees sit
 in moses chaire, all therefore they shall say, that observe, and doe."
 but if the command be such, as cannot be obeyed, without being damned
 to eternall death, then it were madnesse to obey it, and the counsell
 of our saviour takes place, (mat. 10. 28.) "fear not those that kill the
 body, but cannot kill the soule." all men therefore that would avoid,
 both the punishments that are to be in this world inflicted, for
 disobedience to their earthly soveraign, and those that shall be
 inflicted in the world to come for disobedience to god, have need be
 taught to distinguish well between what is, and what is not necessary to
 eternall salvation.
 



all that is necessary to salvation is contained in faith and obedience
 
all that is necessary to salvation, is contained in two vertues, faith
 in christ, and obedience to laws. the latter of these, if it were
 perfect, were enough to us. but because wee are all guilty of
 disobedience to gods law, not onely originally in adam, but also
 actually by our own transgressions, there is required at our hands now,
 not onely obedience for the rest of our time, but also remission of
 sins for the time past; which remission is the reward of our faith
 in christ. that nothing else is necessarily required to salvation, is
 manifest from this, that the kingdome of heaven, is shut to none but
 to sinners; that is to say, to the disobedient, or transgressors of the
 law; nor to them, in case they repent, and beleeve all the articles of
 christian faith, necessary to salvation.
 



what obedience is necessary;
 
the obedience required at our hands by god, that accepteth in all our
 actions the will for the deed, is serious endeavour to obey him;
 and is called also by all such names as signifie that endeavour. and
 therefore obedience, is sometimes called by the names of charity, and
 love, because they imply will to obey; and our saviour himself maketh
 our love to god, and to one another, fulfilling of the whole law: and
 sometimes by the name of righteousnesse; for righteousnesse is but the
 will to give to every one his owne, that is to say, the will to obey
 the laws: and sometimes by the name of repentance; because to repent,
 implyeth turning away from sinne, which is the same, with the return
 of the will to obedience. whosoever therefore unfeignedly desireth
 to fulfill the commandements of god, or repenteth him truely of his
 transgressions, or that loveth god with all his heart, and his neighbor
 as himself, hath all the obedience necessary to his reception into the
 kingdome of god: for if god should require perfect innocence, there
 could flesh be saved.
 



and to what laws
 
but what commandements are those that god hath given us? are all
 those laws which were given to the jews by the hand of moses, the
 commandements of god? if they bee, why are not christians taught to obey
 them? if they be not, what others are so, besides the law of nature? for
 our saviour christ hath not given us new laws, but counsell to observe
 those wee are subject to; that is to say, the laws of nature, and the
 laws of our severall soveraigns: nor did make any new law to the jews
 in his sermon on the mount, but onely expounded the laws of moses, to
 which they were subject before. the laws of god therefore are none
 but the laws of nature, whereof the principall is, that we should
 not violate our faith, that is, commandement to obey our civill
 soveraigns, which wee constituted over us, by mutuall pact one with
 another. and this law of god, that commandeth obedience to the law
 civill, commandeth by consequence obedience to all the precepts of the
 bible, which (as i have proved in the precedent chapter) is there onely
 law, where the civill soveraign hath made it so; and in other places but
 counsell; which man at his own perill, may without injustice refuse to
 obey.
 



in the faith of christian, who is the person beleeved
 
knowing now what is the obedience necessary to salvation, and to whom
 it is due; we are to consider next concerning faith, whom, and why we
 beleeve; and what are the articles, or points necessarily to be beleeved
 by them that shall be saved. and first, for the person whom we beleeve,
 because it is impossible to beleeve any person, before we know what he
 saith, it is necessary be one that wee have heard speak. the person
 therefore, whom abraham, isaac, jacob, moses and the prophets beleeved,
 was god himself, that spake unto them supernaturally: and the person,
 whom the apostles and disciples that conversed with christ beleeved, was
 our saviour himself. but of them, to whom neither god the father, nor
 our saviour ever spake, it cannot be said, that the person whom they
 beleeved, was god. they beleeved the apostles, and after them the
 pastors and doctors of the church, that recommended to their faith the
 history of the old and new testament: so that the faith of christians
 ever since our saviours time, hath had for foundation, first, the
 reputation of their pastors, and afterward, the authority of those that
 made the old and new testament to be received for the rule of faith;
 which none could do but christian soveraignes; who are therefore the
 supreme pastors, and the onely persons, whom christians now hear speak
 from god; except such as god speaketh to, in these days supernaturally.
 but because there be many false prophets "gone out into the world,"
 other men are to examine such spirits (as st. john advised us, 1
 epistle, chap. 4. ver.1.) "whether they be of god, or not." and
 therefore, seeing the examination of doctrines belongeth to the supreme
 pastor, the person which all they that have speciall revelation are
 to beleeve, is (in every common-wealth) the supreme pastor, that is to
 say, the civill soveraigne.
 



the causes of christian faith
 
the causes why men beleeve any christian doctrine, are various; for
 faith is the gift of god; and worketh it in each severall man, by
 such wayes, as it seemeth good unto himself. the most ordinary immediate
 cause of our beleef, concerning any point of christian faith, is, that
 wee beleeve the bible to be the word of god. but why wee beleeve the
 bible to be the word of god, is much disputed, as all questions must
 needs bee, that are not well stated. for they make not the question
 to be, "why we beleeve it," but "how wee know it;" as if beleeving and
 knowing were all one. and thence while one side ground their knowledge
 upon the infallibility of the church, and the other side, on the
 testimony of the private spirit, neither side concludeth what it
 pretends. for how shall man know the infallibility of the church, but
 by knowing first the infallibility of the scripture? or how shall man
 know his own private spirit to be other than beleef, grounded upon the
 authority, and arguments of his teachers; or upon presumption of his
 own gifts? besides, there is nothing in the scripture, from which can be
 inferred the infallibility of the church; much lesse, of any particular
 church; and least of all, the infallibility of any particular man.
 



faith comes by hearing
 
it is manifest, therefore, that christian men doe not know, but onely
 beleeve the scripture to be the word of god; and that the means of
 making them beleeve which god is pleased to afford men ordinarily, is
 according to the way of nature, that is to say, from their teachers.
 it is the doctrine of st. paul concerning christian faith in generall,
 (rom. 10.17.) "faith cometh by hearing," that is, by hearing our lawfull
 pastors. saith also (ver. 14,15. of the same chapter) "how shall
 they beleeve in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
 without preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent?"
 whereby it is evident, that the ordinary cause of beleeving that the
 scriptures are the word of god, is the same with the cause of the
 beleeving of all other articles of our faith, namely, the hearing of
 those that are by the law allowed and appointed to teach us, as our
 parents in their houses, and our pastors in the churches: which also
 is made more manifest by experience. for what other cause can there bee
 assigned, why in christian common-wealths all men either beleeve, or
 at least professe the scripture to bee the word of god, and in other
 common-wealths scarce any; but that in christian common-wealths they
 are taught it from their infancy; and in other places they are taught
 otherwise?
 
but if teaching be the cause of faith, why doe not all beleeve? it is
 certain therefore that faith is the gift of god, and hee giveth it to
 whom will. neverthelesse, because of them to whom giveth it, he
 giveth it by the means of teachers, the immediate cause of faith is
 hearing. in school where many are taught, and some profit, others
 profit not, the cause of learning in them that profit, is the master;
 yet it cannot be thence inferred, that learning is not the gift of god.
 all good things proceed from god; yet cannot all that have them, say
 they are inspired; for that implies gift supernaturall, and the
 immediate hand of god; which that pretends to, pretends to be a
 prophet, and is subject to the examination of the church.
 
but whether men know, or beleeve, or grant the scriptures to be the word
 of god; if out of such places of them, as are without obscurity, i
 shall shew what articles of faith are necessary, and onely necessary for
 salvation, those men must needs know, beleeve, or grant the same.
 
the onely necessary article of christian faith, the (unum necessarium)
 onely article of faith, which the scripture maketh simply necessary to
 salvation, is this, that jesus is the christ. by the name of christ, is
 understood the king, which god had before promised by the prophets of
 the old testament, to send into the world, to reign (over the jews,
 and over such of other nations as should beleeve in him) under himself
 eternally; and to give them that eternall life, which was lost by the
 of adam. which when i have proved out of scripture, i will further
 shew when, and in what sense some other articles may bee also called
 necessary.
 



proved from the scope of the evangelists
 
for proof that the beleef of this article, jesus is the christ, is all
 the faith required to salvation, my first argument shall bee from the
 scope of the evangelists; which was by the description of the life of
 our saviour, to establish that one article, jesus is the christ. the
 summe of st. matthews gospell is this, that jesus was of the stock of
 david; born of virgin; which are the marks of the true christ: that
 the magi came to worship him as king of the jews: that herod for the
 same cause sought to kill him: that john baptist proclaimed him: that
 preached by himselfe, and his apostles that was that king; that
 taught the law, not as scribe, but as man of authority: that he
 cured diseases by his word onely, and did many other miracles, which
 were foretold the christ should doe: that was saluted king when he
 entered into jerusalem: that fore-warned them to beware of all others
 that should pretend to be christ: that was taken, accused, and put
 to death, for saying, hee was king: that the cause of his condemnation
 written on the crosse, was jesus of nazareth, the king of the jewes.
 all which tend to other end than this, that men should beleeve,
 that jesus is the christ. such therefore was the scope of st. matthews
 gospel. but the scope of all the evangelists (as may appear by reading
 them) was the same. therefore the scope of the whole gospell, was the
 establishing of that onely article. and st. john expressely makes it his
 conclusion, john 20. 31. "these things are written, that you may know
 that jesus is the christ, the of the living god."
 



from the sermons of the apostles:
 
my second argument is taken from the subject of the sermons of the
 apostles, both whilest our saviour lived on earth, and after his
 ascension. the apostles in our saviours time were sent, luke 9.2. to
 preach the kingdome of god: for neither there, nor mat. 10.7. giveth he
 any commission to them, other than this, "as ye go, preach, saying, the
 kingdome of heaven is at hand;" that is, that jesus is the messiah, the
 christ, the king which was to come. that their preaching also after his
 ascension was the same, is manifest out of acts 17.6. "they drew (saith
 st. luke) jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city,
 crying, these that have turned the world upside down are come hither
 also, whom jason hath received. and these all do contrary to the decrees
 of caesar, saying, that there is another king, one jesus:" and out of
 the 2.&3. verses of the same chapter, where it is said, that st. paul
 "as his manner was, went in unto them; and three sabbath dayes reasoned
 with them out of the scriptures; opening and alledging, that christ must
 needs have suffered, and risen againe from the dead, and that this jesus
 (whom preached) is christ."
 



from the easinesse of the doctrine:
 
the third argument is, from those places of scripture, by which all the
 faith required to salvation is declared to be easie. for if an inward
 assent of the mind to all the doctrines concerning christian faith now
 taught, (whereof the greatest part are disputed,) were necessary to
 salvation, there would be nothing in the world so hard, as to be a
 christian. the thief upon the crosse though repenting, could not have
 been saved for saying, "lord remember when thou commest into thy
 kingdome;" by which testified beleefe of any other article, but
 this, that jesus was the king. nor could it bee said (as it is mat.
 11. 30.) that "christs yoke is easy, and his burthen light:" nor that
 "little children beleeve in him," as it is matth. 18.6. nor could st.
 paul have said (1 cor. 1. 21.) "it pleased god by the foolishnesse of
 preaching, to save them that beleeve:" nor could st. paul himself have
 been saved, much lesse have been so great doctor of the church
 so suddenly, that never perhaps thought of transsubstantiation, nor
 purgatory, nor many other articles now obtruded.
 



from formall and cleer texts
 
the fourth argument is taken from places expresse, and such as receive
 controversie of interpretation; as first, john 5. 39. "search the
 scriptures, for in them yee thinke yee have eternall life; and they are
 they that testifie of mee." our saviour here speaketh of the scriptures
 onely of the old testament; for the jews at that time could not search
 the scriptures of the new testament, which were not written. but the old
 testament hath nothing of christ, but the markes by which men might
 know him when hee came; as that should descend from david, be born at
 bethlehem, and of virgin; doe great miracles, and the like. therefore
 to beleeve that this jesus was he, was sufficient to eternall life: but
 more than sufficient is not necessary; and consequently other article
 is required. again, (john 11. 26.) "whosoever liveth and beleeveth in
 mee, shall not die eternally," therefore to beleeve in christ, is faith
 sufficient to eternall life; and consequently more faith than that
 is necessary, but to beleeve in jesus, and to beleeve that jesus is the
 christ, is all one, as appeareth in the verses immediately following.
 for when our saviour (verse 26.) had said to martha, "beleevest thou
 this?" she answereth (verse 27.) "yea lord, i beleeve that thou art the
 christ, the of god, which should come into the world;" therefore
 this article alone is faith sufficient to life eternall; and more than
 sufficient is not necessary. thirdly, john 20. 31. "these things are
 written that yee might beleeve, that jesus is the christ, the of
 god, and that beleeving yee might have life through his name." there, to
 beleeve that jesus is the christ, is faith sufficient to the obtaining
 of life; and therefore other article is necessary. fourthly, 1 john
 4. 2. "every spirit that confesseth that jesus christ is come in the
 flesh, is of god." and 1 joh. 5. 1. "whosoever beleeveth that jesus is
 the christ, is born of god." and verse 5. "who is hee that overcommeth
 the world, but that beleeveth that jesus is the of god?" fiftly,
 act. 8. ver. 36, 37. "see (saith the eunuch) here is water, what doth
 hinder to be baptized? and philip said, if thou beleevest with all
 thy heart thou mayst. and hee answered and said, i beleeve that jesus
 christ is the of god." therefore this article beleeved, jesus is the
 christ, is sufficient to baptisme, that is to say, to our reception into
 the kingdome of god, and by consequence, onely necessary. and generally
 in all places where our saviour saith to any man, "thy faith hath saved
 thee," the cause saith it, is some confession, which directly, or by
 consequence, implyeth beleef, that jesus is the christ.
 



from that it is the foundation of all other articles
 
the last argument is from the places, where this article is made the
 foundation of faith: for that holdeth the foundation shall bee saved.
 which places are first, mat. 24.23. "if any man shall say unto you, loe,
 here is christ, or there, beleeve it not, for there shall arise false
 christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders,
 &c." here wee see, this article jesus is the christ, must bee held,
 though hee that shall teach the contrary should doe great miracles. the
 second place is gal. 1. 8. "though we, or an angell from heaven preach
 any other gospell unto you, than that wee have preached unto you, let
 him bee accursed." but the gospell which paul, and the other apostles,
 preached, was onely this article, that jesus is the christ; therefore
 for the beleef of this article, we are to reject the authority of
 an angell from heaven; much more of any mortall man, if teach the
 contrary. this is therefore the fundamentall article of christian faith.
 third place is, 1 joh. 4.1. "beloved, beleeve not every spirit. hereby
 yee shall know the spirit of god; every spirit that confesseth that
 jesus christ is come in the flesh, is of god." by which it is evident,
 that this article, is the measure, and rule, by which to estimate,
 and examine all other articles; and is therefore onely fundamentall.
 fourth is, matt. 16.18. where after st. peter had professed this
 article, saying to our saviour, "thou art christ the of the living
 god," our saviour answered, "thou art peter, and upon this rock i will
 build my church:" from whence i inferre, that this article is that,
 on which all other doctrines of the church are built, as on their
 foundation. fift is (1 cor. 3. ver. 11, 12, &c.) "other foundation can
 man lay, than that which is laid, jesus is the christ. now if any man
 build upon this foundation, gold, silver, pretious stones, wood, hay,
 stubble; every mans work shall be made manifest; for the day shall
 declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try
 every mans work, of what sort it is. if any mans work abide, which he
 hath built thereupon, shall receive reward: if any mans work shall
 bee burnt, shall suffer losse; but himself shall be saved, yet so
 as by fire." which words, being partly plain and easie to understand,
 and partly allegoricall and difficult; out of that which is plain, may
 be inferred, that pastors that teach this foundation, that jesus is the
 christ, though they draw from it false consequences, (which all men are
 sometimes subject to,) they may neverthelesse bee saved; much more that
 they may bee saved, who being pastors, but hearers, beleeve that
 which is by their lawfull pastors taught them. therefore the beleef of
 this article is sufficient; and by consequence there is other article
 of faith necessarily required to salvation.
 
now for the part which is allegoricall, as "that the fire shall try
 every mans work," and that "they shall be saved, but so as by fire,"
 or "through fire," (for the originall is dia puros,) it maketh nothing
 against this conclusion which i have drawn from the other words, that
 are plain. neverthelesse, because upon this place there hath been an
 argument taken, to prove the fire of purgatory, i will also here offer
 you my conjecture concerning the meaning of this triall of doctrines,
 and saving of men as by fire. the apostle here seemeth to allude to
 the words of the prophet zachary, ch. 13. 8,9. who speaking of the
 restauration of the kingdome of god, saith thus, "two parts therein
 shall be cut off, and die, but the third shall be left therein; and
 i will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as
 silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tryed; they shall call
 on the name of the lord, and i will hear them." the day of judgment, is
 the day of the restauration of the kingdome of god; and at that day
 it is, that st. peter tells us (2 pet. 3. v.7, 10, 12.) shall be the
 conflagration of the world, wherein the wicked shall perish; but the
 remnant which god will save, shall passe through that fire, unhurt,
 and be therein (as silver and gold are refined by the fire from their
 drosse) tryed, and refined from their idolatry, and be made to call upon
 the name of the true god. alluding whereto st. paul here saith, that the
 day (that is, the day of judgment, the great day of our saviours comming
 to restore the kingdome of god in israel) shall try every mans doctrine,
 by judging, which are gold, silver, pretious stones, wood, hay, stubble;
 and then they that have built false consequences on the true foundation,
 shall see their doctrines condemned; neverthelesse they themselves
 shall be saved, and passe unhurt through this universall fire, and live
 eternally, to call upon the name of the true and onely god. in which
 sense there is nothing that accordeth not with the rest of holy
 scripture, or any glimpse of the fire of purgatory.
 



in what sense other articles may be called necessary
 
but man may here aske, whether it bee not as necessary to salvation,
 to beleeve, that god is omnipotent; creator of the world; that jesus
 christ is risen; and that all men else shall rise again from the dead
 at the last day; as to beleeve, that jesus is the christ. to which i
 answer, they are; and so are many more articles: but they are such, as
 are contained in this one, and may be deduced from it, with more, or
 lesse difficulty. for who is there that does not see, that they
 who beleeve jesus to be the of the god of israel, and that the
 israelites had for god the omnipotent creator of all things, doe therein
 also beleeve, that god is the omnipotent creator of all things? or how
 can man beleeve, that jesus is the king that shall reign eternally,
 unlesse hee beleeve him also risen again from the dead? for dead man
 cannot exercise the office of king. in summe, that holdeth this
 foundation, jesus is the christ, holdeth expressely all that hee
 seeth rightly deduced from it, and implicitely all that is consequent
 thereunto, though have not skill enough to discern the consequence.
 and therefore it holdeth still good, that the beleef of this one article
 is sufficient faith to obtaine remission of sinnes to the penitent, and
 consequently to bring them into the kingdome of heaven.
 



that faith, and obedience are both of them necessary to salvation
 
now that i have shewn, that all the obedience required to salvation,
 consisteth in the will to obey the law of god, that is to say, in
 repentance; and all the faith required to the same, is comprehended in
 the beleef of this article, jesus is the christ; i will further alledge
 those places of the gospell, that prove, that all that is necessary to
 salvation is contained in both these joined together. the men to whom
 st. peter preached on the day of pentecost, next after the ascension
 of our saviour, asked him, and the rest of the apostles, saying, (act.
 2.37.) "men and brethren what shall we doe?" to whom st. peter answered
 (in the next verse) "repent, and be baptized every one of you, for the
 remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost."
 therefore repentance, and baptisme, that is, beleeving that jesus is the
 christ, is all that is necessary to salvation. again, our saviour being
 asked by certain ruler, (luke 18.18.) "what shall i doe to inherit
 eternall life?" answered (verse 20) "thou knowest the commandements,
 doe not commit adultery, doe not kill, doe not steal, doe not bear false
 witnesse, honor thy father, and thy mother;" which when said had
 observed, our saviour added, "sell all thou hast, give it to the poor,
 and come and follow me:" which was as much as to say, relye on that
 am the king: therefore to fulfill the law, and to beleeve that jesus
 is the king, is all that is required to bring man to eternall life.
 thirdly, st. paul saith (rom. 1.17.) "the just shall live by faith;" not
 every one, but the just; therefore faith and justice (that is, the will
 to be just, or repentance) are all that is necessary to life eternall.
 and (mark 1.15.) our saviour preached, saying, "the time is fulfilled,
 and the kingdom of god is at hand, repent and beleeve the evangile,"
 that is, the good news that the christ was come. therefore to repent,
 and to beleeve that jesus is the christ, is all that is required to
 salvation.
 



what each of them contributes thereunto
 
seeing then it is necessary that faith, and obedience (implyed in the
 word repentance) do both concurre to our salvation; the question
 by which of the two we are justified, is impertinently disputed.
 neverthelesse, it will not be impertinent, to make manifest in what
 manner each of them contributes thereunto; and in what sense it is said,
 that we are to be justified by the one, and by the other. and first,
 if by righteousnesse be understood the justice of the works themselves,
 there is man that can be saved; for there is none that hath not
 transgressed the law of god. and therefore when wee are said to be
 justified by works, it is to be understood of the will, which god doth
 alwaies accept for the work it selfe, as well in good, as in evill men.
 and in this sense onely it is, that man is called just, or unjust; and
 that his justice justifies him, that is, gives him the title, in gods
 acceptation, of just; and renders him capable of living by his faith,
 which before was not. so that justice justifies in that that sense,
 in which to justifie, is the same that to denominate man just; and not
 in the signification of discharging the law; whereby the punishment of
 his sins should be unjust.
 
but man is then also said to be justified, when his plea, though in
 it selfe unsufficient, is accepted; as when we plead our will, our
 endeavour to fulfill the law, and repent us of our failings, and god
 accepteth it for the performance it selfe: and because god accepteth not
 the will for the deed, but onely in the faithfull; it is therefore faith
 that makes good our plea; and in this sense it is, that faith onely
 justifies: so that faith and obedience are both necessary to salvation;
 yet in severall senses each of them is said to justifie.
 



obedience to god and to the civill soveraign not inconsistent
 
whether christian, having thus shewn what is necessary to salvation; it
 is not hard to reconcile our obedience to the civill soveraign; who is
 either christian, or infidel. if bee christian, alloweth the
 beleefe of this article, that jesus is the christ; and of all the
 articles that are contained in, or are evident consequence deduced from
 it: which is all the faith necessary to salvation. and because is a
 soveraign, requireth obedience to all his owne, that is, to all the
 civill laws; in which also are contained all the laws of nature, that
 is, all the laws of god: for besides the laws of nature, and the laws of
 the church, which are part of the civill law, (for the church that
 can make laws is the common-wealth,) there bee other laws divine.
 whosoever therefore obeyeth his christian soveraign, is not thereby
 hindred, neither from beleeving, nor from obeying god. but suppose that
 christian king should from this foundation, jesus is the christ, draw
 some false consequences, that is to say, make some superstructions of
 hay, or stubble, and command the teaching of the same; yet seeing st.
 paul says, shal be saved; much more shall be saved, that teacheth
 them by his command; and much more yet, that teaches not, but onely
 beleeves his lawfull teacher. and in case subject be forbidden by
 the civill soveraign to professe some of those his opinions, upon
 what grounds can disobey? christian kings may erre in deducing a
 consequence, but who shall judge? shall private man judge, when the
 question is of his own obedience? or shall any man judg but that is
 appointed thereto by the church, that is, by the civill soveraign that
 representeth it? or if the pope, or an apostle judge, may not erre
 in deducing of consequence? did not one of the two, st. peter, or st.
 paul erre in superstructure, when st. paul withstood st. peter to his
 face? there can therefore be contradiction between the laws of god,
 and the laws of christian common-wealth.
 



or infidel
 
and when the civill soveraign is an infidel, every one of his own
 subjects that resisteth him, sinneth against the laws of god (for such
 as are the laws of nature,) and rejecteth the counsell of the apostles,
 that admonisheth all christians to obey their princes, and all children
 and servants to obey they parents, and masters, in all things. and for
 their faith, it is internall, and invisible; they have the licence that
 naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger for it. but if they
 do, they ought to expect their reward in heaven, and not complain of
 their lawfull soveraign; much lesse make warre upon him. for that
 is not glad of any just occasion of martyrdome, has not the faith be
 professeth, but pretends it onely, to set some colour upon his own
 contumacy. but what infidel king is so unreasonable, as knowing has
 subject, that waiteth for the second comming of christ, after the
 present world shall be burnt, and intendeth then to obey him (which is
 the intent of beleeving that jesus is the christ,) and in the mean time
 thinketh himself bound to obey the laws of that infidel king, (which
 all christians are obliged in conscience to doe,) to put to death, or to
 persecute such subject?
 
and thus much shall suffice, concerning the kingdome of god, and policy
 ecclesiasticall. wherein i pretend not to advance any position of
 my own, but onely to shew what are the consequences that seem to me
 deducible from the principles of christian politiques, (which are the
 holy scriptures,) in confirmation of the power of civill soveraigns, and
 the duty of their subjects. and in the allegation of scripture, i have
 endeavoured to avoid such texts as are of obscure, or controverted
 interpretation; and to alledge none, but is such sense as is most plain,
 and agreeable to the harmony and scope of the whole bible; which was
 written for the re-establishment of the kingdome of god in christ. for
 it is not the bare words, but the scope of the writer that giveth the
 true light, by which any writing is to bee interpreted; and they that
 insist upon single texts, without considering the main designe, can
 derive thing from them cleerly; but rather by casting atomes of
 scripture, as dust before mens eyes, make every thing more obscure than
 it is; an ordinary artifice of those that seek not the truth, but their
 own advantage.
 



part iv.
 of the kingdome of darknesse
 



chapter xliv. of spirituall darknesse from misinterpretation of
 scripture
 



the kingdome of darknesse what
 
besides these soveraign powers, divine, and humane, of which i have
 hitherto discoursed, there is mention in scripture of another power,
 namely, (eph. 6. 12.), that of "the rulers of the darknesse of this
 world," (mat. 12. 26.), "the kingdome of satan," and, (mat. 9. 34.), "the
 principality of beelzebub over daemons," that is to say, over phantasmes
 that appear in the air: for which cause satan is also called (eph. 2.
 2.) "the prince of the power of the air;" and (because ruleth in the
 darknesse of this world) (joh. 16. 11.) "the prince of this world;" and
 in consequence hereunto, they who are under his dominion, in opposition
 to the faithfull (who are the children of the light) are called the
 children of darknesse. for seeing beelzebub is prince of phantasmes,
 inhabitants of his dominion of air and darknesse, the children of
 darknesse, and these daemons, phantasmes, or spirits of illusion,
 signifie allegorically the same thing. this considered, the kingdome
 of darknesse, as it is set forth in these, and other places of the
 scripture, is nothing else but "confederacy of deceivers, that to
 obtain dominion over men in this present world, endeavour by dark, and
 erroneous doctrines, to extinguish in them the light, both of nature,
 and of the gospell; and so to dis-prepare them for the kingdome of god
 to come."
 



the church not yet fully freed of darknesse
 
as men that are utterly deprived from their nativity, of the light
 of the bodily eye, have idea at all, of any such light; and man
 conceives in his imagination any greater light, than hath at some
 time, or other perceived by his outward senses: so also is it of the
 light of the gospel, and of the light of the understanding, that man
 can conceive there is any greater degree of it, than that which hath
 already attained unto. and from hence it comes to passe, that men
 have other means to acknowledge their owne darknesse, but onely by
 reasoning from the un-forseen mischances, that befall them in their
 ways; the darkest part of the kingdome of satan, is that which is
 without the church of god; that is to say, amongst them that beleeve not
 in jesus christ. but we cannot say, that therefore the church enjoyeth
 (as the land of goshen) all the light, which to the performance of
 the work enjoined us by god, is necessary. whence comes it, that in
 christendome there has been, almost from the time of the apostles,
 such justling of one another out of their places, both by forraign,
 and civill war? such stumbling at every little asperity of their own
 fortune, and every little eminence of that of other men? and such
 diversity of ways in running to the same mark, felicity, if it be not
 night amongst us, or at least mist? wee are therefore yet in the dark.
 



four causes of spirituall darknesse
 
the enemy has been here in the night of our naturall ignorance, and sown
 the tares of spirituall errors; and that, first, by abusing, and
 putting out the light of the scriptures: for we erre, not knowing the
 scriptures. secondly, by introducing the daemonology of the heathen
 poets, that is to say, their fabulous doctrine concerning daemons, which
 are but idols, or phantasms of the braine, without any reall nature of
 their own, distinct from humane fancy; such as are dead mens ghosts, and
 fairies, and other matter of old wives tales. thirdly, by mixing with
 the scripture divers reliques of the religion, and much of the vain and
 erroneous philosophy of the greeks, especially of aristotle. fourthly,
 by mingling with both these, false, or uncertain traditions, and
 fained, or uncertain history. and so we come to erre, by "giving heed
 to seducing spirits," and the daemonology of such "as speak lies in
 hypocrisie," (or as it is in the originall, 1 tim. 4.1,2. "of those that
 play the part of lyars") "with seared conscience," that is, contrary
 to their own knowledge. concerning the first of these, which is the
 seducing of men by abuse of scripture, i intend to speak briefly in this
 chapter.
 



errors from misinterpreting the scriptures, concerning the kingdome
 of god
 
the greatest, and main abuse of scripture, and to which almost all the
 rest are either consequent, or subservient, is the wresting of it, to
 prove that the kingdome of god, mentioned so often in the scripture, is
 the present church, or multitude of christian men now living, or that
 being dead, are to rise again at the last day: whereas the kingdome of
 god was first instituted by the ministery of moses, over the jews onely;
 who were therefore called his peculiar people; and ceased afterward, in
 the election of saul, when they refused to be governed by god any more,
 and demanded king after the manner of the nations; which god himself
 consented unto, as i have more at large proved before, in the 35.
 chapter. after that time, there was other kingdome of god in the
 world, by any pact, or otherwise, than ever was, is, and shall be
 king, of all men, and of all creatures, as governing according to his
 will, by his infinite power. neverthelesse, promised by his prophets
 to restore this his government to them again, when the time hath in
 his secret counsell appointed for it shall bee fully come, and when they
 shall turn unto him by repentance, and amendment of life; and not
 onely so, but invited also the gentiles to come in, and enjoy the
 happinesse of his reign, on the same conditions of conversion and
 repentance; and hee promised also to send his into the world, to
 expiate the sins of them all by his death, and to prepare them by his
 doctrine, to receive him at his second coming: which second coming not
 yet being, the kingdome of god is not yet come, and wee are not now
 under any other kings by pact, but our civill soveraigns; saving onely,
 that christian men are already in the kingdome of grace, in as much as
 they have already the promise of being received at his comming againe.
 



as that the kingdome of god is the present church
 
consequent to this errour, that the present church is christs kingdome,
 there ought to be some one man, or assembly, by whose mouth our saviour
 (now in heaven) speaketh, giveth law, and which representeth his person
 to all christians, or divers men, or divers assemblies that doe the same
 to divers parts of christendome. this power regal under christ, being
 challenged, universally by that pope, and in particular common-wealths
 by assemblies of the pastors of the place, (when the scripture gives it
 to none but to civill soveraigns,) comes to be so passionately disputed,
 that it putteth out the light of nature, and causeth so great a
 darknesse in mens understanding, that they see not who it is to whom
 they have engaged their obedience.
 



and that the pope is his vicar generall
 
consequent to this claim of the pope to vicar generall of christ in the
 present church, (supposed to be that kingdom of his, to which we are
 addressed in the gospel,) is the doctrine, that it is necessary for a
 christian king, to receive his crown by bishop; as if it were from
 that ceremony, that derives the clause of dei gratia in his title;
 and that then onely is made king by the favour of god, when is
 crowned by the authority of gods universall viceregent on earth; and
 that every bishop whosoever be his soveraign, taketh at his consecration
 an oath of absolute obedience to the pope, consequent to the same, is
 the doctrine of the fourth councell of lateran, held under pope innocent
 the third, (chap. 3. haereticis.) "that if king at the popes
 admonition, doe not purge his kingdome of haeresies, and being
 excommunicate for the same, doe not give satisfaction within year,
 his subjects are absolved of the bond of their obedience." where, by
 haeresies are understood all opinions which the church of rome hath
 forbidden to be maintained. and by this means, as often as there is
 any repugnancy between the politicall designes of the pope, and other
 christian princes, as there is very often, there ariseth such mist
 amongst their subjects, that they know not stranger that thrusteth
 himself into the throne of their lawfull prince, from him whom they
 had themselves placed there; and in this darknesse of mind, are made to
 fight one against another, without discerning their enemies from their
 friends, under the conduct of another mans ambition.
 



and that the pastors are the clergy
 
from the same opinion, that the present church is the kingdome of god,
 it proceeds that pastours, deacons, and all other ministers of the
 church, take the name to themselves of the clergy, giving to other
 christians the name of laity, that is, simply people. for clergy
 signifies those, whose maintenance is that revenue, which god having
 reserved to himselfe during his reigne over the israelites, assigned
 to the tribe of levi (who were to be his publique ministers, and had no
 portion of land set them out to live on, as their brethren) to be their
 inheritance. the pope therefore, (pretending the present church to be,
 as the realme of israel, the kingdome of god) challenging to himselfe
 and his subordinate ministers, the like revenue, as the inheritance of
 god, the name of clergy was sutable to that claime. and thence it is,
 that tithes, or other tributes paid to the levites, as gods right,
 amongst the israelites, have long time been demanded, and taken of
 christians, by ecclesiastiques, jure divino, that is, in gods right. by
 which meanes, the people every where were obliged to double tribute;
 one to the state, another to the clergy; whereof, that to the clergy,
 being the tenth of their revenue, is double to that which king of
 athens (and esteemed tyrant) exacted of his subjects for the defraying
 of all publique charges: for demanded more but the twentieth part;
 and yet abundantly maintained therewith the commonwealth. and in the
 kingdome of the jewes, during the sacerdotall reigne of god, the tithes
 and offerings were the whole publique revenue.
 
from the same mistaking of the present church for the kingdom of god,
 came in the distinction betweene the civill and the canon laws: the
 civil law being the acts of soveraigns in their own dominions, and
 the canon law being the acts of the pope in the same dominions. which
 canons, though they were but canons, that is, rules propounded, and but
 voluntarily received by christian princes, till the translation of
 the empire to charlemain; yet afterwards, as the power of the pope
 encreased, became rules commanded, and the emperours themselves (to
 avoyd greater mischiefes, which the people blinded might be led into)
 were forced to let them passe for laws.
 
from hence it is, that in all dominions, where the popes ecclesiasticall
 power is entirely received, jewes, turkes, and gentiles, are in the
 roman church tolerated in their religion, as farre forth, as in the
 exercise and profession thereof they offend not against the civill
 power: whereas in christian, though stranger, not to be of the roman
 religion, is capitall; because the pope pretendeth that all christians
 are his subjects. for otherwise it were as much against the law of
 nations, to persecute christian stranger, for professing the religion
 of his owne country, as an infidell; or rather more, in as much as they
 that are not against christ, are with him.
 
from the same it is, that in every christian state there are certaine
 men, that are exempt, by ecclesiasticall liberty, from the tributes, and
 from the tribunals of the civil state; for so are the secular clergy,
 besides monks and friars, which in many places, bear so great a
 proportion to the common people, as if need were, there might be raised
 out of them alone, an army, sufficient for any warre the church militant
 should imploy them in, against their owne, or other princes.
 



error from mistaking consecration for conjuration
 
second generall abuse of scripture, is the turning of consecration
 into conjuration, or enchantment. to consecrate, is in scripture, to
 offer, give, or dedicate, in pious and decent language and gesture, a
 man, or any other thing to god, by separating of it from common use;
 that is to say, to sanctifie, or make it gods, and to be used only by
 those, whom god hath appointed to be his publike ministers, (as i have
 already proved at large in the 35. chapter;) and thereby to change, not
 the thing consecrated, but onely the use of it, from being profane
 and common, to be holy, and peculiar to gods service. but when by such
 words, the nature of qualitie of the thing it selfe, is pretended to be
 changed, it is not consecration, but either an extraordinary worke of
 god, or vaine and impious conjuration. but seeing (for the frequency
 of pretending the change of nature in their consecrations,) it cannot
 be esteemed work extraordinary, it is other than conjuration or
 incantation, whereby they would have men to beleeve an alteration of
 nature that is not, contrary to the testimony of mans sight, and of all
 the rest of his senses. as for example, when the priest, in stead of
 consecrating bread and wine to gods peculiar service in the sacrament of
 the lords supper, (which is but separation of it from the common use,
 to signifie, that is, to put men in mind of their redemption, by the
 passion of christ, whose body was broken, and blood shed upon the crosse
 for our transgressions,) pretends, that by saying of the words of our
 saviour, "this is my body," and "this is my blood," the nature of bread
 is more there, but his very body; notwithstanding there appeared not
 to the sight, or other sense of the receiver, any thing that appeareth
 not before the consecration. the egyptian conjurers, that are said
 to have turned their rods to serpents, and the water into bloud, are
 thought but to have deluded the senses of the spectators by false shew
 of things, yet are esteemed enchanters: but what should wee have thought
 of them, if there had appeared in their rods nothing like serpent, and
 in the water enchanted, nothing like bloud, nor like any thing else but
 water, but that they had faced down the king, that they were serpents
 that looked like rods, and that it was bloud that seemed water? that
 had been both enchantment, and lying. and yet in this daily act of
 the priest, they doe the very same, by turning the holy words into the
 manner of charme, which produceth nothing now to the sense; but they
 face us down, that it hath turned the bread into man; nay more, into
 god; and require men to worship it, as if it were our saviour himself
 present god and man, and thereby to commit most grosse idolatry. for if
 it bee enough to excuse it of idolatry, to say it is more bread, but
 god; why should not the same excuse serve the egyptians, in case they
 had the faces to say, the leeks, and onyons they worshipped, were
 not very leeks, and onyons, but divinity under their species, or
 likenesse. the words, "this is my body," are aequivalent to these,
 "this signifies, or represents my body;" and it is an ordinary figure of
 speech: but to take it literally, is an abuse; nor though so taken, can
 it extend any further, than to the bread which christ himself with his
 own hands consecrated. for hee never said, that of what bread soever,
 any priest whatsoever, should say, "this is my body," or, "this is
 christs body," the same should presently be transubstantiated. nor did
 the church of rome ever establish this transubstantiation, till the time
 of innocent the third; which was not above 500. years agoe, when the
 power of popes was at the highest, and the darknesse of the time grown
 so great, as men discerned not the bread that was given them to eat,
 especially when it was stamped with the figure of christ upon the
 crosse, as if they would have men beleeve it were transubstantiated, not
 onely into the body of christ, but also into the wood of his crosse, and
 that they did eat both together in the sacrament.
 



incantation in the ceremonies of baptisme
 
the like incantation, in stead of consecration, is used also in the
 sacrament of baptisme: where the abuse of gods name in each severall
 person, and in the whole trinity, with the sign of the crosse at each
 name, maketh up the charm: as first, when they make the holy water, the
 priest saith, "i conjure thee, thou creature of water, in the name of
 god the father almighty, and in the name of jesus christ his onely son
 our lord, and in vertue of the holy ghost, that thou become conjured
 water, to drive away all the powers of the enemy, and to eradicate, and
 supplant the enemy, &c." and the same in the benediction of the salt
 to be mingled with it; "that thou become conjured salt, that all
 phantasmes, and knavery of the devills fraud may fly and depart from the
 place wherein thou art sprinkled; and every unclean spirit bee conjured
 by him that shall come to judge the quicke and the dead." the same in
 the benediction of the oyle. "that all the power of the enemy, all the
 host of the devill, all assaults and phantasmes of satan, may be
 driven away by this creature of oyle." and for the infant that is to be
 baptized, is subject to many charms; first, at the church dore the
 priest blows thrice in the childs face, and sayes, "goe out of him
 unclean spirit, and give place to the holy ghost the comforter." as
 if all children, till blown on by the priest were daemoniaques: again,
 before his entrance into the church, saith as before, "i conjure
 thee, &c. to goe out, and depart from this servant of god:" and again
 the same exorcisme is repeated once more before be baptized. these,
 and some other incantations, and consecrations, in administration of the
 sacraments of baptisme, and the lords supper; wherein every thing that
 serveth to those holy men (except the unhallowed spittle of the priest)
 hath some set form of exorcisme.
 



in marriage, in visitation of the sick, and in consecration of places
 
nor are the other rites, as of marriage, of extreme unction, of
 visitation of the sick, of consecrating churches, and church-yards, and
 the like, exempt from charms; in as much as there is in them the use of
 enchanted oyle, and water, with the abuse of the crosse, and of the holy
 word of david, "asperges domine hyssopo," as things of efficacy to
 drive away phantasmes, and imaginery spirits.
 



errors from mistaking eternall life, and everlasting death
 
another generall error, is from the misinterpretation of the words
 eternall life, everlasting death, and the second death. for though we
 read plainly in holy scripture, that god created adam in an estate of
 living for ever, which was conditionall, that is to say, if disobeyed
 not his commandement; which was not essentiall to humane nature, but
 consequent to the vertue of the tree of life; whereof hee had liberty
 to eat, as long as hee had not sinned; and that hee was thrust out of
 paradise after had sinned, lest hee should eate thereof, and live for
 ever; and that christs passion is discharge of to all that beleeve
 on him; and by consequence, restitution of eternall life, to all the
 faithfull, and to them onely: yet the doctrine is now, and hath been a
 long time far otherwise; namely, that every man hath eternity of life by
 nature, in as much as his soul is immortall: so that the flaming sword
 at the entrance of paradise, though it hinder man from coming to the
 tree of life, hinders him not from the immortality which god took from
 him for his sin; nor makes him to need the sacrificing of christ, for
 the recovering of the same; and consequently, not onely the faithfull
 and righteous, but also the wicked, and the heathen, shall enjoy
 eternall life, without any death at all; much lesse second, and
 everlasting death. to salve this, it is said, that by second, and
 everlasting death, is meant second, and everlasting life, but in
 torments; figure never used, but in this very case.
 
all which doctrine is founded onely on some of the obscurer places of
 the new testament; which neverthelesse, the whole scope of the scripture
 considered, are cleer enough in different sense, and unnecessary to
 the christian faith. for supposing that when man dies, there remaineth
 nothing of him but his carkasse; cannot god that raised inanimated dust
 and clay into living creature by his word, as easily raise dead
 carkasse to life again, and continue him alive for ever, or make him
 die again, by another word? the soule in scripture, signifieth alwaies,
 either the life, or the living creature; and the body and soule jointly,
 the body alive. in the fift day of the creation, god said, let the water
 produce reptile animae viventis, the creeping thing that hath in it a
 living soule; the english translate it, "that hath life:" and again,
 god created whales, "& omnem animam viventem;" which in the english is,
 "every living creature:" and likewise of man, god made him of the dust
 of the earth, and breathed in his face the breath of life, "& factus est
 homo in animam viventem," that is, "and man was made living creature;"
 and after noah came out of the arke, god saith, hee will more smite
 "omnem animam viventem," that is "every living creature;" and deut.
 12.23. "eate not the bloud, for the bloud is the soule;" that is
 "the life." from which places, if by soule were meant substance
 incorporeall, with an existence separated from the body, it might as
 well be inferred of any other living creature, as of man. but that
 the souls of the faithfull, are not of their own nature, but by gods
 speciall grace, to remaine in their bodies, from the resurrection to
 all eternity, i have already i think sufficiently proved out of the
 scriptures, in the 38. chapter. and for the places of the new testament,
 where it is said that any man shall be cast body and soul into hell
 fire, it is more than body and life; that is to say, they shall be
 cast alive into the perpetuall fire of gehenna.
 



as the doctrine of purgatory, and exorcismes, and invocation of saints
 
this window it is, that gives entrance to the dark doctrine, first, of
 eternall torments; and afterwards of purgatory, and consequently of the
 walking abroad, especially in places consecrated, solitary, or dark, of
 the ghosts of men deceased; and thereby to the pretences of exorcisme
 and conjuration of phantasmes; as also of invocation of men dead; and to
 the doctrine of indulgences; that is to say, of exemption for time,
 or for ever, from the fire of purgatory, wherein these incorporeall
 substances are pretended by burning to be cleansed, and made fit
 for heaven. for men being generally possessed before the time of our
 saviour, by contagion of the daemonology of the greeks, of an opinion,
 that the souls of men were substances distinct from their bodies, and
 therefore that when the body was dead, the soule of every man, whether
 godly, or wicked, must subsist somewhere by vertue of its own nature,
 without acknowledging therein any supernaturall gift of gods; the
 doctors of the church doubted long time, what was the place, which
 they were to abide in, till they should be re-united to their bodies in
 the resurrection; supposing for while, they lay under the altars: but
 afterward the church of rome found it more profitable, to build for them
 this place of purgatory; which by some other churches in this later age,
 has been demolished.
 



the texts alledged for the doctrines aforementioned have been answered
 before
 
let us now consider, what texts of scripture seem most to confirm these
 three generall errors, i have here touched. as for those which cardinall
 bellarmine hath alledged, for the present kingdome of god administred by
 the pope, (than which there are none that make better show of proof,)
 i have already answered them; and made it evident, that the kingdome
 of god, instituted by moses, ended in the election of saul: after which
 time the priest of his own authority never deposed any king. that which
 the high priest did to athaliah, was not done in his own right, but in
 the right of the young king joash her son: but solomon in his own right
 deposed the high priest abiathar, and set up another in his place. the
 most difficult place to answer, of all those than can be brought,
 to prove the kingdome of god by christ is already in this world, is
 alledged, not by bellarmine, nor any other of the church of rome; but
 by beza; that will have it to begin from the resurrection of christ.
 but whether hee intend thereby, to entitle the presbytery to the supreme
 power ecclesiasticall in the common-wealth of geneva, (and consequently
 to every presbytery in every other common-wealth,) or to princes,
 and other civill soveraignes, i doe not know. for the presbytery hath
 challenged the power to excommunicate their owne kings, and to bee the
 supreme moderators in religion, in the places where they have that form
 of church government, lesse then the pope challengeth it universally.
 



answer to the text on which beza infereth
 
that the kingdome of christ began at the resurrection the words are
 (marke 9.1.) "verily, i say unto you, that there be some of them that
 stand here, which shall not tast of death, till they have seene the
 kingdome of god come with power." which words, if taken grammatically,
 make it certaine, that either some of those men that stood by christ at
 that time, are yet alive; or else, that the kingdome of god must be now
 in this present world. and then there is another place more difficult:
 for when the apostles after our saviours resurrection, and immediately
 before his ascension, asked our saviour, saying, (acts.1.6.) "wilt thou
 at this time restore again the kingdome to israel," answered them,
 "it is not for you to know the times and the seasons, which the father
 hath put in his own power; but ye shall receive power by the comming of
 the holy ghost upon you, and yee shall be my (martyrs) witnesses both in
 jerusalem, & in all judaea, and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part
 of the earth:" which is as much as to say, my kingdome is not yet come,
 nor shall you foreknow when it shall come, for it shall come as theefe
 in the night; but i will send you the holy ghost, and by him you shall
 have power to beare witnesse to all the world (by your preaching) of
 my resurrection, and the workes i have done, and the doctrine i have
 taught, that they may beleeve in me, and expect eternall life, at my
 comming againe: how does this agree with the comming of christs kingdome
 at the resurrection? and that which st. paul saies (1 thessal. 1.9, 10.)
 "that they turned from idols, to serve the living and true god, and
 to waite for his sonne from heaven:" where to waite for his sonne from
 heaven, is to wait for his comming to be king in power; which were
 not necessary, if this kingdome had beene then present. againe, if the
 kingdome of god began (as beza on that place (mark 9.1.) would have it)
 at the resurrection; what reason is there for christians ever since the
 resurrection to say in their prayers, "let thy kingdome come"? it
 is therefore manifest, that the words of st. mark are not so to be
 interpreted. there be some of them that stand here (saith our saviour)
 that shall not tast of death till they have seen the kingdome of god
 come in power. if then this kingdome were to come at the resurrection
 of christ, why is it said, "some of them" rather than all? for they all
 lived till after christ was risen.
 



explication of the place in mark 9.1
 
but they that require an exact interpretation of this text, let them
 interpret first the like words of our saviour to st. peter concerning
 st. john, (chap. 21.22.) "if i will that tarry till i come, what is
 that to thee?" upon which was grounded report that hee should not dye:
 neverthelesse the truth of that report was neither confirmed, as well
 grounded; nor refuted, as ill grounded on those words; but left as a
 saying not understood. the same difficulty is also in the place of st.
 marke. and if it be lawfull to conjecture at their meaning, by that
 which immediately followes, both here, and in st. luke, where the same
 is againe repeated, it is not unprobable, to say they have relation
 to the transfiguration, which is described in the verses immediately
 following; where it is said, that "after six dayes jesus taketh with
 him peter, and james, and john (not all, but some of his disciples)
 and leadeth them up into an high mountaine apart by themselves, and
 was transfigured before them. and his rayment became shining, exceeding
 white as snow; so as fuller on earth can white them. and there
 appeared unto them elias with moses, and they were talking with jesus,
 &c." so that they saw christ in glory and majestie, as is to come;
 insomuch as "they were sore afraid." and thus the promise of our saviour
 was accomplished by way of vision: for it was vision, as may probably
 bee inferred out of st. luke, that reciteth the same story (ch. 9. ve.
 28.) and saith, that peter and they that were with him, were heavy with
 sleep; but most certainly out of matth. 17.9. (where the same is again
 related;) for our saviour charged them, saying, "tell man the vision
 untill the of man be risen from the dead." howsoever it be, yet
 there can from thence be taken argument, to prove that the kingdome
 of god taketh beginning till the day of judgement.
 



abuse of some other texts in defence of the power of the pope
 
as for some other texts, to prove the popes power over civill
 soveraignes (besides those of bellarmine;) as that the two swords that
 christ and his apostles had amongst them, were the spirituall and the
 temporall sword, which they say st. peter had given him by christ: and,
 that of the two luminaries, the greater signifies the pope, and the
 lesser the king; one might as well inferre out of the first verse of the
 bible, that by heaven is meant the pope, and by earth the king: which
 is not arguing from scripture, but wanton insulting over princes, that
 came in fashion after the time the popes were growne so secure of their
 greatnesse, as to contemne all christian kings; and treading on the
 necks of emperours, to mocke both them, and the scripture, in the words
 of the 91. psalm, "thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder, the
 young lion and the dragon thou shalt trample under thy feet."
 



the manner of consecrations in the scripture, was without exorcisms
 
as for the rites of consecration, though they depend for the most part
 upon the discretion and judgement of the governors of the church,
 and not upon the scriptures; yet those governors are obliged to such
 direction, as the nature of the action it selfe requireth; as that the
 ceremonies, words, and gestures, be both decent, and significant, or at
 least conformable to the action. when moses consecrated the tabernacle,
 the altar, and the vessels belonging to them (exod. 40.) anointed
 them with the oyle which god had commanded to bee made for that
 purpose; and they were holy; there was nothing exorcised, to drive away
 phantasmes. the same moses (the civill soveraigne of israel) when he
 consecrated aaron (the high priest,) and his sons, did wash them with
 water, (not exorcised water,) put their garments upon them, and anointed
 them with oyle; and they were sanctified, to minister unto the lord
 in the priests office; which was simple and decent cleansing, and
 adorning them, before hee presented them to god, to be his servants.
 when king solomon, (the civill soveraigne of israel) consecrated the
 temple hee had built, (2 kings 8.) stood before all the congregation
 of israel; and having blessed them, gave thanks to god, for putting
 into the heart of his father, to build it; and for giving to himselfe
 the grace to accomplish the same; and then prayed unto him, first,
 to accept that house, though it were not sutable to his infinite
 greatnesse; and to hear the prayers of his servants that should pray
 therein, or (if they were absent) towards it; and lastly, offered a
 sacrifice of peace-offering, and the house was dedicated. here was no
 procession; the king stood still in his first place; exorcised water;
 asperges me, nor other impertinent application of words spoken upon
 another occasion; but decent, and rationall speech, and such as in
 making to god present of his new built house, was most conformable
 to the occasion. we read not that st. john did exorcise the water
 of jordan; nor philip the water of the river wherein baptized the
 eunuch; nor that any pastor in the time of the apostles, did take his
 spittle, and put it to the nose of the person to be baptized, and say,
 "in odorem suavitatis," that is, "for sweet savour unto the lord;"
 wherein neither the ceremony of spittle, for the uncleannesse; nor the
 application of that scripture for the levity, can by any authority of
 man be justified.
 



the immortality of mans soule, not proved by scripture to be of nature,
 but of grace
 
to prove that the soule separated from the body liveth eternally, not
 onely the soules of the elect, by especiall grace, and restauration of
 the eternall life which adam lost by sinne, and our saviour restored
 by the sacrifice of himself, to the faithfull, but also the soules
 of reprobates, as property naturally consequent to the essence of
 mankind, without other grace of god, but that which is universally given
 to all mankind; there are divers places, which at the first sight seem
 sufficiently to serve the turn: but such, as when i compare them with
 that which i have before (chapter 38.) alledged out of the 14 of job,
 seem to mee much more subject to divers interpretation, than the words
 of job.
 
and first there are the words of solomon (ecclesiastes 12.7.) "then
 shall the dust return to dust, as it was, and the spirit shall return to
 god that gave it." which may bear well enough (if there be other text
 directly against it) this interpretation, that god onely knows, (but
 man not,) what becomes of mans spirit, when expireth; and the same
 solomon, in the same book, (chap. 3. ver. 20,21.) delivereth in the same
 sentence in the sense i have given it: his words are, "all goe, (man
 and beast) to the same place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
 again; who knoweth that the spirit of man goeth upward, and the spirit
 of the beast goeth downward to the earth?" that is, none knows but god;
 nor is it an unusuall phrase to say of things we understand not, "god
 knows what," and "god knows where." that of gen. 5.24. "enoch walked
 with god, and was not; for god took him;" which is expounded heb.
 13.5. "he was translated, that should not die; and was not found,
 because god had translated him. for before his translation, had this
 testimony, that pleased god," making as much for the immortality
 of the body, as of the soule, proveth, that this his translation was
 peculiar to them that please god; not common to them with the wicked;
 and depending on grace, not on nature. but on the contrary, what
 interpretation shall we give, besides the literall sense of the words of
 solomon (eccles. 3.19.) "that which befalleth the sons of men, befalleth
 beasts, even one thing befalleth them; as the one dyeth, so doth the
 other; yea, they have all one breath (one spirit;) so that man hath no
 praeeminence above beast, for all is vanity." by the literall sense,
 here is naturall immortality of the soule; nor yet any repugnancy
 with the life eternall, which the elect shall enjoy by grace. and (chap.
 4. ver.3.) "better is that hath not yet been, than both they;" that
 is, than they that live, or have lived; which, if the soule of all them
 that have lived, were immortall, were hard saying; for then to have
 an immortall soule, were worse than to have soule at all. and
 againe,(chapt. 9.5.) "the living know they shall die, but the dead know
 not any thing;" that is, naturally, and before the resurrection of the
 body.
 
another place which seems to make for naturall immortality of the
 soule, is that, where our saviour saith, that abraham, isaac, and jacob
 are living: but this is spoken of the promise of god, and of their
 certitude to rise again, not of life then actuall; and in the same
 sense that god said to adam, that on the day hee should eate of the
 forbidden fruit, should certainly die; from that time forward was
 dead man by sentence; but not by execution, till almost thousand
 years after. so abraham, isaac, and jacob were alive by promise, then,
 when christ spake; but are not actually till the resurrection. and the
 history of dives and lazarus, make nothing against this, if wee take it
 (as it is) for parable.
 
but there be other places of the new testament, where an immortality
 seemeth to be directly attributed to the wicked. for it is evident, that
 they shall all rise to judgement. and it is said besides in many places,
 that they shall goe into "everlasting fire, everlasting torments,
 everlasting punishments; and that the worm of conscience never dyeth;"
 and all this is comprehended in the word everlasting death, which is
 ordinarily interpreted everlasting life in torments: and yet i can find
 where that any man shall live in torments everlastingly. also, it
 seemeth hard, to say, that god who is the father of mercies, that doth
 in heaven and earth all that hee will; that hath the hearts of all men
 in his disposing; that worketh in men both to doe, and to will; and
 without whose free gift man hath neither inclination to good, nor
 repentance of evill, should punish mens transgressions without any end
 of time, and with all the extremity of torture, that men can imagine,
 and more. we are therefore to consider, what the meaning is, of
 everlasting fire, and other the like phrases of scripture.
 
i have shewed already, that the kingdome of god by christ beginneth at
 the day of judgment: that in that day, the faithfull shall rise again,
 with glorious, and spirituall bodies, and bee his subjects in that his
 kingdome, which shall be eternall; that they shall neither marry, nor
 be given in marriage, nor eate and drink, as they did in their naturall
 bodies; but live for ever in their individuall persons, without the
 specificall eternity of generation: and that the reprobates also shall
 rise again, to receive punishments for their sins: as also, that those
 of the elect, which shall be alive in their earthly bodies at that
 day, shall have their bodies suddenly changed, and made spirituall, and
 immortall. but that the bodies of the reprobate, who make the kingdome
 of satan, shall also be glorious, or spirituall bodies, or that they
 shall bee as the angels of god, neither eating, nor drinking, nor
 engendring; or that their life shall be eternall in their individuall
 persons, as the life of every faithfull man is, or as the life of adam
 had been if hee had not sinned, there is place of scripture to prove
 it; save onely these places concerning eternall torments; which may
 otherwise be interpreted.
 
from whence may be inferred, that as the elect after the resurrection
 shall be restored to the estate, wherein adam was before had sinned;
 so the reprobate shall be in the estate, that adam, and his posterity
 were in after the committed; saving that god promised redeemer to
 adam, and such of his seed as should trust in him, and repent; but not
 to them that should die in their sins, as do the reprobate.
 



eternall torments what
 
these things considered, the texts that mention eternall fire, eternal
 torments, or the word that never dieth, contradict not the doctrine of
 second, and everlasting death, in the proper and naturall sense of the
 word death. the fire, or torments prepared for the wicked in gehenna,
 tophet, or in what place soever, may continue for ever; and there may
 never want wicked men to be tormented in them; though not every, nor
 any one eternally. for the wicked being left in the estate they were in
 after adams sin, may at the resurrection live as they did, marry, and
 give in marriage, and have grosse and corruptible bodies, as all
 mankind now have; and consequently may engender perpetually, after the
 resurrection, as they did before: for there is place of scripture to
 the contrary. for st. paul, speaking of the resurrection (1 cor. 15.)
 understandeth it onely of the resurrection to life eternall; and not the
 resurrection to punishment. and of the first, saith that the body is
 "sown in corruption, raised in incorruption; sown in dishonour, raised
 in honour; sown in weaknesse, raised in power; sown naturall body,
 raised spirituall body:" there is such thing can be said of the
 bodies of them that rise to punishment. the text is luke 20. verses
 34,35,36. fertile text. "the children of this world marry, and are
 given in marriage; but they that shall be counted worthy to obtaine that
 world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given
 in marriage: neither can they die any more; for they are equall to
 the angells, and are the children of god, being the children of the
 resurrection:" the children of this world, that are in the estate
 which adam left them in, shall marry, and be given in marriage; that is
 corrupt, and generate successively; which is an immortality of the kind,
 but not of the persons of men: they are not worthy to be counted amongst
 them that shall obtain the next world, and an absolute resurrection from
 the dead; but onely short time, as inmates of that world; and to the
 end onely to receive condign punishment for their contumacy. the elect
 are the onely children of the resurrection; that is to say the sole
 heirs of eternall life: they only can die more; it is they that are
 equall to the angels, and that are the children of god; and not the
 reprobate. to the reprobate there remaineth after the resurrection,
 second, and eternall death: between which resurrection, and their
 second, and eternall death, is but time of punishment and torment; and
 to last by succession of sinners thereunto, as long as the kind of man
 by propagation shall endure, which is eternally.
 



answer of the texts alledged for purgatory
 
upon this doctrine of the naturall eternity of separated soules, is
 founded (as i said) the doctrine of purgatory. for supposing eternall
 life by grace onely, there is life, but the life of the body; and no
 immortality till the resurrection. the texts for purgatory alledged by
 bellarmine out of the canonicall scripture of the old testament, are
 first, the fasting of david for saul and jonathan, mentioned (2 kings,
 1. 12.); and againe, (2 sam. 3. 35.) for the death of abner. this
 fasting of david, saith, was for the obtaining of something for them
 at gods hands, after their death; because after had fasted to procure
 the recovery of his owne child, assoone as know it was dead, he
 called for meate. seeing then the soule hath an existence separate from
 the body, and nothing can be obtained by mens fasting for the soules
 that are already either in heaven, or hell, it followeth that there be
 some soules of dead men, what are neither in heaven, nor in hell; and
 therefore they must bee in some third place, which must be purgatory.
 and thus with hard straining, hee has wrested those places to the proofe
 of purgatory; whereas it is manifest, that the ceremonies of mourning,
 and fasting, when they are used for the death of men, whose life was
 not profitable to the mourners, they are used for honours sake to their
 persons; and when tis done for the death of them by whose life the
 mourners had benefit, it proceeds from their particular dammage: and so
 david honoured saul, and abner, with his fasting; and in the death of
 his owne child, recomforted himselfe, by receiving his ordinary food.
 
in the other places, which alledgeth out of the old testament, there
 is not so much as any shew, or colour of proofe. brings in every text
 wherein there is the word anger, or fire, or burning, or purging, or
 clensing, in case any of the fathers have but in sermon rhetorically
 applied it to the doctrine of purgatory, already beleeved. the first
 verse of psalme, 37. "o lord rebuke not in thy wrath, nor chasten me
 in thy hot displeasure:" what were this to purgatory, if augustine had
 not applied the wrath to the fire of hell, and the displeasure, to that
 of purgatory? and what is it to purgatory, that of psalme, 66. 12. "wee
 went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us to moist place;"
 and other the like texts, (with which the doctors of those times
 entended to adorne, or extend their sermons, or commentaries) haled to
 their purposes by force of wit?
 



places of the new testament for purgatory answered
 
but alledgeth other places of the new testament, that are not
 so easie to be answered: and first that of matth. 12.32. "whosoever
 speaketh word against the sonne of man, it shall be forgiven him; but
 whosoever speaketh against the holy ghost, it shall not bee forgiven
 him neither in this world, nor in the world to come:" where will have
 purgatory to be the world to come, wherein some sinnes may be forgiven,
 which in this world were not forgiven: notwithstanding that it is
 manifest, there are but three worlds; one from the creation to the
 flood, which was destroyed by water, and is called in scripture the
 old world; another from the flood to the day of judgement, which is the
 present world, and shall bee destroyed by fire; and the third, which
 shall bee from the day of judgement forward, everlasting, which is
 called the world to come; and in which it is agreed by all, there shall
 be purgatory; and therefore the world to come, and purgatory, are
 inconsistent. but what then can bee the meaning of those our saviours
 words? i confesse they are very hardly to bee reconciled with all the
 doctrines now unanimously received: nor is it any shame, to confesse the
 profoundnesse of the scripture, to bee too great to be sounded by the
 shortnesse of humane understanding. neverthelesse, i may propound such
 things to the consideration of more learned divines, as the text it
 selfe suggesteth. and first, seeing to speake against the holy ghost, as
 being the third person of the trinity, is to speake against the church,
 in which the holy ghost resideth; it seemeth the comparison is made,
 betweene the easinesse of our saviour, in bearing with offences done to
 him while was on earth, and the severity of the pastors after him,
 against those which should deny their authority, which was from the holy
 ghost: as if should say, you that deny my power; nay you that shall
 crucifie me, shall be pardoned by mee, as often as you turne unto mee by
 repentance: but if you deny the power of them that teach you hereafter,
 by vertue of the holy ghost, they shall be inexorable, and shall not
 forgive you, but persecute you in this world, and leave you without
 absolution, (though you turn to me, unlesse you turn also to them,) to
 the punishments (as much as lies in them) of the world to come: and
 so the words may be taken as prophecy, or praediction concerning the
 times, as they have along been in the christian church: or if this be
 not the meaning, (for i am not peremptory in such difficult places,)
 perhaps there may be place left after the resurrection for the
 repentance of some sinners: and there is also another place, that
 seemeth to agree therewith. for considering the words of st. paul (1
 cor. 15. 29.) "what shall they doe which are baptized for the dead, if
 the dead rise not at all? why also are they baptized for the dead?" a
 man may probably inferre, as some have done, that in st. pauls time,
 there was custome by receiving baptisme for the dead, (as men that now
 beleeve, are sureties and undertakers for the faith of infants, that
 are not capable of beleeving,) to undertake for the persons of their
 deceased friends, that they should be ready to obey, and receive our
 saviour for their king, at his coming again; and then the forgivenesse
 of sins in the world to come, has need of purgatory. but in both
 these interpretations, there is so much of paradox, that i trust not
 to them; but propound them to those that are throughly versed in the
 scripture, to inquire if there be clearer place that contradicts
 them. onely of thus much, i see evident scripture, to perswade men, that
 there is neither the word, nor the thing of purgatory, neither in this,
 nor any other text; nor any thing that can prove necessity of place
 for the soule without the body; neither for the soule of lazarus during
 the four days was dead; nor for the soules of them which the romane
 church pretend to be tormented now in purgatory. for god, that could
 give life to peece of clay, hath the same power to give life again
 to dead man, and renew his inanimate, and rotten carkasse, into a
 glorious, spirituall, and immortall body.
 
another place is that of 1 cor. 3. where it is said that they which
 built stubble, hay, &c. on the true foundation, their work shall perish;
 but "they themselves shall be saved; but as through fire:" this fire, he
 will have to be the fire of purgatory. the words, as i have said before,
 are an allusion to those of zach. 13. 9. where saith, "i will bring
 the third part through the fire, and refine them as silver is refined,
 and will try them as gold is tryed;" which is spoken of the comming of
 the messiah in power and glory; that is, at the day of judgment, and
 conflagration of the present world; wherein the elect shall not be
 consumed, but be refined; that is, depose their erroneous doctrines, and
 traditions, and have them as it were sindged off; and shall afterwards
 call upon the name of the true god. in like manner, the apostle saith
 of them, that holding this foundation jesus is the christ, shall build
 thereon some other doctrines that be erroneous, that they shall not be
 consumed in that fire which reneweth the world, but shall passe through
 it to salvation; but so, as to see, and relinquish their former errours.
 the builders, are the pastors; the foundation, that jesus is the christ;
 the stubble and hay, false consequences drawn from it through ignorance,
 or frailty; the gold, silver, and pretious stones, are their true
 doctrines; and their refining or purging, the relinquishing of their
 errors. in all which there is colour at all for the burning of
 incorporeall, that is to say, impatible souls.
 



baptisme for the dead, how understood
 
third place is that of 1 cor. 15. before mentioned, concerning
 baptisme for the dead: out of which concludeth, first, that prayers
 for the dead are not unprofitable; and out of that, that there is fire
 of purgatory: but neither of them rightly. for of many interpretations
 of the word baptisme, approveth this in the first place, that by
 baptisme is meant (metaphorically) baptisme of penance; and that men
 are in this sense baptized, when they fast, and pray, and give almes:
 and so baptisme for the dead, and prayer of the dead, is the same thing.
 but this is metaphor, of which there is example, neither in
 the scripture, nor in any other use of language; and which is also
 discordant to the harmony, and scope of the scripture. the word baptisme
 is used (mar. 10. 38. & luk. 12. 59.) for being dipped in ones own
 bloud, as christ was upon the cross, and as most of the apostles
 were, for giving testimony of him. but it is hard to say, that prayer,
 fasting, and almes, have any similitude with dipping. the same is used
 also mat. 3. 11. (which seemeth to make somewhat for purgatory) for
 purging with fire. but it is evident the fire and purging here
 mentioned, is the same whereof the prophet zachary speaketh (chap. 13.
 v. 9.) "i will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
 them, &c." and st. peter after him (1 epist. 1. 7.) "that the triall
 of your faith, which is much more precious than of gold that perisheth,
 though it be tryed with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour,
 and glory at the appearing of jesus christ;" and st. paul (1 cor. 3.
 13.) the fire shall trie every mans work of what sort it is." but
 st. peter, and st. paul speak of the fire that shall be at the second
 appearing of christ; and the prophet zachary of the day of judgment: and
 therefore this place of s. mat. may be interpreted of the same; and then
 there will be necessity of the fire of purgatory.
 
another interpretation of baptisme for the dead, is that which i
 have before mentioned, which preferreth to the second place of
 probability; and thence also inferreth the utility of prayer for the
 dead. for if after the resurrection, such as have not heard of christ,
 or not beleeved in him, may be received into christs kingdome; it is
 not in vain, after their death, that their friends should pray for them,
 till they should be risen. but granting that god, at the prayers of the
 faithfull, may convert unto him some of those that have not heard christ
 preached, and consequently cannot have rejected christ, and that the
 charity of men in that point, cannot be blamed; yet this concludeth
 nothing for purgatory, because to rise from death to life, is one thing;
 to rise from purgatory to life is another; and being rising from life
 to life, from life in torments to life in joy.
 
fourth place is that of mat. 5. 25. "agree with thine adversary
 quickly, whilest thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the
 adversary deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
 verily i say unto thee, thou shalt by means come out thence, till
 thou has paid the uttermost farthing." in which allegory, the offender
 is the sinner; both the adversary and the judge is god; the way is
 this life; the prison is the grave; the officer, death; from which, the
 sinner shall not rise again to life eternall, but to second death,
 till have paid the utmost farthing, or christ pay it for him by his
 passion, which is full ransome for all manner of sin, as well lesser
 sins, as greater crimes; both being made by the passion of christ
 equally veniall.
 
the fift place, is that of matth. 5. 22. "whosoever is angry with his
 brother without cause, shall be guilty in judgment. and whosoever
 shall say to his brother, racha, shall be guilty in the councel. but
 whosoever shall say, thou foole, shall be guilty to hell fire." from
 which words inferreth three sorts of sins, and three sorts of
 punishments; and that none of those sins, but the last, shall be
 punished with hell fire; and consequently, that after this life, there
 is punishment of lesser sins in purgatory. of which inference, there is
 colour in any interpretation that hath yet been given to them: shall
 there be distinction after this life of courts of justice, as there
 was amongst the jews in our saviours time, to hear, and determine
 divers sorts of crimes; as the judges, and the councell? shall not
 all judicature appertain to christ, and his apostles? to understand
 therefore this text, we are not to consider it solitarily, but jointly
 with the words precedent, and subsequent. our saviour in this chapter
 interpreteth the law of moses; which the jews thought was then
 fulfilled, when they had not transgressed the grammaticall sense
 thereof, howsoever they had transgressed against the sentence, or
 meaning of the legislator. therefore whereas they thought the sixth
 commandement was not broken, but by killing man; nor the seventh, but
 when man lay with woman, not his wife; our saviour tells them, the
 inward anger of man against his brother, if it be without just cause,
 is homicide: you have heard (saith hee) the law of moses, "thou shalt
 not kill," and that "whosoever shall kill, shall be condemned before the
 judges," or before the session of the seventy: but i say unto you, to
 be angry with ones brother without cause; or to say unto him racha, or
 foole, is homicide, and shall be punished at the day of judgment, and
 session of christ, and his apostles, with hell fire: so that those words
 were not used to distinguish between divers crimes, and divers courts
 of justice, and divers punishments; but to taxe the distinction between
 sin, and sin, which the jews drew not from the difference of the will
 in obeying god, but from the difference of their temporall courts of
 justice; and to shew them that that had the will to hurt his brother,
 though the effect appear but in reviling, or not at all, shall be cast
 into hell fire, by the judges, and by the session, which shall be the
 same, not different courts at the day of judgment. this considered, what
 can be drawn from this text, to maintain purgatory, i cannot imagine.
 
the sixth place is luke 16. 9. "make yee friends of the unrighteous
 mammon, that when yee faile, they may receive you into everlasting
 tabernacles." this alledges to prove invocation of saints departed.
 but the sense is plain, that we should make friends with our riches, of
 the poore, and thereby obtain their prayers whilest they live. "he that
 giveth to the poore, lendeth to the lord. "the seventh is luke 23. 42.
 "lord remember when thou commest into thy kingdome:" therefore, saith
 hee, there is remission of sins after this life. but the consequence
 is not good. our saviour then forgave him; and at his comming againe in
 glory, will remember to raise him againe to life eternall.
 
the eight is acts 2. 24. where st. peter saith of christ, "that god
 had raised him up, and loosed the paines of death, because it was not
 possible should be holden of it;" which hee interprets to bee a
 descent of christ into purgatory, to loose some soules there from their
 torments; whereas it is manifest, that it was christ that was loosed;
 it was hee that could not bee holden of death, or the grave; and not the
 souls in purgatory. but if that which beza sayes in his notes on this
 place be well observed, there is none that will not see, that in stead
 of paynes, it should be bands; and then there is further cause to
 seek for purgatory in this text.
 


chapter xlv. of daemonology, and other reliques of the religion of the
 gentiles
 



the originall of daemonology
 
the impression made on the organs of sight, by lucide bodies, either in
 one direct line, or in many lines, reflected from opaque, or refracted
 in the passage through diaphanous bodies, produceth in living creatures,
 in whom god hath placed such organs, an imagination of the object, from
 whence the impression proceedeth; which imagination is called sight; and
 seemeth not to bee meer imagination, but the body it selfe without
 us; in the same manner, as when man violently presseth his eye, there
 appears to him light without, and before him, which man perceiveth
 but himselfe; because there is indeed such thing without him, but
 onely motion in the interiour organs, pressing by resistance
 outward, that makes him think so. and the motion made by this pressure,
 continuing after the object which caused it is removed, is that we call
 imagination, and memory, and (in sleep, and sometimes in great distemper
 of the organs by sicknesse, or violence) dream: of which things i have
 already spoken briefly, in the second and third chapters.
 
this nature of sight having never been discovered by the ancient
 pretenders to naturall knowledge; much lesse by those that consider not
 things so remote (as that knowledge is) from their present use; it was
 hard for men to conceive of those images in the fancy, and in the sense,
 otherwise, than of things really without us: which some (because they
 vanish away, they know not whither, nor how,) will have to be absolutely
 incorporeall, that is to say immateriall, of formes without matter;
 colour and figure, without any coloured or figured body; and that they
 can put on aiery bodies (as garment) to make them visible when
 they will to our bodily eyes; and others say, are bodies, and living
 creatures, but made of air, or other more subtile and aethereall matter,
 which is, then, when they will be seen, condensed. but both of them
 agree on one generall appellation of them, daemons. as if the dead of
 whom they dreamed, were not inhabitants of their own brain, but of the
 air, or of heaven, or hell; not phantasmes, but ghosts; with just
 as much reason, as if one should say, saw his own ghost in a
 looking-glasse, or the ghosts of the stars in river; or call the
 ordinary apparition of the sun, of the quantity of about foot, the
 daemon, or ghost of that great sun that enlighteneth the whole visible
 world: and by that means have feared them, as things of an unknown, that
 is, of an unlimited power to doe them good, or harme; and consequently,
 given occasion to the governours of the heathen common-wealths to
 regulate this their fear, by establishing that daemonology (in which
 the poets, as principal priests of the heathen religion, were specially
 employed, or reverenced) to the publique peace, and to the obedience of
 subjects necessary thereunto; and to make some of them good daemons,
 and others evill; the one as spurre to the observance, the other, as
 reines to withhold them from violation of the laws.
 



what were the daemons of the ancients
 
what kind of things they were, to whom they attributed the name of
 daemons, appeareth partly in the genealogie of their gods, written by
 hesiod, one of the most ancient poets of the graecians; and partly in
 other histories; of which i have observed some few before, in the 12.
 chapter of this discourse.
 



how that doctrine was spread
 
the graecians, by their colonies and conquests, communicated their
 language and writings into asia, egypt, and italy; and therein, by
 necessary consequence their daemonology, or (as st. paul calles it)
 "their doctrines of devils;" and by that meanes, the contagion was
 derived also to the jewes, both of judaea, and alexandria, and other
 parts, whereinto they were dispersed. but the name of daemon they did
 not (as the graecians) attribute to spirits both good, and evill; but
 to the evill onely: and to the good daemons they gave the name of the
 spirit of god; and esteemed those into whose bodies they entred to be
 prophets. in summe, all singularity if good, they attributed to the
 spirit of god; and if evill, to some daemon, but kakodaimen, an evill
 daemon, that is, devill. and therefore, they called daemoniaques, that
 is, possessed by the devill, such as we call madmen or lunatiques; or
 such as had the falling sicknesse; or that spoke any thing, which they
 for want of understanding, thought absurd: as also of an unclean person
 in notorious degree, they used to say had an unclean spirit; of a
 dumbe man, that had dumbe devill; and of john baptist (math. 11.
 18.) for the singularity of his fasting, that had devill; and of
 our saviour, because said, hee that keepeth his sayings should not
 see death in aeternum, (john 8. 52.) "now we know thou hast devill;
 abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead:" and again, because said
 (john 7. 20.) "they went about to kill him," the people answered, "thou
 hast devill, who goeth about to kill thee?" whereby it is manifest,
 that the jewes had the same opinions concerning phantasmes, namely, that
 they were not phantasmes that is, idols of the braine, but things reall,
 and independent on the fancy.
 



why our saviour controlled it not
 
which doctrine if it be not true, why (may some say) did not our saviour
 contradict it, and teach the contrary? nay why does use on diverse
 occasions, such forms of speech as seem to confirm it? to this i answer,
 that first, where christ saith, "a spirit hath not flesh and bone,"
 though hee shew that there be spirits, yet denies not that they are
 bodies: and where st. paul sais, "we shall rise spirituall bodies," he
 acknowledgeth the nature of spirits, but that they are bodily spirits;
 which is not difficult to understand. for air and many other things
 are bodies, though not flesh and bone, or any other grosse body, to bee
 discerned by the eye. but when our saviour speaketh to the devill, and
 commandeth him to go out of man, if by the devill, be meant disease,
 as phrenesy, or lunacy, or corporeal spirit, is not the speech
 improper? can diseases heare? or can there be corporeall spirit in a
 body of flesh and bone, full already of vitall and animall spirits?
 are there not therefore spirits, that neither have bodies, nor are meer
 imaginations? to the first i answer, that the addressing of our saviours
 command to the madnesse, or lunacy cureth, is more improper, then
 was his rebuking of the fever, or of the wind, and sea; for neither
 do these hear: or than was the command of god, to the light, to the
 firmament, to the sunne, and starres, when commanded them to bee; for
 they could not heare before they had beeing. but those speeches are
 not improper, because they signifie the power of gods word: more
 therefore is it improper, to command madnesse, or lunacy (under the
 appellation of devils, by which they were then commonly understood,)
 to depart out of mans body. to the second, concerning their being
 incorporeall, i have not yet observed any place of scripture, from
 whence it can be gathered, that any man was ever possessed with any
 other corporeal spirit, but that of his owne, by which his body is
 naturally moved.
 



the scriptures doe not teach that spirits are incorporeall
 
our saviour, immediately after the holy ghost descended upon him in the
 form of dove, is said by st. matthew (chapt. 4. 1.) to have been "led
 up by the spirit into the wildernesse;" and the same is recited (luke 4.
 1.) in these words, "jesus being full of the holy ghost, was led in
 the spirit into the wildernesse;" whereby it is evident, that by
 spirit there, is meant the holy ghost. this cannot be interpreted for
 possession: for christ, and the holy ghost, are but one and the same
 substance; which is possession of one substance, or body, by another.
 and whereas in the verses following, is said "to have been taken
 up by the devill into the holy city, and set upon pinnacle of the
 temple," shall we conclude thence that hee was possessed of the devill,
 or carryed thither by violence? and again, "carryed thence by the devill
 into an exceeding high mountain, who shewed him them thence all the
 kingdomes of the world:" herein, wee are not to beleeve was either
 possessed, or forced by the devill; nor that any mountaine is high
 enough, (according to the literall sense,) to shew him one whole
 hemisphere. what then can be the meaning of this place, other than that
 went of himself into the wildernesse; and that this carrying of him
 up and down, from the wildernesse to the city, and from thence into a
 mountain, was vision? conformable whereunto, is also the phrase of st.
 luke, that hee was led into the wildernesse, not by, but in the spirit:
 whereas concerning his being taken up into the mountaine, and unto the
 pinnacle of the temple, hee speaketh as st. matthew doth. which suiteth
 with the nature of vision.
 
again, where st. luke sayes of judas iscariot, that "satan entred into
 him, and thereupon that went and communed with the chief priests, and
 captaines, how might betray christ unto them:" it may be answered,
 that by the entring of satan (that is the enemy) into him, is meant, the
 hostile and traiterous intention of selling his lord and master. for as
 by the holy ghost, is frequently in scripture understood, the graces and
 good inclinations given by the holy ghost; so by the entring of
 satan, may bee understood the wicked cogitations, and designes of the
 adversaries of christ, and his disciples. for as it is hard to say,
 that the devill was entred into judas, before had any such hostile
 designe; so it is impertinent to say, was first christs enemy in his
 heart, and that the devill entred into him afterwards. therefore the
 entring of satan, and his wicked purpose, was one and the same thing.
 
but if there be immateriall spirit, nor any possession of mens bodies
 by any spirit corporeall, it may again be asked, why our saviour and his
 apostles did not teach the people so; and in such cleer words, as they
 might more doubt thereof. but such questions as these, are more
 curious, than necessary for christian mans salvation. men may as well
 aske, why christ that could have given to all men faith, piety, and all
 manner of morall vertues, gave it to some onely, and not to all: and
 why left the search of naturall causes, and sciences, to the naturall
 reason and industry of men, and did not reveal it to all, or any man
 supernaturally; and many other such questions: of which neverthelesse
 there may be alledged probable and pious reasons. for as god, when he
 brought the israelites into the land of promise, did not secure them
 therein, by subduing all the nations round about them; but left many of
 them, as thornes in their sides, to awaken from time to time their
 piety and industry: so our saviour, in conducting us toward his heavenly
 kingdome, did not destroy all the difficulties of naturall questions;
 but left them to exercise our industry, and reason; the scope of
 his preaching, being onely to shew us this plain and direct way to
 salvation, namely, the beleef of this article, "that was the christ,
 the of the living god, sent into the world to sacrifice himselfe for
 our sins, and at his comming again, gloriously to reign over his elect,
 and to save them from their enemies eternally:" to which, the opinion
 of possession by spirits, or phantasmes, are impediment in the way;
 though it be to some an occasion of going out of the way, and to follow
 their own inventions. if wee require of the scripture an account of all
 questions, which may be raised to trouble us in the performance of gods
 commands; we may as well complaine of moses for not having set downe the
 time of the creation of such spirits, as well as of the creation of the
 earth, and sea, and of men, and beasts. to conclude, i find in scripture
 that there be angels, and spirits, good and evill; but not that they are
 incorporeall, as are the apparitions men see in the dark, or in dream,
 or vision; which the latines call spectra, and took for daemons. and i
 find that there are spirits corporeal, (though subtile and invisible;)
 but not that any mans body was possessed, or inhabited by them; and that
 the bodies of the saints shall be such, namely, spirituall bodies, as
 st. paul calls them.
 



the power of casting out devills, not the same it was in the primitive
 church
 
neverthelesse, the contrary doctrine, namely, that there be incorporeall
 spirits, hath hitherto so prevailed in the church, that the use of
 exorcisme, (that is to say, of ejection of devills by conjuration) is
 thereupon built; and (though rarely and faintly practised) is not yet
 totally given over. that there were many daemoniaques in the primitive
 church, and few mad-men, and other such singular diseases; whereas in
 these times we hear of, and see many mad-men, and few daemoniaques,
 proceeds not from the change of nature; but of names. but how it comes
 to passe, that whereas heretofore the apostles, and after them for a
 time, the pastors of the church, did cure those singular diseases, which
 now they are not seen to doe; as likewise, why it is not in the power of
 every true beleever now, to doe all that the faithfull did then, that is
 to say, as we read (mark 16. 17.) "in christs name to cast out devills,
 to speak with new tongues, to take up serpents, to drink deadly poison
 without harm taking, and to cure the sick by the laying on of their
 hands," and all this without other words, but "in the name of jesus,"
 is another question. and it is probable, that those extraordinary gifts
 were given to the church, for longer time, than men trusted wholly
 to christ, and looked for their felicity onely in his kingdome to come;
 and consequently, that when they sought authority, and riches, and
 trusted to their own subtilty for kingdome of this world, these
 supernaturall gifts of god were again taken from them.
 



another relique of gentilisme, worshipping images, left in the church,
 not brought into it
 
another relique of gentilisme, is the worship of images, neither
 instituted by moses in the old, nor by christ in the new testament; nor
 yet brought in from the gentiles; but left amongst them, after they had
 given their names to christ. before our saviour preached, it was the
 generall religion of the gentiles, to worship for gods, those apparences
 that remain in the brain from the impression of externall bodies upon
 the organs of their senses, which are commonly called ideas, idols,
 phantasmes, conceits, as being representations of those externall
 bodies, which cause them, and have nothing in them of reality, more
 than there is in the things that seem to stand before us in dream:
 and this is the reason why st. paul says, "wee know that an idol is
 nothing:" not that thought that an image of metall, stone, or wood,
 was nothing; but that the thing which they honored, or feared in
 the image, and held for god, was meer figment, without place,
 habitation, motion, or existence, but in the motions of the brain.
 and the worship of these with divine honour, is that which is in the
 scripture called idolatry, and rebellion against god. for god being king
 of the jews, and his lieutenant being first moses, and afterward the
 high priest; if the people had been permitted to worship, and pray to
 images, (which are representations of their own fancies,) they had
 had farther dependence on the true god, of whom there can be no
 similitude; nor on his prime ministers, moses, and the high priests;
 but every man had governed himself according to his own appetite, to the
 utter eversion of the common-wealth, and their own destruction for want
 of union. and therefore the first law of god was, "they should not take
 for gods, alienos deos, that is, the gods of other nations, but that
 onely true god, who vouchsafed to commune with moses, and by him to give
 them laws and directions, for their peace, and for their salvation
 from their enemies." and the second was, that "they should not make to
 themselves any image to worship, of their own invention." for it is the
 same deposing of king, to submit to another king, whether be set up
 by neighbour nation, or by our selves.
 



answer to certain seeming texts for images
 
the places of scripture pretended to countenance the setting up of
 images, to worship them; or to set them up at all in the places where
 god is worshipped, are first, two examples; one of the cherubins over
 the ark of god; the other of the brazen serpent: secondly, some texts
 whereby we are commanded to worship certain creatures for their relation
 to god; as to worship his footstool: and lastly, some other texts, by
 which is authorized, religious honoring of holy things. but before i
 examine the force of those places, to prove that which is pretended, i
 must first explain what is to be understood by worshipping, and what by
 images, and idols.
 



what is worship
 
i have already shewn in the 20 chapter of this discourse, that to honor,
 is to value highly the power of any person: and that such value is
 measured, by our comparing him with others. but because there is nothing
 to be compared with god in power; we honor him not but dishonour him
 by any value lesse than infinite. and thus honor is properly of its own
 nature, secret, and internall in the heart. but the inward thoughts of
 men, which appeare outwardly in their words and actions, are the signes
 of our honoring, and these goe by the name of worship, in latine,
 cultus. therefore, to pray to, to swear by, to obey, to bee diligent,
 and officious in serving: in summe, all words and actions that betoken
 fear to offend, or desire to please, is worship, whether those words
 and actions be sincere, or feigned: and because they appear as signes of
 honoring, are ordinarily also called honor.
 



distinction between divine and civill worship
 
the worship we exhibite to those we esteem to be but men, as to kings,
 and men in authority, is civill worship: but the worship we exhibite
 to that which we think to bee god, whatsoever the words, ceremonies,
 gestures, or other actions be, is divine worship. to fall prostrate
 before king, in him that thinks him but man, is but civill worship:
 and that but putteth off his hat in the church, for this cause, that
 thinketh it the house of god, worshippeth with divine worship. they
 that seek the distinction of divine and civill worship, not in the
 intention of the worshipper, but in the words douleia, and latreia,
 deceive themselves. for whereas there be two sorts of servants; that
 sort, which is of those that are absolutely in the power of their
 masters, as slaves taken in war, and their issue, whose bodies are not
 in their own power, (their lives depending on the will of their masters,
 in such manner as to forfeit them upon the least disobedience,) and that
 are bought and sold as beasts, were called douloi, that is properly,
 slaves, and their service, douleia: the other, which is of those that
 serve (for hire, or in hope of benefit from their masters) voluntarily;
 are called thetes; that is, domestique servants; to whose service the
 masters have further right, than is contained in the covenants made
 betwixt them. these two kinds of servants have thus much common to them
 both, that their labour is appointed them by another, whether, as a
 slave, or voluntary servant: and the word latris, is the general name
 of both, signifying him that worketh for another, whether, as slave,
 or voluntary servant: so that latreia signifieth generally all
 service; but douleia the service of bondmen onely, and the condition of
 slavery: and both are used in scripture (to signifie our service of god)
 promiscuously. douleia, because we are gods slaves; latreia, because
 wee serve him: and in all kinds of service is contained, not onely
 obedience, but also worship, that is, such actions, gestures, and words,
 as signifie honor.
 



an image what phantasmes
 
an image (in the most strict signification of the word) is the
 resemblance of some thing visible: in which sense the phantasticall
 formes, apparitions, or seemings of visible bodies to the sight, are
 onely images; such as are the shew of man, or other thing in the
 water, by reflexion, or refraction; or of the sun, or stars by direct
 vision in the air; which are nothing reall in the things seen, nor in
 the place where thy seem to bee; nor are their magnitudes and figures
 the same with that of the object; but changeable, by the variation of
 the organs of sight, or by glasses; and are present oftentimes in our
 imagination, and in our dreams, when the object is absent; or changed
 into other colours, and shapes, as things that depend onely upon the
 fancy. and these are the images which are originally and most properly
 called ideas, and idols, and derived from the language of the graecians,
 with whom the word eido signifieth to see. they are also called
 phantasmes, which is in the same language, apparitions. and from these
 images it is that one of the faculties of mans nature, is called the
 imagination. and from hence it is manifest, that there neither is, nor
 can bee any image made of thing invisible.
 
it is also evident, that there can be image of thing infinite: for
 all the images, and phantasmes that are made by the impression of things
 visible, are figured: but figure is quantity every way determined: and
 therefore there can bee image of god: nor of the soule of man; nor of
 spirits, but onely of bodies visible, that is, bodies that have light in
 themselves, or are by such enlightened.
 



fictions; materiall images
 
and whereas man can fancy shapes never saw; making up figure out
 of the parts of divers creatures; as the poets make their centaures,
 chimaeras, and other monsters never seen: so can also give matter to
 those shapes, and make them in wood, clay or metall. and these are also
 called images, not for the resemblance of any corporeall thing, but for
 the resemblance of some phantasticall inhabitants of the brain of the
 maker. but in these idols, as they are originally in the brain, and
 as they are painted, carved, moulded, or moulten in matter, there is a
 similitude of the one to the other, for which the materiall body made
 by art, may be said to be the image of the phantasticall idoll made by
 nature.
 
but in larger use of the word image, is contained also, any
 representation of one thing by another. so an earthly soveraign may be
 called the image of god: and an inferiour magistrate the image of an
 earthly soveraign. and many times in the idolatry of the gentiles there
 was little regard to the similitude of their materiall idoll to the
 idol in their fancy, and yet it was called the image of it. for a
 stone unhewn has been set up for neptune, and divers other shapes far
 different from the shapes they conceived of their gods. and at this
 day we see many images of the virgin mary, and other saints, unlike one
 another, and without correspondence to any one mans fancy; and yet serve
 well enough for the purpose they were erected for; which was more but
 by the names onely, to represent the persons mentioned in the history;
 to which every man applyeth mentall image of his owne making, or
 none at all. and thus an image in the largest sense, is either the
 resemblance, or the representation of some thing visible; or both
 together, as it happeneth for the most part.
 
but the name of idoll is extended yet further in scripture, to
 signifie also the sunne, or starre, or any other creature, visible or
 invisible, when they are worshipped for gods.
 



idolatry what
 
having shewn what is worship, and what an image; i will now put them
 together, and examine what that idolatry is, which is forbidden in the
 second commandement, and other places of the scripture.
 
to worship an image, is voluntarily to doe those externall acts, which
 are signes of honoring either the matter of the image, which is wood,
 stone, or metall, or some other visible creature; or the phantasme of
 the brain, for the resemblance, or representation whereof, the matter
 was formed and figured; or both together, as one animate body, composed
 of the matter and the phantasme, as of body and soule.
 
to be uncovered, before man of power and authority, or before the
 throne of prince, or in such other places as hee ordaineth to that
 purpose in his absence, is to worship that man, or prince with civill
 worship; as being signe, not of honoring the stoole, or place, but the
 person; and is not idolatry. but if hee that doth it, should suppose the
 soule of the prince to be in the stool, or should present petition to
 the stool, it were divine worship, and idolatry.
 
to pray to king for such things, as hee is able to doe for us, though
 we prostrate our selves before him, is but civill worship; because we
 acknowledge other power in him, but humane: but voluntarily to pray
 unto him for fair weather, or for any thing which god onely can doe
 for us, is divine worship, and idolatry. on the other side, if king
 compell man to it by the terrour of death, or other great corporall
 punishment, it is not idolatry: for the worship which the soveraign
 commandeth to bee done unto himself by the terrour of his laws, is not
 sign that that obeyeth him, does inwardly honour him as god, but
 that is desirous to save himselfe from death, or from miserable
 life; and that which is not sign of internall honor, is worship;
 and therefore idolatry. neither can it bee said, that hee that does
 it, scandalizeth, or layeth any stumbling block before his brother;
 because how wise, or learned soever be that worshippeth in that
 manner, another man cannot from thence argue, that approveth it; but
 that doth it for fear; and that it is not his act, but the act of the
 soveraign.
 
to worship god, in some peculiar place, or turning mans face towards
 an image, or determinate place, is not to worship, or honor the place,
 or image; but to acknowledge it holy, that is to say, to acknowledge
 the image, or the place to be set apart from common use: for that is the
 meaning of the word holy; which implies new quality in the place, or
 image; but onely new relation by appropriation to god; and therefore
 is not idolatry; more than it was idolatry to worship god before
 the brazen serpent; or for the jews when they were out of their owne
 countrey, to turn their faces (when they prayed) toward the temple of
 jerusalem; or for moses to put off his shoes when was before the
 flaming bush, the ground appertaining to mount sinai; which place god
 had chosen to appear in, and to give his laws to the people of israel,
 and was therefore holy ground, not by inhaerent sanctity, but by
 separation to gods use; or for christians to worship in the churches,
 which are once solemnly dedicated to god for that purpose, by the
 authority of the king, or other true representant of the church. but to
 worship god, is inanimating, or inhibiting, such image, or place; that
 is to say, an infinite substance in finite place, is idolatry: for
 such finite gods, are but idols of the brain, nothing reall; and are
 commonly called in the scripture by the names of vanity, and lyes, and
 nothing. also to worship god, not as inanimating, or present in the
 place, or image; but to the end to be put in mind of him, or of some
 works of his, in case the place, or image be dedicated, or set up
 by private authority, and not by the authority of them that are our
 soveraign pastors, is idolatry. for the commandement is, "thou shalt not
 make to thy selfe any graven image." god commanded moses to set up the
 brazen serpent; hee did not make it to himselfe; it was not therefore
 against the commandement. but the making of the golden calfe by aaron,
 and the people, as being done without authority from god, was idolatry;
 not onely because they held it for god, but also because they made it
 for religious use, without warrant either from god their soveraign, or
 from moses, that was his lieutenant.
 
the gentiles worshipped for gods, jupiter, and others; that living, were
 men perhaps that had done great and glorious acts; and for the children
 of god, divers men and women, supposing them gotten between an immortall
 deity, and mortall man. this was idolatry, because they made them so
 to themselves, having authority from god, neither in his eternall law
 of reason, nor in his positive and revealed will. but though our saviour
 was man, whom wee also beleeve to bee god immortall, and the of
 god; yet this is idolatry; because wee build not that beleef upon
 our own fancy, or judgment, but upon the word of god revealed in the
 scriptures. and for the adoration of the eucharist, if the words of
 christ, "this is my body," signifie, "that himselfe, and the seeming
 bread in his hand; and not onely so, but that all the seeming morsells
 of bread that have ever since been, and any time hereafter shall bee
 consecrated by priests, bee so many christs bodies, and yet all of them
 but one body," then is that idolatry, because it is authorized by our
 saviour: but if that text doe not signifie that, (for there is other
 that can be alledged for it,) then, because it is worship of humane
 institution, it is idolatry. for it is not enough to say, god can
 transubstantiate the bread into christs body: for the gentiles also held
 god to be omnipotent; and might upon that ground lesse excuse their
 idolatry, by pretending, as well as others, as transubstantiation of
 their wood, and stone into god almighty.
 
whereas there be, that pretend divine inspiration, to be supernaturall
 entring of the holy ghost into man, and not an acquisition of gods
 grace, by doctrine, and study; i think they are in very dangerous
 dilemma. for if they worship not the men whom they beleeve to be so
 inspired, they fall into impiety; as not adoring gods supernaturall
 presence. and again, if they worship them, they commit idolatry; for the
 apostles would never permit themselves to be so worshipped. therefore
 the safest way is to beleeve, that by the descending of the dove upon
 the apostles; and by christs breathing on them, when hee gave them
 the holy ghost; and by the giving of it by imposition of hands, are
 understood the signes which god hath been pleased to use, or ordain to
 be used, of his promise to assist those persons in their study to
 preach his kingdome, and in their conversation, that it might not be
 scandalous, but edifying to others.
 



scandalous worship of images
 
besides the idolatrous worship of images, there is also scandalous
 worship of them; which is also sin; but not idolatry. for idolatry is
 to worship by signes of an internall, and reall honour: but scandalous
 worship, is but seeming worship; and may sometimes bee joined with
 an inward, and hearty detestation, both of the image, and of the
 phantasticall daemon, or idol, to which it is dedicated; and proceed
 onely from the fear of death, or other grievous punishment; and is
 neverthelesse in them that so worship, in case they be men whose
 actions are looked at by others, as lights to guide them by; because
 following their ways, they cannot but stumble, and fall in the way of
 religion: whereas the example of those we regard not, works not on us
 at all, but leaves us to our own diligence and caution; and consequently
 are causes of our falling.
 
if therefore pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others, or any
 other, of whose knowledge there is great opinion, doe externall honor
 to an idol for fear; unlesse make his feare, and unwillingnesse to
 it, as evident as the worship; scandalizeth his brother, by seeming
 to approve idolatry. for his brother, arguing from the action of his
 teacher, or of him whose knowledge esteemeth great, concludes it
 to bee lawfull in it selfe. and this scandall, is sin, and scandall
 given. but if one being pastor, nor of eminent reputation for
 knowledge in christian doctrine, doe the same, and another follow him;
 this is scandall given; for had cause to follow such example:
 but is pretence of scandall which hee taketh of himselfe for an excuse
 before men: for an unlearned man, that is in the power of an idolatrous
 king, or state, if commanded on pain of death to worship before an
 idoll, hee detesteth the idoll in his heart, hee doth well; though if he
 had the fortitude to suffer death, rather than worship it, should
 doe better. but if pastor, who as christs messenger, has undertaken to
 teach christs doctrine to all nations, should doe the same, it were
 not onely sinfull scandall, in respect of other christian mens
 consciences, but perfidious forsaking of his charge.
 
the summe of that which i have said hitherto, concerning the worship of
 images, is that, that that worshippeth in an image, or any creature,
 either the matter thereof, or any fancy of his own, which thinketh
 to dwell in it; or both together; or beleeveth that such things hear
 his prayers, or see his devotions, without ears, or eyes, committeth
 idolatry: and that counterfeiteth such worship for fear of
 punishment, if bee man whose example hath power amongst his
 brethren, committeth sin: but that worshippeth the creator of the
 world before such an image, or in such place as hath not made, or
 chosen of himselfe, but taken from the commandement of gods word, as the
 jewes did in worshipping god before the cherubins, and before the brazen
 serpent for time, and in, or towards the temple of jerusalem, which
 was also but for time, committeth not idolatry.
 
now for the worship of saints, and images, and reliques, and other
 things at this day practised in the church of rome, i say they are not
 allowed by the word of god, not brought into the church of rome, from
 the doctrine there taught; but partly left in it at the first conversion
 of the gentiles; and afterwards countenanced, and confirmed, and
 augmented by the bishops of rome.
 



answer to the argument from the cherubins, and brazen serpent
 
as for the proofs alledged out of scripture, namely, those examples
 of images appointed by god to bee set up; they were not set up for the
 people, or any man to worship; but that they should worship god himselfe
 before them: as before the cherubins over the ark, and the brazen
 serpent. for we read not, that the priest, or any other did worship the
 cherubins; but contrarily wee read (2 kings 18.4.) that hezekiah brake
 in pieces the brazen serpent which moses had set up, because the
 people burnt incense to it. besides, those examples are not put for
 our imitation, that we also should set up images, under pretence
 of worshipping god before them; because the words of the second
 commandement, "thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven image, &c."
 distinguish between the images that god commanded to be set up, and
 those which wee set up to our selves. and therefore from the cherubins,
 or brazen serpent, to the images of mans devising; and from the worship
 commanded by god, to the will-worship of men, the argument is not good.
 this also is to bee considered, that as hezekiah brake in pieces the
 brazen serpent, because the jews did worship it, to the end they should
 doe so more; so also christian soveraigns ought to break down the
 images which their subjects have been accustomed to worship; that there
 be more occasion of such idolatry. for at this day, the ignorant
 people, where images are worshipped, doe really beleeve there is a
 divine power in the images; and are told by their pastors, that some
 of them have spoken; and have bled; and that miracles have been done by
 them; which they apprehend as done by the saint, which they think either
 is the image it self, or in it. the israelites, when they worshipped the
 calfe, did think they worshipped the god that brought them out of egypt;
 and yet it was idolatry, because they thought the calfe either was
 that god, or had him in his belly. and though some man may think it
 impossible for people to be so stupid, as to think the image to be
 god, or saint; or to worship it in that notion; yet it is manifest
 in scripture to the contrary; where when the golden calfe was made, the
 people said, (exod. 32. 2.) "these are thy gods israel;" and where the
 images of laban (gen. 31.30.) are called his gods. and wee see daily by
 experience in all sorts of people, that such men as study nothing but
 their food and ease, are content to beleeve any absurdity, rather than
 to trouble themselves to examine it; holding their faith as it were by
 entaile unalienable, except by an expresse and new law.
 



painting of fancies idolatry: abusing them to religious worship is
 
but they inferre from some other places, that it is lawfull to paint
 angels, and also god himselfe: as from gods walking in the garden; from
 jacobs seeing god at the top of the ladder; and from other visions, and
 dreams. but visions, and dreams whether naturall, or supernaturall, are
 but phantasmes: and that painteth an image of any of them, maketh not
 an image of god, but of his own phantasm, which is, making of an idol. i
 say not, that to draw picture after fancy, is sin; but when it
 is drawn, to hold it for representation of god, is against the second
 commandement; and can be of use, but to worship. and the same may be
 said of the images of angels, and of men dead; unlesse as monuments of
 friends, or of men worthy remembrance: for such use of an image, is not
 worship of the image; but civill honoring of the person, not that is,
 but that was: but when it is done to the image which we make of saint,
 for other reason, but that we think heareth our prayers, and is
 pleased with the honour wee doe him, when dead, and without sense, wee
 attribute to him more than humane power; and therefore it is idolatry.
 
seeing therefore there is authority, neither in the law of moses,
 nor in the gospel, for the religious worship of images, or other
 representations of god, which men set up to themselves; or for the
 worship of the image of any creature in heaven, or earth, or under the
 earth: and whereas christian kings, who are living representants of god,
 are not to be worshipped by their subjects, by any act, that signifieth
 greater esteem of his power, than the nature of mortall man is capable
 of; it cannot be imagined, that the religious worship now in use,
 was brought into the church, by misunderstanding of the scripture. it
 resteth therefore, that it was left in it, by not destroying the images
 themselves, in the conversion of the gentiles that worshipped them.
 



how idolatry was left in the church
 
the cause whereof, was the immoderate esteem, and prices set upon the
 workmanship of them, which made the owners (though converted, from
 worshipping them as they had done religiously for daemons) to retain
 them still in their houses, upon pretence of doing it in the honor of
 christ, of the virgin mary, and of the apostles, and other the pastors
 of the primitive church; as being easie, by giving them new names, to
 make that an image of the virgin mary, and of her sonne our saviour,
 which before perhaps was called the image of venus, and cupid; and so of
 jupiter to make barnabas, and of mercury paul, and the like. and
 as worldly ambition creeping by degrees into the pastors, drew them to
 an endeavour of pleasing the new made christians; and also to liking
 of this kind of honour, which they also might hope for after their
 decease, as well as those that had already gained it: so the worshipping
 of the images of christ and his apostles, grow more and more idolatrous;
 save that somewhat after the time of constantine, divers emperors, and
 bishops, and generall councells observed, and opposed the unlawfulnesse
 thereof; but too late, or too weakly.
 



canonizing of saints
 
the canonizing of saints, is another relique of gentilisme: it is
 neither misunderstanding of scripture, nor new invention of the
 roman church, but custome as ancient as the common-wealth of rome it
 self. the first that ever was canonized at rome, was romulus, and that
 upon the narration of julius proculus, that swore before the senate,
 spake with him after his death, and was assured by him, dwelt in
 heaven, and was there called quirinius, and would be propitious to
 the state of their new city: and thereupon the senate gave publique
 testimony of his sanctity. julius caesar, and other emperors after him,
 had the like testimony; that is, were canonized for saints; now defined;
 and is the same with the apotheosis of the heathen.
 



the name of pontifex
 
it is also from the roman heathen, that the popes have received the
 name, and power of pontifex maximus. this was the name of him that in
 the ancient common-wealth of rome, had the supreme authority under
 the senate and people, of regulating all ceremonies, and doctrines
 concerning their religion: and when augustus caesar changed the state
 into monarchy, took to himselfe more but this office, and that
 of tribune of the people, (than is to say, the supreme power both in
 state, and religion;) and the succeeding emperors enjoyed the same. but
 when the emperour constantine lived, who was the first that professed
 and authorized christian religion, it was consonant to his profession,
 to cause religion to be regulated (under his authority) by the bishop
 of rome: though it doe not appear they had so soon the name of pontifex;
 but rather, that the succeeding bishops took it of themselves, to
 countenance the power they exercised over the bishops of the roman
 provinces. for it is not any priviledge of st. peter, but the priviledge
 of the city of rome, which the emperors were alwaies willing to uphold;
 that gave them such authority over other bishops; as may be evidently
 seen by that, that the bishop of constantinople, when the emperour made
 that city the seat of the empire, pretended to bee equall to the bishop
 of rome; though at last, not without contention, the pope carryed it,
 and became the pontifex maximus; but in right onely of the emperour; and
 not without the bounds of the empire; nor any where, after the emperour
 had lost his power in rome; though it were the pope himself that took
 his power from him. from whence wee may by the way observe, that there
 is place for the superiority of the pope over other bishops, except
 in the territories whereof is himself the civill soveraign; and where
 the emperour having soveraign power civill, hath expressely chosen the
 pope for the chief pastor under himselfe, of his christian subjects.
 



procession of images
 
the carrying about of images in procession, is another relique of the
 religion of the greeks, and romans: for they also carried their
 idols from place to place, in kind of chariot, which was peculiarly
 dedicated to that use, which the latines called thensa, and vehiculum
 deorum; and the image was placed in frame, or shrine, which they
 called ferculum: and that which they called pompa, is the same that
 now is named procession: according whereunto, amongst the divine honors
 which were given to julius caesar by the senate, this was one, that in
 the pompe (or procession) at the circaean games, should have thensam
 & ferculum, sacred chariot, and shrine; which was as much, as to be
 carried up and down as god: just as at this day the popes are carried
 by switzers under canopie.
 



wax candles, and torches lighted
 
to these processions also belonged the bearing of burning torches, and
 candles, before the images of the gods, both amongst the greeks, and
 romans. for afterwards the emperors of rome received the same honor; as
 we read of caligula, that at his reception to the empire, was carried
 from misenum to rome, in the midst of throng of people, the wayes
 beset with altars, and beasts for sacrifice, and burning torches: and
 of caracalla that was received into alexandria with incense, and with
 casting of flowers, and dadouchiais, that is, with torches; for dadochoi
 were they that amongst the greeks carried torches lighted in the
 processions of their gods: and in processe of time, the devout, but
 ignorant people, did many times honor their bishops with the like
 pompe of wax candles, and the images of our saviour, and the saints,
 constantly, in the church it self. and thus came in the use of wax
 candles; and was also established by some of the ancient councells.
 
the heathens had also their aqua lustralis, that is to say, holy water.
 the church of rome imitates them also in their holy dayes. they had
 their bacchanalia; and we have our wakes, answering to them: they
 their saturnalia, and we our carnevalls, and shrove-tuesdays liberty
 of servants: they their procession of priapus; wee our fetching in,
 erection, and dancing about may-poles; and dancing is one kind of
 worship: they had their procession called ambarvalia; and we our
 procession about the fields in the rogation week. nor do i think that
 these are all the ceremonies that have been left in the church, from the
 first conversion of the gentiles: but they are all that i can for the
 present call to mind; and if man would wel observe that which is
 delivered in the histories, concerning the religious rites of the greeks
 and romanes, i doubt not but might find many more of these old empty
 bottles of gentilisme, which the doctors of the romane church, either
 by negligence, or ambition, have filled up again with the new wine of
 christianity, that will not faile in time to break them.
 


chapter xlvi. of darknesse from vain philosophy, and fabulous traditions
 



what philosophy is
 
by philosophy is understood "the knowledge acquired by reasoning, from
 the manner of the generation of any thing, to the properties; or from
 the properties, to some possible way of generation of the same; to the
 end to bee able to produce, as far as matter, and humane force permit,
 such effects, as humane life requireth." so the geometrician, from the
 construction of figures, findeth out many properties thereof; and from
 the properties, new ways of their construction, by reasoning; to the end
 to be able to measure land and water; and for infinite other uses. so
 the astronomer, from the rising, setting, and moving of the sun, and
 starres, in divers parts of the heavens, findeth out the causes of day,
 and night, and of the different seasons of the year; whereby keepeth
 an account of time: and the like of other sciences.
 



prudence part of philosophy
 
by which definition it is evident, that we are not to account as any
 part thereof, that originall knowledge called experience, in which
 consisteth prudence: because it is not attained by reasoning, but found
 as well in brute beasts, as in man; and is but memory of successions
 of events in times past, wherein the omission of every little
 circumstance altering the effect, frustrateth the expectation of the
 most prudent: whereas nothing is produced by reasoning aright, but
 generall, eternall, and immutable truth.
 



false doctrine is part of philosophy
 
nor are we therefore to give that name to any false conclusions: for he
 that reasoneth aright in words understandeth, can never conclude an
 error:
 


more is revelation supernaturall
 
nor to that which any man knows by supernaturall revelation; because it
 is not acquired by reasoning:
 



nor learning taken upon credit of authors
 
nor that which is gotten by reasoning from the authority of books;
 because it is not by reasoning from the cause to the effect, nor from
 the effect to the cause; and is not knowledge, but faith.
 



of the beginnings and progresse of philosophy
 
the faculty of reasoning being consequent to the use of speech, it was
 not possible, but that there should have been some generall truthes
 found out by reasoning, as ancient almost as language it selfe. the
 savages of america, are not without some good morall sentences; also
 they have little arithmetick, to adde, and divide in numbers not too
 great: but they are not therefore philosophers. for as there were plants
 of corn and wine in small quantity dispersed in the fields and woods,
 before men knew their vertue, or made use of them for their nourishment,
 or planted them apart in fields, and vineyards; in which time they
 fed on akorns, and drank water: so also there have been divers true,
 generall, and profitable speculations from the beginning; as being the
 naturall plants of humane reason: but they were at first but few in
 number; men lived upon grosse experience; there was method; that is
 to say, sowing, nor planting of knowledge by it self, apart from the
 weeds, and common plants of errour and conjecture: and the cause of it
 being the want of leasure from procuring the necessities of life, and
 defending themselves against their neighbours, it was impossible, till
 the erecting of great common-wealths, it should be otherwise. leasure
 is the mother of philosophy; and common-wealth, the mother of peace, and
 leasure: where first were great and flourishing cities, there was first
 the study of philosophy. the gymnosophists of india, the magi of persia,
 and the priests of chaldea and egypt, are counted the most ancient
 philosophers; and those countreys were the most ancient of kingdomes.
 philosophy was not risen to the graecians, and other people of the west,
 whose common-wealths (no greater perhaps then lucca, or geneva) had
 never peace, but when their fears of one another were equall; nor the
 leasure to observe any thing but one another. at length, when warre had
 united many of these graecian lesser cities, into fewer, and greater;
 then began seven men, of severall parts of greece, to get the reputation
 of being wise; some of them for morall and politique sentences; and
 others for the learning of the chaldeans and egyptians, which was
 astronomy, and geometry. but we hear not yet of any schools of
 philosophy.
 



of the schools of philosophy amongst the athenians
 
after the athenians by the overthrow of the persian armies, had gotten
 the dominion of the sea; and thereby, of all the islands, and maritime
 cities of the archipelago, as well of asia as europe; and were grown
 wealthy; they that had employment, neither at home, nor abroad, had
 little else to employ themselves in, but either (as st. luke says, acts
 17.21.) "in telling and hearing news," or in discoursing of philosophy
 publiquely to the youth of the city. every master took some place for
 that purpose. plato in certaine publique walks called academia, from one
 academus: aristotle in the walk of the temple of pan, called lycaeum:
 others in the stoa, or covered walk, wherein the merchants goods were
 brought to land: others in other places; where they spent the time of
 their leasure, in teaching or in disputing of their opinions: and some
 in any place, where they could get the youth of the city together to
 hear them talk. and this was it which carneades also did at rome, when
 was ambassadour: which caused cato to advise the senate to dispatch
 him quickly, for feare of corrupting the manners of the young men that
 delighted to hear him speak (as they thought) fine things.
 
from this it was, that the place where any of them taught, and disputed,
 was called schola, which in their tongue signifieth leasure; and their
 disputations, diatribae, that is to say, passing of the time. also the
 philosophers themselves had the name of their sects, some of them from
 these their schools: for they that followed plato’s doctrine, were
 called academiques; the followers of aristotle, peripatetiques, from the
 walk hee taught in; and those that zeno taught, stoiques, from the stoa:
 as if we should denominate men from more-fields, from pauls-church, and
 from the exchange, because they meet there often, to prate and loyter.
 
neverthelesse, men were so much taken with this custome, that in time
 it spread it selfe over all europe, and the best part of afrique; so as
 there were schools publiquely erected, and maintained for lectures, and
 disputations, almost in every common-wealth.
 



of the schools of the jews
 
there were also schools, anciently, both before, and after the time of
 our saviour, amongst the jews: but they were schools of their law. for
 though they were called synagogues, that is to say, congregations of the
 people; yet in as much as the law was every sabbath day read, expounded,
 and disputed in them, they differed not in nature, but in name onely
 from publique schools; and were not onely in jerusalem, but in every
 city of the gentiles, where the jews inhabited. there was such schoole
 at damascus, whereinto paul entred, to persecute. there were others at
 antioch, iconium and thessalonica, whereinto entred, to dispute:
 and such was the synagogue of the libertines, cyrenians, alexandrians,
 cilicians, and those of asia; that is to say, the schoole of libertines,
 and of jewes, that were strangers in jerusalem: and of this schoole they
 were that disputed with saint steven.
 



the schoole of graecians unprofitable
 
but what has been the utility of those schools? what science is there
 at this day acquired by their readings and disputings? that wee have
 of geometry, which is the mother of all naturall science, wee are not
 indebted for it to the schools. plato that was the best philosopher
 of the greeks, forbad entrance into his schoole, to all that were not
 already in some measure geometricians. there were many that studied that
 science to the great advantage of mankind: but there is mention of
 their schools; nor was there any sect of geometricians; nor did they
 then passe under the name of philosophers. the naturall philosophy
 of those schools, was rather dream than science, and set forth in
 senselesse and insignificant language; which cannot be avoided by
 those that will teach philosophy, without having first attained great
 knowledge in geometry: for nature worketh by motion; the wayes,
 and degrees whereof cannot be known, without the knowledge of the
 proportions and properties of lines, and figures. their morall
 philosophy is but description of their own passions. for the rule of
 manners, without civill government, is the law of nature; and in it,
 the law civill; that determineth what is honest, and dishonest; what is
 just, and unjust; and generally what is good, and evill: whereas they
 make the rules of good, and bad, by their own liking, and disliking: by
 which means, in so great diversity of taste, there is nothing generally
 agreed on; but every one doth (as far as dares) whatsoever seemeth
 good in his own eyes, to the subversion of common-wealth. their logique
 which should bee the method of reasoning, is nothing else but captions
 of words, and inventions how to puzzle such as should goe about to pose
 them. to conclude there is nothing so absurd, that the old philosophers
 (as cicero saith, who was one of them) have not some of them maintained.
 and i beleeve that scarce any thing can be more absurdly said
 in naturall philosophy, than that which now is called aristotles
 metaphysiques, nor more repugnant to government, than much of that hee
 hath said in his politiques; nor more ignorantly, than great part of
 his ethiques.
 



the schools of the jews unprofitable
 
the schoole of the jews, was originally schoole of the law of moses;
 who commanded (deut. 31.10.) that at the end of every seventh year, at
 the feast of the tabernacles, it should be read to all the people, that
 they might hear, and learn it: therefore the reading of the law (which
 was in use after the captivity) every sabbath day, ought to have had
 other end, but the acquainting of the people with the commandements
 which they were to obey, and to expound unto them the writings of the
 prophets. but it is manifest, by the many reprehensions of them by
 our saviour, that they corrupted the text of the law with their
 false commentaries, and vain traditions; and so little understood the
 prophets, that they did neither acknowledge christ, nor the works he
 did; for which the prophets prophecyed. so that by their lectures and
 disputations in their synagogues, they turned the doctrine of their law
 into phantasticall kind of philosophy, concerning the incomprehensible
 nature of god, and of spirits; which they compounded of the vain
 philosophy and theology of the graecians, mingled with their own
 fancies, drawn from the obscurer places of the scripture, and which
 might most easily bee wrested to their purpose; and from the fabulous
 traditions of their ancestors.
 



university what it is
 
that which is now called an university, is joyning together, and an
 incorporation under one government of many publique schools, in one and
 the same town or city. in which, the principal schools were ordained for
 the three professions, that is to say, of the romane religion, of the
 romane law, and of the art of medicine. and for the study of philosophy
 it hath otherwise place, then as handmaid to the romane religion:
 and since the authority of aristotle is onely current there, that
 study is not properly philosophy, (the nature whereof dependeth not on
 authors,) but aristotelity. and for geometry, till of very late times it
 had place at all; as being subservient to nothing but rigide truth.
 and if any man by the ingenuity of his owne nature, had attained to any
 degree of perfection therein, hee was commonly thought magician, and
 his art diabolicall.
 



errors brought into religion from aristotles metaphysiques
 
now to descend to the particular tenets of vain philosophy, derived to
 the universities, and thence into the church, partly from aristotle,
 partly from blindnesse of understanding; i shall first consider their
 principles. there is certain philosophia prima, on which all other
 philosophy ought to depend; and consisteth principally, in right
 limiting of the significations of such appellations, or names, as are
 of all others the most universall: which limitations serve to avoid
 ambiguity, and aequivocation in reasoning; and are commonly called
 definitions; such as are the definitions of body, time, place, matter,
 forme, essence, subject, substance, accident, power, act, finite,
 infinite, quantity, quality, motion, action, passion, and divers others,
 necessary to the explaining of mans conceptions concerning the nature
 and generation of bodies. the explication (that is, the setling of the
 meaning) of which, and the like terms, is commonly in the schools called
 metaphysiques; as being part of the philosophy of aristotle, which
 hath that for title: but it is in another sense; for there it signifieth
 as much, as "books written, or placed after his naturall philosophy:"
 but the schools take them for books of supernaturall philosophy: for the
 word metaphysiques will bear both these senses. and indeed that which is
 there written, is for the most part so far from the possibility of being
 understood, and so repugnant to naturall reason, that whosoever
 thinketh there is any thing to bee understood by it, must needs think it
 supernaturall.
 



errors concerning abstract essences
 
from these metaphysiques, which are mingled with the scripture to make
 schoole divinity, wee are told, there be in the world certaine
 essences separated from bodies, which they call abstract essences, and
 substantiall formes: for the interpreting of which jargon, there is
 need of somewhat more than ordinary attention in this place. also i
 ask pardon of those that are not used to this kind of discourse, for
 applying my selfe to those that are. the world, (i mean not the earth
 onely, that denominates the lovers of it worldly men, but the universe,
 that is, the whole masse of all things that are) is corporeall, that
 is to say, body; and hath the dimensions of magnitude, namely, length,
 bredth, and depth: also every part of body, is likewise body, and hath
 the like dimensions; and consequently every part of the universe,
 is body, and that which is not body, is part of the universe: and
 because the universe is all, that which is part of it, is nothing;
 and consequently where. nor does it follow from hence, that spirits
 are nothing: for they have dimensions, and are therefore really bodies;
 though that name in common speech be given to such bodies onely, as are
 visible, or palpable; that is, that have some degree of opacity: but for
 spirits, they call them incorporeall; which is name of more honour,
 and may therefore with more piety bee attributed to god himselfe; in
 whom wee consider not what attribute expresseth best his nature, which
 is incomprehensible; but what best expresseth our desire to honour him.
 
to know now upon what grounds they say there be essences abstract, or
 substantiall formes, wee are to consider what those words do properly
 signifie. the use of words, is to register to our selves, and make
 manifest to others the thoughts and conceptions of our minds. of which
 words, some are the names of the things conceived; as the names of all
 sorts of bodies, that work upon the senses, and leave an impression in
 the imagination: others are the names of the imaginations themselves;
 that is to say, of those ideas, or mentall images we have of all things
 wee see, or remember: and others againe are names of names; or of
 different sorts of speech: as universall, plurall, singular, negation,
 true, false, syllogisme, interrogation, promise, covenant, are the names
 of certain forms of speech. others serve to shew the consequence, or
 repugnance of one name to another; as when one saith, "a man is body,"
 hee intendeth that the name of body is necessarily consequent to the
 name of man; as being but severall names of the same thing, man; which
 consequence is signified by coupling them together with the word is.
 and as wee use the verbe is; so the latines use their verbe est, and
 the greeks their esti through all its declinations. whether all other
 nations of the world have in their severall languages word that
 answereth to it, or not, i cannot tell; but i am sure they have not need
 of it: for the placing of two names in order may serve to signifie their
 consequence, if it were the custome, (for custome is it, that give words
 their force,) as well as the words is, or bee, or are, and the like.
 
and if it were so, that there were language without any verb
 answerable to est, or is, or bee; yet the men that used it would bee
 not jot the lesse capable of inferring, concluding, and of all kind of
 reasoning, than were the greeks, and latines. but what then would become
 of these terms, of entity, essence, essentiall, essentially, that are
 derived from it, and of many more that depend on these, applyed as most
 commonly they are? they are therefore names of things; but signes, by
 which wee make known, that wee conceive the consequence of one name or
 attribute to another: as when we say, "a man, is, living body," wee
 mean not that the man is one thing, the living body another, and the is,
 or beeing third: but that the man, and the living body, is the same
 thing: because the consequence, "if hee bee man, hee is living
 body," is true consequence, signified by that word is. therefore, to
 bee body, to walke, to bee speaking, to live, to see, and the like
 infinitives; also corporeity, walking, speaking, life, sight, and the
 like, that signifie just the same, are the names of nothing; as i have
 elsewhere more amply expressed.
 
but to what purpose (may some man say) is such subtilty in work of
 this nature, where i pretend to nothing but what is necessary to the
 doctrine of government and obedience? it is to this purpose, that men
 may longer suffer themselves to be abused, by them, that by this
 doctrine of separated essences, built on the vain philosophy of
 aristotle, would fright them from obeying the laws of their countrey,
 with empty names; as men fright birds from the corn with an empty
 doublet, hat, and crooked stick. for it is upon this ground, that
 when man is dead and buried, they say his soule (that is his life) can
 walk separated from his body, and is seen by night amongst the graves.
 upon the same ground they say, that the figure, and colour, and tast of
 peece of bread, has being, there, where they say there is bread:
 and upon the same ground they say, that faith, and wisdome, and other
 vertues are sometimes powred into man, sometimes blown into him from
 heaven; as if the vertuous, and their vertues could be asunder; and a
 great many other things that serve to lessen the dependance of subjects
 on the soveraign power of their countrey. for who will endeavour to obey
 the laws, if expect obedience to be powred or blown into him? or who
 will not obey priest, that can make god, rather than his soveraign;
 nay than god himselfe? or who, that is in fear of ghosts, will not bear
 great respect to those that can make the holy water, that drives them
 from him? and this shall suffice for an example of the errors, which are
 brought into the church, from the entities, and essences of aristotle:
 which it may be knew to be false philosophy; but writ it as thing
 consonant to, and corroborative of their religion; and fearing the fate
 of socrates.
 
being once fallen into this error of separated essences, they are
 thereby necessarily involved in many other absurdities that follow it.
 for seeing they will have these forms to be reall, they are obliged to
 assign them some place. but because they hold them incorporeall, without
 all dimension of quantity, and all men know that place is dimension, and
 not to be filled, but by that which is corporeall; they are driven to
 uphold their credit with distinction, that they are not indeed any
 where circumscriptive, but definitive: which terms being meer words, and
 in this occasion insignificant, passe onely in latine, that the vanity
 of them may bee concealed. for the circumscription of thing, is
 nothing else but the determination, or defining of its place; and so
 both the terms of the distinction are the same. and in particular, of
 the essence of man, which (they say) is his soule, they affirm it,
 to be all of it in his little finger, and all of it in every other part
 (how small soever) of his body; and yet more soule in the whole body,
 than in any one of those parts. can any man think that god is served
 with such absurdities? and yet all this is necessary to beleeve,
 to those that will beleeve the existence of an incorporeall soule,
 separated from the body.
 
and when they come to give account, how an incorporeall substance can
 be capable of pain, and be tormented in the fire of hell, or purgatory,
 they have nothing at all to answer, but that it cannot be known how fire
 can burn soules.
 
again, whereas motion is change of place, and incorporeall substances
 are not capable of place, they are troubled to make it seem possible,
 how soule can goe hence, without the body to heaven, hell, or
 purgatory; and how the ghosts of men (and i may adde of their clothes
 which they appear in) can walk by night in churches, church-yards, and
 other places of sepulture. to which i know not what they can answer,
 unlesse they will say, they walke definitive, not circumscriptive, or
 spiritually, not temporally: for such egregious distinctions are equally
 applicable to any difficulty whatsoever.
 



nunc-stans
 
for the meaning of eternity, they will not have it to be an endlesse
 succession of time; for then they should not be able to render reason
 how gods will, and praeordaining of things to come, should not be before
 his praescience of the same, as the efficient cause before the effect,
 or agent before the action; nor of many other their bold opinions
 concerning the incomprehensible nature of god. but they will teach us,
 that eternity is the standing still of the present time, nunc-stans
 (as the schools call it;) which neither they, nor any else understand,
 more than they would hic-stans for an infinite greatnesse of place.
 



one body in many places, and many bodies in one place at once
 
and whereas men divide body in their thought, by numbring parts of
 it, and in numbring those parts, number also the parts of the place
 it filled; it cannot be, but in making many parts, wee make also many
 places of those parts; whereby there cannot bee conceived in the mind of
 any man, more, or fewer parts, than there are places for: yet they will
 have us beleeve, that by the almighty power of god, one body may be at
 one and the same time in many places; and many bodies at one and the
 same time in one place; as if it were an acknowledgment of the divine
 power, to say, that which is, is not; or that which has been, has not
 been. and these are but small part of the incongruities they are
 forced to, from their disputing philosophically, in stead of admiring,
 and adoring of the divine and incomprehensible nature; whose attributes
 cannot signifie what is, but ought to signifie our desire to honour
 him, with the best appellations we can think on. but they that venture
 to reason of his nature, from these attributes of honour, losing their
 understanding in the very first attempt, fall from one inconvenience
 into another, without end, and without number; in the same manner,
 as when man ignorant of the ceremonies of court, comming into the
 presence of greater person than is used to speak to, and stumbling
 at his entrance, to save himselfe from falling, lets slip his cloake;
 to recover his cloake, lets fall his hat; and with one disorder after
 another, discovers his astonishment and rusticity.
 



absurdities in naturall philosophy, as gravity the cause of heavinesse
 
then for physiques, that is, the knowledge of the subordinate, and
 secundary causes of naturall events; they render none at all, but empty
 words. if you desire to know why some kind of bodies sink naturally
 downwards toward the earth, and others goe naturally from it; the
 schools will tell you out of aristotle, that the bodies that sink
 downwards, are heavy; and that this heavinesse is it that causes them to
 descend: but if you ask what they mean by heavinesse, they will define
 it to bee an endeavour to goe to the center of the earth: so that the
 cause why things sink downward, is an endeavour to be below: which is
 as much as to say, that bodies descend, or ascend, because they doe.
 or they will tell you the center of the earth is the place of rest, and
 conservation for heavy things; and therefore they endeavour to be there:
 as if stones, and metalls had desire, or could discern the place they
 would bee at, as man does; or loved rest, as man does not; or that a
 peece of glasse were lesse safe in the window, than falling into the
 street.
 



quantity put into body already made
 
if we would know why the same body seems greater (without adding to it)
 one time, than another; they say, when it seems lesse, it is condensed;
 when greater, rarefied. what is that condensed, and rarefied? condensed,
 is when there is in the very same matter, lesse quantity than before;
 and rarefied, when more. as if there could be matter, that had not some
 determined quantity; when quantity is nothing else but the determination
 of matter; that is to say of body, by which we say one body is greater,
 or lesser than another, by thus, or thus much. or as if body were made
 without any quantity at all, and that afterwards more, or lesse were put
 into it, according as it is intended the body should be more, or lesse
 dense.
 



powring in of soules
 
for the cause of the soule of man, they say, creatur infundendo, and
 creando infunditur: that is, "it is created by powring it in," and
 "powred in by creation."
 



ubiquity of apparition
 
for the cause of sense, an ubiquity of species; that is, of the shews
 or apparitions of objects; which when they be apparitions to the eye, is
 sight; when to the eare, hearing; to the palate, tast; to the nostrill,
 smelling; and to the rest of the body, feeling.
 



will, the cause of willing
 
for cause of the will, to doe any particular action, which is called
 volitio, they assign the faculty, that is to say, the capacity in
 generall, that men have, to will sometimes one thing, sometimes another,
 which is called voluntas; making the power the cause of the act: as
 if one should assign for cause of the good or evill acts of men, their
 ability to doe them.
 



ignorance an occult cause
 
and in many occasions they put for cause of naturall events, their own
 ignorance, but disguised in other words: as when they say, fortune is
 the cause of things contingent; that is, of things whereof they know no
 cause: and as when they attribute many effects to occult qualities; that
 is, qualities not known to them; and therefore also (as they thinke)
 to man else. and to sympathy, antipathy, antiperistasis, specificall
 qualities, and other like termes, which signifie neither the agent that
 produceth them, nor the operation by which they are produced.
 
if such metaphysiques, and physiques as this, be not vain philosophy,
 there was never any; nor needed st. paul to give us warning to avoid it.
 



one makes the things incongruent, another the incongruity
 
and for their morall, and civill philosophy, it hath the same, or
 greater absurdities. if man doe an action of injustice, that is to
 say, an action contrary to the law, god they say is the prime cause of
 the law, and also the prime cause of that, and all other actions; but no
 cause at all of the injustice; which is the inconformity of the action
 to the law. this is vain philosophy. man might as well say, that one
 man maketh both streight line, and crooked, and another maketh their
 incongruity. and such is the philosophy of all men that resolve of their
 conclusions, before they know their premises; pretending to comprehend,
 that which is incomprehensible; and of attributes of honour to make
 attributes of nature; as this distinction was made to maintain the
 doctrine of free-will, that is, of will of man, not subject to the
 will of god.
 



private appetite the rule of publique good:
 
aristotle, and other heathen philosophers define good, and evill, by the
 appetite of men; and well enough, as long as we consider them governed
 every one by his own law: for in the condition of men that have other
 law but their own appetites, there can be generall rule of good, and
 evill actions. but in common-wealth this measure is false: not the
 appetite of private men, but the law, which is the will and appetite of
 the state is the measure. and yet is this doctrine still practised; and
 men judge the goodnesse, or wickednesse of their own, and of other mens
 actions, and of the actions of the common-wealth it selfe, by their own
 passions; and man calleth good or evill, but that which is so in his
 own eyes, without any regard at all to the publique laws; except onely
 monks, and friers, that are bound by vow to that simple obedience to
 their superiour, to which every subject ought to think himself bound by
 the law of nature to the civill soveraign. and this private measure of
 good, is doctrine, not onely vain, but also pernicious to the publique
 state.
 



and that lawfull marriage is unchastity
 
it is also vain and false philosophy, to say the work of marriage is
 repugnant to chastity, or continence, and by consequence to make them
 morall vices; as they doe, that pretend chastity, and continence, for
 the ground of denying marriage to the clergy. for they confesse it is
 more, but constitution of the church, that requireth in those holy
 orders that continually attend the altar, and administration of the
 eucharist, continuall abstinence from women, under the name of
 continuall chastity, continence, and purity. therefore they call the
 lawfull use of wives, want of chastity, and continence; and so make
 marriage sin, or at least thing so impure, and unclean, as to render
 man unfit for the altar. if the law were made because the use of wives
 is incontinence, and contrary to chastity, then all marriage is vice; if
 because it is thing too impure, and unclean for man consecrated to
 god; much more should other naturall, necessary, and daily works which
 all men doe, render men unworthy to bee priests, because they are more
 unclean.
 
but the secret foundation of this prohibition of marriage of priests, is
 not likely to have been laid so slightly, as upon such errours in morall
 philosophy; nor yet upon the preference of single life, to the estate of
 matrimony; which proceeded from the wisdome of st. paul, who perceived
 how inconvenient thing it was, for those that in those times of
 persecution were preachers of the gospel, and forced to fly from one
 countrey to another, to be clogged with the care of wife and children;
 but upon the design of the popes, and priests of after times, to make
 themselves the clergy, that is to say, sole heirs of the kingdome of god
 in this world; to which it was necessary to take from them the use of
 marriage, because our saviour saith, that at the coming of his kingdome
 the children of god shall "neither marry, nor bee given in marriage, but
 shall bee as the angels in heaven;" that is to say, spirituall. seeing
 then they had taken on them the name of spirituall, to have allowed
 themselves (when there was need) the propriety of wives, had been an
 incongruity.
 



and that all government but popular, is tyranny
 
from aristotles civill philosophy, they have learned, to call all manner
 of common-wealths but the popular, (such as was at that time the state
 of athens,) tyranny. all kings they called tyrants; and the aristocracy
 of the thirty governours set up there by the lacedemonians that subdued
 them, the thirty tyrants: as also to call the condition of the people
 under the democracy, liberty. tyrant originally signified more
 simply, but monarch: but when afterwards in most parts of greece that
 kind of government was abolished, the name began to signifie, not onely
 the thing it did before, but with it, the hatred which the popular
 states bare towards it: as also the name of king became odious after the
 deposing of the kings in rome, as being thing naturall to all men,
 to conceive some great fault to be signified in any attribute, that is
 given in despight, and to great enemy. and when the same men shall be
 displeased with those that have the administration of the democracy,
 or aristocracy, they are not to seek for disgraceful names to expresse
 their anger in; but call readily the one anarchy, and the other
 oligarchy, or the tyranny of few. and that which offendeth the people,
 is other thing, but that they are governed, not as every one of them
 would himselfe, but as the publique representant, be it one man, or an
 assembly of men thinks fit; that is, by an arbitrary government: for
 which they give evill names to their superiors; never knowing (till
 perhaps little after civill warre) that without such arbitrary
 government, such warre must be perpetuall; and that it is men, and arms,
 not words, and promises, that make the force and power of the laws.
 



that not men, but law governs
 
and therefore this is another errour of aristotles politiques, that in
 wel ordered common-wealth, not men should govern, but the laws. what
 man, that has his naturall senses, though can neither write nor read,
 does not find himself governed by them fears, and beleeves can kill
 or hurt him when obeyeth not? or that beleeves the law can hurt him;
 that is, words, and paper, without the hands, and swords of men? and
 this is of the number of pernicious errors: for they induce men, as oft
 as they like not their governours, to adhaere to those that call them
 tyrants, and to think it lawfull to raise warre against them: and yet
 they are many times cherished from the pulpit, by the clergy.
 



laws over the conscience
 
there is another errour in their civill philosophy (which they never
 learned of aristotle, nor cicero, nor any other of the heathen,) to
 extend the power of the law, which is the rule of actions onely, to the
 very thoughts, and consciences of men, by examination, and inquisition
 of what they hold, notwithstanding the conformity of their speech and
 actions: by which, men are either punished for answering the truth
 of their thoughts, or constrained to answer an untruth for fear of
 punishment. it is true, that the civill magistrate, intending to employ
 minister in the charge of teaching, may enquire of him, if hee bee
 content to preach such, and such doctrines; and in case of refusall,
 may deny him the employment: but to force him to accuse himselfe of
 opinions, when his actions are not by law forbidden, is against the
 law of nature; and especially in them, who teach, that man shall bee
 damned to eternall and extream torments, if die in false opinion
 concerning an article of the christian faith. for who is there, that
 knowing there is so great danger in an error, when the naturall care
 of himself, compelleth not to hazard his soule upon his own judgement,
 rather than that of any other man that is unconcerned in his damnation?
 



private interpretation of law
 
for private man, without the authority of the common-wealth, that is
 to say, without permission from the representant thereof, to interpret
 the law by his own spirit, is another error in the politiques; but not
 drawn from aristotle, nor from any other of the heathen philosophers.
 for none of them deny, but that in the power of making laws, is
 comprehended also the power of explaining them when there is need. and
 are not the scriptures, in all places where they are law, made law by
 the authority of the common-wealth, and consequently, part of the
 civill law?
 
of the same kind it is also, when any but the soveraign restraineth in
 any man that power which the common-wealth hath not restrained: as they
 do, that impropriate the preaching of the gospell to one certain order
 of men, where the laws have left it free. if the state give leave to
 preach, or teach; that is, if it forbid not, man can forbid me.
 if i find my selfe amongst the idolaters of america, shall i that am a
 christian, though not in orders, think it to preach jesus christ,
 till i have received orders from rome? or when i have preached, shall
 not i answer their doubts, and expound the scriptures to them; that is
 shall i not teach? but for this may some say, as also for administring
 to them the sacraments, the necessity shall be esteemed for sufficient
 mission; which is true: but this is true also, that for whatsoever,
 dispensation is due for the necessity, for the same there needs no
 dispensation, when there is law that forbids it. therefore to deny
 these functions to those, to whom the civill soveraigne hath not denyed
 them, is taking away of lawfull liberty, which is contrary to the
 doctrine of civill government.
 



language of schoole-divines
 
more examples of vain philosophy, brought into religion by the doctors
 of schoole-divinity, might be produced; but other men may if they please
 observe them of themselves. i shall onely adde this, that the
 writings of schoole-divines, are nothing else for the most part, but
 insignificant traines of strange and barbarous words, or words otherwise
 used, then in the common use of the latine tongue; such as would pose
 cicero, and varro, and all the grammarians of ancient rome. which if any
 man would see proved, let him (as i have said once before) see whether
 can translate any schoole-divine into any of the modern tongues, as
 french, english, or any other copious language: for that which cannot
 in most of these be made intelligible, is intelligible in the latine.
 which insignificancy of language, though i cannot note it for false
 philosophy; yet it hath quality, not onely to hide the truth, but also
 to make men think they have it, and desist from further search.
 



errors from tradition
 
lastly, for the errors brought in from false, or uncertain history, what
 is all the legend of fictitious miracles, in the lives of the saints;
 and all the histories of apparitions, and ghosts, alledged by the
 doctors of the romane church, to make good their doctrines of hell, and
 purgatory, the power of exorcisme, and other doctrines which have no
 warrant, neither in reason, nor scripture; as also all those traditions
 which they call the unwritten word of god; but old wives fables?
 whereof, though they find dispersed somewhat in the writings of the
 ancient fathers; yet those fathers were men, that might too easily
 beleeve false reports; and the producing of their opinions for testimony
 of the truth of what they beleeved, hath other force with them that
 (according to the counsell of st. john 1 epist. chap. 4. verse 1.)
 examine spirits, than in all things that concern the power of the romane
 church, (the abuse whereof either they suspected not, or had benefit
 by it,) to discredit their testimony, in respect of too rash beleef of
 reports; which the most sincere men, without great knowledge of naturall
 causes, (such as the fathers were) are commonly the most subject to: for
 naturally, the best men are the least suspicious of fraudulent purposes.
 gregory the pope, and s. bernard have somewhat of apparitions of ghosts,
 that said they were in purgatory; and so has our beda: but where, i
 beleeve, but by report from others. but if they, or any other, relate
 any such stories of their own knowledge, they shall not thereby confirm
 the more such vain reports; but discover their own infirmity, or fraud.
 



suppression of reason
 
with the introduction of false, we may joyn also the suppression of true
 philosophy, by such men, as neither by lawfull authority, nor sufficient
 study, are competent judges of the truth. our own navigations make
 manifest, and all men learned in humane sciences, now acknowledge there
 are antipodes: and every day it appeareth more and more, that years, and
 dayes are determined by motions of the earth. neverthelesse, men that
 have in their writings but supposed such doctrine, as an occasion to
 lay open the reasons for, and against it, have been punished for it
 by authority ecclesiasticall. but what reason is there for it? is it
 because such opinions are contrary to true religion? that cannot be,
 if they be true. let therefore the truth be first examined by competent
 judges, or confuted by them that pretend to know the contrary. is
 it because they be contrary to the religion established? let them be
 silenced by the laws of those, to whom the teachers of them are subject;
 that is, by the laws civill: for disobedience may lawfully be punished
 in them, that against the laws teach even true philosophy. is it because
 they tend to disorder in government, as countenancing rebellion, or
 sedition? then let them be silenced, and the teachers punished by vertue
 of his power to whom the care of the publique quiet is committed; which
 is the authority civill. for whatsoever power ecclesiastiques take upon
 themselves (in any place where they are subject to the state) in their
 own right, though they call it gods right, is but usurpation.
 



chapter xlvii. of the benefit that proceedeth from such darknesse, and
 to whom it accreweth
 



that receiveth benefit by fact, is presumed to be the author
 
cicero maketh honorable mention of one of the cassii, severe judge
 amongst the romans, for custome had, in criminal causes, (when the
 testimony of the witnesses was not sufficient,) to ask the accusers,
 cui bono; that is to say, what profit, honor, or other contentment, the
 accused obtained, or expected by the fact. for amongst praesumptions,
 there is none that so evidently declareth the author, as doth the
 benefit of the action. by the same rule i intend in this place to
 examine, who they may be, that have possessed the people so long in this
 part of christendome, with these doctrines, contrary to the peaceable
 societies of mankind.
 



that the church militant is the kingdome of god, was first taught by
 the church of rome
 
and first, to this error, that the present church now militant on earth,
 is the kingdome of god, (that is, the kingdome of glory, or the land of
 promise; not the kingdome of grace, which is but promise of the
 land,) are annexed these worldly benefits, first, that the pastors,
 and teachers of the church, are entitled thereby, as gods publique
 ministers, to right of governing the church; and consequently (because
 the church, and common-wealth are the same persons) to be rectors, and
 governours of the common-wealth. by this title it is, that the pope
 prevailed with the subjects of all christian princes, to beleeve, that
 to disobey him, was to disobey christ himselfe; and in all differences
 between him and other princes, (charmed with the word power spirituall,)
 to abandon their lawfull soveraigns; which is in effect an universall
 monarchy over all christendome. for though they were first invested in
 the right of being supreme teachers of christian doctrine, by, and
 under christian emperors, within the limits of the romane empire (as is
 acknowledged by themselves) by the title of pontifex maximus, who was an
 officer subject to the civill state; yet after the empire was divided,
 and dissolved, it was not hard to obtrude upon the people already
 subject to them, another title, namely, the right of st. peter; not
 onely to save entire their pretended power; but also to extend the same
 over the same christian provinces, though more united in the empire
 of rome. this benefit of an universall monarchy, (considering the desire
 of men to bear rule) is sufficient presumption, that the popes that
 pretended to it, and for long time enjoyed it, were the authors of
 the doctrine, by which it was obtained; namely, that the church now
 on earth, is the kingdome of christ. for that granted, it must be
 understood, that christ hath some lieutenant amongst us, by whom we are
 to be told what are his commandements.
 
after that certain churches had renounced this universall power of the
 pope, one would expect in reason, that the civill soveraigns in all
 those churches, should have recovered so much of it, as (before they had
 unadvisedly let it goe) was their own right, and in their own hands.
 and in england it was so in effect; saving that they, by whom the kings
 administred the government of religion, by maintaining their imployment
 to be in gods right, seemed to usurp, if not supremacy, yet an
 independency on the civill power: and they but seemed to usurp it, in
 as much as they acknowledged right in the king, to deprive them of the
 exercise of their functions at his pleasure.
 



and maintained also by the presbytery
 
but in those places where the presbytery took that office, though many
 other doctrines of the church of rome were forbidden to be taught; yet
 this doctrine, that the kingdome of christ is already come, and that it
 began at the resurrection of our saviour, was still retained. but cui
 bono? what profit did they expect from it? the same which the popes
 expected: to have soveraign power over the people. for what is it for
 men to excommunicate their lawful king, but to keep him from all places
 of gods publique service in his own kingdom? and with force to resist
 him, when with force endeavoureth to correct them? or what is it,
 without authority from the civill soveraign, to excommunicate any
 person, but to take from him his lawfull liberty, that is, to usurpe
 an unlawfull power over their brethren? the authors therefore of this
 darknesse in religion, are the romane, and the presbyterian clergy.
 



infallibility
 
to this head, i referre also all those doctrines, that serve them to
 keep the possession of this spirituall soveraignty after it is gotten.
 as first, that the pope in his publique capacity cannot erre. for who
 is there, that beleeving this to be true, will not readily obey him in
 whatsoever commands?
 



subjection of bishops
 
secondly, that all other bishops, in what common-wealth soever, have
 not their right, neither immediately from god, nor mediately from their
 civill soveraigns, but from the pope, is doctrine, by which there
 comes to be in every christian common-wealth many potent men, (for so
 are bishops,) that have their dependance on the pope, and owe obedience
 to him, though be forraign prince; by which means is able, (as
 hath done many times) to raise civill war against the state
 that submits not it self to be governed according to his pleasure and
 interest.
 



exemptions of the clergy
 
thirdly, the exemption of these, and of all other priests, and of all
 monkes, and fryers, from the power of the civill laws. for by this
 means, there is great part of every common-wealth, that enjoy the
 benefit of the laws, and are protected by the power of the civill state,
 which neverthelesse pay part of the publique expence; nor are
 lyable to the penalties, as other subjects, due to their crimes; and
 consequently, stand not in fear of any man, but the pope; and adhere to
 him onely, to uphold his universall monarchy.
 



the names of sacerdotes, and sacrifices
 
fourthly, the giving to their priests (which is more in the new
 testament but presbyters, that is, elders) the name of sacerdotes, that
 is, sacrificers, which was the title of the civill soveraign, and his
 publique ministers, amongst the jews, whilest god was their king. also,
 the making the lords supper sacrifice, serveth to make the people
 beleeve the pope hath the same power over all christian, that moses
 and aaron had over the jews; that is to say, all power, both civill and
 ecclesiasticall, as the high priest then had.
 



the sacramentation of marriage
 
fiftly, the teaching that matrimony is sacrament, giveth to the
 clergy the judging of the lawfulnesse of marriages; and thereby, of what
 children are legitimate; and consequently, of the right of succession to
 haereditary kingdomes.
 



the single life of priests
 
sixtly, the deniall of marriage to priests, serveth to assure this power
 of the pope over kings. for if king be priest, cannot marry, and
 transmit his kingdome to his posterity; if be not priest then the
 pope pretendeth this authority ecclesiasticall over him, and over his
 people.
 



auricular confession
 
seventhly, from auricular confession, they obtain, for the assurance of
 their power, better intelligence of the designs of princes, and great
 persons in the civill state, than these can have of the designs of the
 state ecclesiasticall.
 



canonization of saints, and declaring of martyrs
 
eighthly, by the canonization of saints, and declaring who are martyrs,
 they assure their power, in that they induce simple men into an
 obstinacy against the laws and commands of their civill soveraigns even
 to death, if by the popes excommunication, they be declared heretiques
 or enemies to the church; that is, (as they interpret it,) to the pope.
 



transubstantiation, penance, absolution
 
ninthly, they assure the same, by the power they ascribe to every
 priest, of making christ; and by the power of ordaining pennance; and of
 remitting, and retaining of sins.
 



purgatory, indulgences, externall works
 
tenthly, by the doctrine of purgatory, of justification by externall
 works, and of indulgences, the clergy is enriched.
 



daemonology and exorcism
 
eleventhly, by their daemonology, and the use of exorcisme, and other
 things appertaining thereto, they keep (or thinke they keep) the people
 more in awe of their power.
 



school-divinity
 
lastly, the metaphysiques, ethiques, and politiques of aristotle, the
 frivolous distinctions, barbarous terms, and obscure language of the
 schoolmen, taught in the universities, (which have been all erected and
 regulated by the popes authority,) serve them to keep these errors
 from being detected, and to make men mistake the ignis fatuus of vain
 philosophy, for the light of the gospell.
 



the authors of spirituall darknesse, who they be
 
to these, if they sufficed not, might be added other of their dark
 doctrines, the profit whereof redoundeth manifestly, to the setting up
 of an unlawfull power over the lawfull soveraigns of christian people;
 or for the sustaining of the same, when it is set up; or to the worldly
 riches, honour, and authority of those that sustain it. and therefore by
 the aforesaid rule, of cui bono, we may justly pronounce for the authors
 of all this spirituall darknesse, the pope, and roman clergy, and
 all those besides that endeavour to settle in the mindes of men this
 erroneous doctrine, that the church now on earth, is that kingdome of
 god mentioned in the old and new testament.
 
but the emperours, and other christian soveraigns, under whose
 government these errours, and the like encroachments of ecclesiastiques
 upon their office, at first crept in, to the disturbance of their
 possessions, and of the tranquillity of their subjects, though they
 suffered the same for want of foresight of the sequel, and of insight
 into the designs of their teachers, may neverthelesse bee esteemed
 accessories to their own, and the publique dammage; for without
 their authority there could at first seditious doctrine have been
 publiquely preached. i say they might have hindred the same in the
 beginning: but when the people were once possessed by those spirituall
 men, there was humane remedy to be applyed, that any man could
 invent: and for the remedies that god should provide, who never faileth
 in his good time to destroy all the machinations of men against the
 truth, wee are to attend his good pleasure, that suffereth many times
 the prosperity of his enemies, together with their ambition, to grow
 to such height, as the violence thereof openeth the eyes, which the
 warinesse of their predecessours had before sealed up, and makes men
 by too much grasping let goe all, as peters net was broken, by the
 struggling of too great multitude of fishes; whereas the impatience
 of those, that strive to resist such encroachment, before their subjects
 eyes were opened, did but encrease the power they resisted. i doe not
 therefore blame the emperour frederick for holding the stirrop to our
 countryman pope adrian; for such was the disposition of his subjects
 then, as if hee had not doe it, hee was not likely to have succeeded in
 the empire: but i blame those, that in the beginning, when their power
 was entire, by suffering such doctrines to be forged in the universities
 of their own dominions, have holden the stirrop to all the succeeding
 popes, whilest they mounted into the thrones of all christian
 soveraigns, to ride, and tire, both them, and their people, at their
 pleasure.
 
but as the inventions of men are woven, so also are they ravelled out;
 the way is the same, but the order is inverted: the web begins at the
 first elements of power, which are wisdom, humility, sincerity, and
 other vertues of the apostles, whom the people converted, obeyed, out
 of reverence, not by obligation: their consciences were free, and their
 words and actions subject to none but the civill power. afterwards the
 presbyters (as the flocks of christ encreased) assembling to consider
 what they should teach, and thereby obliging themselves to teach nothing
 against the decrees of their assemblies, made it to be thought the
 people were thereby obliged to follow their doctrine, and when
 they refused, refused to keep them company, (that was then called
 excommunication,) not as being infidels, but as being disobedient: and
 this was the first knot upon their liberty. and the number of presbyters
 encreasing, the presbyters of the chief city or province, got themselves
 an authority over the parochiall presbyters, and appropriated to
 themselves the names of bishops: and this was second knot on christian
 liberty. lastly, the bishop of rome, in regard of the imperiall city,
 took upon him an authority (partly by the wills of the emperours
 themselves, and by the title of pontifex maximus, and at last when the
 emperours were grown weak, by the priviledges of st. peter) over all
 other bishops of the empire: which was the third and last knot, and the
 whole synthesis and construction of the pontificall power.
 
and therefore the analysis, or resolution is by the same way; but
 beginning with the knot that was last tyed; as wee may see in the
 dissolution of the praeterpoliticall church government in england.
 
first, the power of the popes was dissolved totally by queen elizabeth;
 and the bishops, who before exercised their functions in right of the
 pope, did afterwards exercise the same in right of the queen and her
 successours; though by retaining the phrase of jure divino, they were
 thought to demand it by immediate right from god: and so was untyed the
 first knot. after this, the presbyterians lately in england obtained the
 putting down of episcopacy: and so was the second knot dissolved:
 and almost at the same time, the power was taken also from the
 presbyterians: and so we are reduced to the independency of the
 primitive christians to follow paul, or cephas, or apollos, every man
 as liketh best: which, if it be without contention, and without
 measuring the doctrine of christ, by our affection to the person of his
 minister, (the fault which the apostle reprehended in the corinthians,)
 is perhaps the best: first, because there ought to be power over the
 consciences of men, but of the word it selfe, working faith in every
 one, not alwayes according to the purpose of them that plant and water,
 but of god himself, that giveth the increase: and secondly, because it
 is unreasonable in them, who teach there is such danger in every little
 errour, to require of man endued with reason of his own, to follow the
 reason of any other man, or of the most voices of many other men; which
 is little better, then to venture his salvation at crosse and pile. nor
 ought those teachers to be displeased with this losse of their antient
 authority: for there is none should know better then they, that power is
 preserved by the same vertues by which it is acquired; that is to
 say, by wisdome, humility, clearnesse of doctrine, and sincerity of
 conversation; and not by suppression of the naturall sciences, and
 of the morality of naturall reason; nor by obscure language; nor by
 arrogating to themselves more knowledge than they make appear; nor by
 pious frauds; nor by such other faults, as in the pastors of gods church
 are not only faults, but also scandalls, apt to make men stumble one
 time or other upon the suppression of their authority.
 



comparison of the papacy with the kingdome of fayries
 
but after this doctrine, "that the church now militant, is the kingdome
 of god spoken of in the old and new testament," was received in
 the world; the ambition, and canvasing for the offices that belong
 thereunto, and especially for that great office of being christs
 lieutenant, and the pompe of them that obtained therein the principal
 publique charges, became by degrees so evident, that they lost the
 inward reverence due to the pastorall function: in so much as the wisest
 men, of them that had any power in the civill state, needed nothing but
 the authority of their princes, to deny them any further obedience. for,
 from the time that the bishop of rome had gotten to be acknowledged for
 bishop universall, by pretence of succession to st. peter, their whole
 hierarchy, or kingdome of darknesse, may be compared not unfitly to
 the kingdome of fairies; that is, to the old wives fables in england,
 concerning ghosts and spirits, and the feats they play in the night. and
 if man consider the originall of this great ecclesiasticall dominion,
 will easily perceive, that the papacy, is other, than the ghost of
 the deceased romane empire, sitting crowned upon the grave thereof: for
 so did the papacy start up on sudden out of the ruines of that heathen
 power.
 
the language also, which they use, both in the churches, and in their
 publique acts, being latine, which is not commonly used by any nation
 now in the world, what is it but the ghost of the old romane language.
 
the fairies in what nation soever they converse, have but one universall
 king, which some poets of ours call king oberon; but the scripture calls
 beelzebub, prince of daemons. the ecclesiastiques likewise, in whose
 dominions soever they be found, acknowledge but one universall king, the
 pope.
 
the ecclesiastiques are spirituall men, and ghostly fathers. the
 fairies are spirits, and ghosts. fairies and ghosts inhabite darknesse,
 solitudes, and graves. the ecclesiastiques walke in obscurity of
 doctrine, in monasteries, churches, and churchyards.
 
the ecclesiastiques have their cathedral churches; which, in what towne
 soever they be erected, by vertue of holy water, and certain charmes
 called exorcismes, have the power to make those townes, cities, that is
 to say, seats of empire. the fairies also have their enchanted castles,
 and certain gigantique ghosts, that domineer over the regions round
 about them.
 
the fairies are not to be seized on; and brought to answer for the hurt
 they do. so also the ecclesiastiques vanish away from the tribunals of
 civill justice.
 
the ecclesiastiques take from young men, the use of reason, by certain
 charms compounded of metaphysiques, and miracles, and traditions, and
 abused scripture, whereby they are good for nothing else, but to execute
 what they command them. the fairies likewise are said to take young
 children out of their cradles, and to change them into naturall fools,
 which common people do therefore call elves, and are apt to mischief.
 
in what shop, or operatory the fairies make their enchantment, the old
 wives have not determined. but the operatories of the clergy, are well
 enough known to be the universities, that received their discipline from
 authority pontificall.
 
when the fairies are displeased with any body, they are said to
 send their elves, to pinch them. the ecclesiastiques, when they are
 displeased with any civill state, make also their elves, that is,
 superstitious, enchanted subjects, to pinch their princes, by preaching
 sedition; or one prince enchanted with promises, to pinch another.
 
the fairies marry not; but there be amongst them incubi, that have
 copulation with flesh and bloud. the priests also marry not.
 
the ecclesiastiques take the cream of the land, by donations of ignorant
 men, that stand in aw of them, and by tythes: so also it is in the fable
 of fairies, that they enter into the dairies, and feast upon the cream,
 which they skim from the milk.
 
what kind of money is currant in the kingdome of fairies, is not
 recorded in the story. but the ecclesiastiques in their receipts accept
 of the same money that we doe; though when they are to make any payment,
 it is in canonizations, indulgences, and masses.
 
to this, and such like resemblances between the papacy, and the kingdome
 of fairies, may be added this, that as the fairies have existence,
 but in the fancies of ignorant people, rising from the traditions of old
 wives, or old poets: so the spirituall power of the pope (without the
 bounds of his own civill dominion) consisteth onely in the fear that
 seduced people stand in, of their excommunication; upon hearing of false
 miracles, false traditions, and false interpretations of the scripture.
 
it was not therefore very difficult matter, for henry 8. by his
 exorcisme; nor for qu. elizabeth by hers, to cast them out. but who
 knows that this spirit of rome, now gone out, and walking by missions
 through the dry places of china, japan, and the indies, that yeeld him
 little fruit, may not return, or rather an assembly of spirits worse
 than he, enter, and inhabite this clean swept house, and make the end
 thereof worse than the beginning? for it is not the romane clergy onely,
 that pretends the kingdome of god to be of this world, and thereby to
 have power therein, distinct from that of the civill state. and
 this is all i had designe to say, concerning the doctrine of the
 politiques. which when i have reviewed, i shall willingly expose it to
 the censure of my countrey.
 



review, and conclusion
 

from the contrariety of some of the naturall faculties of the mind, one
 to another, as also of one passion to another, and from their reference
 to conversation, there has been an argument taken, to inferre an
 impossibility that any one man should be sufficiently disposed to all
 sorts of civill duty. the severity of judgment, they say, makes men
 censorious, and unapt to pardon the errours and infirmities of other
 men: and on the other side, celerity of fancy, makes the thoughts lesse
 steddy than is necessary, to discern exactly between right and wrong.
 again, in all deliberations, and in all pleadings, the faculty of solid
 reasoning, is necessary: for without it, the resolutions of men are
 rash, and their sentences unjust: and yet if there be not powerfull
 eloquence, which procureth attention and consent, the effect of reason
 will be little. but these are contrary faculties; the former being
 grounded upon principles of truth; the other upon opinions already
 received, true, or false; and upon the passions and interests of men,
 which are different, and mutable.
 
and amongst the passions, courage, (by which i mean the contempt of
 wounds, and violent death) enclineth men to private revenges, and
 sometimes to endeavour the unsetling of the publique peace; and
 timorousnesse, many times disposeth to the desertion of the publique
 defence. both these they say cannot stand together in the same person.
 
and to consider the contrariety of mens opinions, and manners in
 generall, it is they say, impossible to entertain constant civill
 amity with all those, with whom the businesse of the world constrains
 us to converse: which businesse consisteth almost in nothing else but a
 perpetuall contention for honor, riches, and authority.
 
to which i answer, that these are indeed great difficulties, but not
 impossibilities: for by education, and discipline, they may bee, and
 are sometimes reconciled. judgment, and fancy may have place in the
 same man; but by turnes; as the end which aimeth at requireth. as the
 israelites in egypt, were sometimes fastened to their labour of making
 bricks, and other times were ranging abroad to gather straw: so also may
 the judgment sometimes be fixed upon one certain consideration, and
 the fancy at another time wandring about the world. so also reason,
 and eloquence, (though not perhaps in the naturall sciences, yet in the
 morall) may stand very well together. for wheresoever there is place for
 adorning and preferring of errour, there is much more place for adorning
 and preferring of truth, if they have it to adorn. nor is there any
 repugnancy between fearing the laws, and not fearing publique enemy;
 nor between abstaining from injury, and pardoning it in others. there is
 therefore such inconsistence of humane nature, with civill duties,
 as some think. i have known cleernesse of judgment, and largenesse of
 fancy; strength of reason, and gracefull elocution; courage for the
 warre, and fear for the laws, and all eminently in one man; and that
 was my most noble and honored friend mr. sidney godolphin; who hating no
 man, nor hated of any, was unfortunately slain in the beginning of the
 late civill warre, in the publique quarrel, by an indiscerned, and an
 undiscerning hand.
 
to the laws of nature, declared in the 15. chapter, i would have this
 added, "that every man is bound by nature, as much as in him lieth, to
 protect in warre, the authority, by which is himself protected in
 time of peace." for that pretendeth right of nature to preserve
 his owne body, cannot pretend right of nature to destroy him, by whose
 strength is preserved: it is manifest contradiction of himselfe.
 and though this law may bee drawn by consequence, from some of those
 that are there already mentioned; yet the times require to have it
 inculcated, and remembred.
 
and because i find by divers english books lately printed, that the
 civill warres have not yet sufficiently taught men, in what point of
 time it is, that subject becomes obliged to the conquerour; nor what
 is conquest; nor how it comes about, that it obliges men to obey his
 laws: therefore for farther satisfaction of men therein, i say, the
 point of time, wherein man becomes subject of conquerour, is that
 point, wherein having liberty to submit to him, consenteth, either by
 expresse words, or by other sufficient sign, to be his subject. when it
 is that man hath the liberty to submit, i have showed before in the
 end of the 21. chapter; namely, that for him that hath obligation to
 his former soveraign but that of an ordinary subject, it is then, when
 the means of his life is within the guards and garrisons of the enemy;
 for it is then, that hath longer protection from him, but is
 protected by the adverse party for his contribution. seeing
 therefore such contribution is every where, as thing inevitable,
 (notwithstanding it be an assistance to the enemy,) esteemed lawfull;
 as totall submission, which is but an assistance to the enemy, cannot
 be esteemed unlawfull. besides, if man consider that they who submit,
 assist the enemy but with part of their estates, whereas they that
 refuse, assist him with the whole, there is reason to call their
 submission, or composition an assistance; but rather detriment to the
 enemy. but if man, besides the obligation of subject, hath taken
 upon him new obligation of souldier, then hath not the liberty
 to submit to new power, as long as the old one keeps the field, and
 giveth him means of subsistence, either in his armies, or garrisons:
 for in this case, cannot complain of want of protection, and means to
 live as souldier: but when that also failes, souldier also may seek
 his protection wheresoever has most hope to have it; and may lawfully
 submit himself to his new master. and so much for the time when may
 do it lawfully, if hee will. if therefore doe it, is undoubtedly
 bound to be true subject: for contract lawfully made, cannot
 lawfully be broken.
 
by this also man may understand, when it is, that men may be said to
 be conquered; and in what the nature of conquest, and the right of a
 conquerour consisteth: for this submission is it implyeth them all.
 conquest, is not the victory it self; but the acquisition by victory,
 of right, over the persons of men. therefore that is slain, is
 overcome, but not conquered; that is taken, and put into prison, or
 chaines, is not conquered, though overcome; for is still an enemy,
 and may save himself if hee can: but that upon promise of obedience,
 hath his life and liberty allowed him, is then conquered, and subject;
 and not before. the romanes used to say, that their generall had
 pacified such province, that is to say, in english, conquered it; and
 that the countrey was pacified by victory, when the people of it
 had promised imperata facere, that is, to doe what the romane people
 commanded them: this was to be conquered. but this promise may be either
 expresse, or tacite: expresse, by promise: tacite, by other signes. as
 for example, man that hath not been called to make such an expresse
 promise, (because is one whose power perhaps is not considerable;)
 yet if live under their protection openly, hee is understood to
 submit himselfe to the government: but if live there secretly, is
 lyable to any thing that may bee done to spie, and enemy of the state.
 i say not, hee does any injustice, (for acts of open hostility bear not
 that name); but that may be justly put to death. likewise, if man,
 when his country is conquered, be out of it, is not conquered, nor
 subject: but if at his return, submit to the government, is bound
 to obey it. so that conquest (to define it) is the acquiring of the
 right of soveraignty by victory. which right, is acquired, in the
 peoples submission, by which they contract with the victor, promising
 obedience, for life and liberty.
 
in the 29th chapter i have set down for one of the causes of the
 dissolutions of common-wealths, their imperfect generation, consisting
 in the want of an absolute and arbitrary legislative power; for want
 whereof, the civill soveraign is fain to handle the sword of justice
 unconstantly, and as if it were too hot for him to hold: one reason
 whereof (which i have not there mentioned) is this, that they will all
 of them justifie the war, by which their power was at first gotten,
 and whereon (as they think) their right dependeth, and not on the
 possession. as if, for example, the right of the kings of england did
 depend on the goodnesse of the cause of william the conquerour, and upon
 their lineall, and directest descent from him; by which means, there
 would perhaps be tie of the subjects obedience to their soveraign
 at this day in all the world: wherein whilest they needlessely think to
 justifie themselves, they justifie all the successefull rebellions that
 ambition shall at any time raise against them, and their successors.
 therefore i put down for one of the most effectuall seeds of the death
 of any state, that the conquerours require not onely submission of
 mens actions to them for the future, but also an approbation of all
 their actions past; when there is scarce common-wealth in the world,
 whose beginnings can in conscience be justified.
 
and because the name of tyranny, signifieth nothing more, nor lesse,
 than the name of soveraignty, be it in one, or many men, saving that
 they that use the former word, are understood to bee angry with them
 they call tyrants; i think the toleration of professed hatred of
 tyranny, is toleration of hatred to common-wealth in general, and
 another evill seed, not differing much from the former. for to the
 justification of the cause of conqueror, the reproach of the cause
 of the conquered, is for the most part necessary: but neither of them
 necessary for the obligation of the conquered. and thus much i have
 thought fit to say upon the review of the first and second part of this
 discourse.
 
in the 35th chapter, i have sufficiently declared out of the scripture,
 that in the common-wealth of the jewes, god himselfe was made the
 soveraign, by pact with the people; who were therefore called his
 peculiar people, to distinguish them from the rest of the world, over
 whom god reigned not by their consent, but by his own power: and that
 in this kingdome moses was gods lieutenant on earth; and that it was he
 that told them what laws god appointed to doe execution; especially
 in capitall punishments; not then thinking it matter of so necessary
 consideration, as i find it since. wee know that generally in all
 common-wealths, the execution of corporeall punishments, was either put
 upon the guards, or other souldiers of the soveraign power; or given
 to those, in whom want of means, contempt of honour, and hardnesse of
 heart, concurred, to make them sue for such an office. but amongst the
 israelites it was positive law of god their soveraign, that that
 was convicted of capitall crime, should be stoned to death by the
 people; and that the witnesses should cast the first stone, and after
 the witnesses, then the rest of the people. this was law that designed
 who were to be the executioners; but not that any one should throw a
 stone at him before conviction and sentence, where the congregation
 was judge. the witnesses were neverthelesse to be heard before they
 proceeded to execution, unlesse the fact were committed in the presence
 of the congregation it self, or in sight of the lawfull judges; for
 then there needed other witnesses but the judges themselves.
 neverthelesse, this manner of proceeding being not throughly understood,
 hath given occasion to dangerous opinion, that any man may kill
 another, is some cases, by right of zeal; as if the executions done
 upon offenders in the kingdome of god in old time, proceeded not from
 the soveraign command, but from the authority of private zeal: which, if
 we consider the texts that seem to favour it, is quite contrary.
 
first, where the levites fell upon the people, that had made and
 worshipped the golden calfe, and slew three thousand of them; it was by
 the commandement of moses, from the mouth of god; as is manifest, exod.
 32.27. and when the of woman of israel had blasphemed god, they
 that heard it, did not kill him, but brought him before moses, who
 put him under custody, till god should give sentence against him; as
 appears, levit. 25.11, 12. again, (numbers 25.6, 7.) when phinehas
 killed zimri and cosbi, it was not by right of private zeale: their
 crime was committed in the sight of the assembly; there needed
 witnesse; the law was known, and the heir apparent to the
 soveraignty; and which is the principall point, the lawfulnesse of his
 act depended wholly upon subsequent ratification by moses, whereof he
 had cause to doubt. and this presumption of future ratification, is
 sometimes necessary to the safety [of] common-wealth; as in sudden
 rebellion, any man that can suppresse it by his own power in the
 countrey where it begins, may lawfully doe it, and provide to have it
 ratified, or pardoned, whilest it is in doing, or after it is done. also
 numb. 35.30. it is expressely said, "whosoever shall kill the murtherer,
 shall kill him upon the word of witnesses:" but witnesses suppose
 formall judicature, and consequently condemn that pretence of jus
 zelotarum. the law of moses concerning him that enticeth to idolatry,
 (that is to say, in the kingdome of god to renouncing of his
 allegiance) (deut. 13.8.) forbids to conceal him, and commands the
 accuser to cause him to be put to death, and to cast the first stone at
 him; but not to kill him before be condemned. and (deut. 17. ver.4,
 5, 6.) the processe against idolatry is exactly set down: for god there
 speaketh to the people, as judge, and commandeth them, when man is
 accused of idolatry, to enquire diligently of the fact, and finding it
 true, then to stone him; but still the hand of the witnesse throweth
 the first stone. this is not private zeal, but publique condemnation. in
 like manner when father hath rebellious son, the law is (deut. 21.
 18.) that shall bring him before the judges of the town, and all the
 people of the town shall stone him. lastly, by pretence of these laws
 it was, that st. steven was stoned, and not by pretence of private zeal:
 for before hee was carried away to execution, had pleaded his cause
 before the high priest. there is nothing in all this, nor in any other
 part of the bible, to countenance executions by private zeal; which
 being oftentimes but conjunction of ignorance and passion, is against
 both the justice and peace of common-wealth.
 
in the 36th chapter i have said, that it is not declared in what
 manner god spake supernaturally to moses: not that spake not to him
 sometimes by dreams and visions, and by supernaturall voice, as
 to other prophets: for the manner how spake unto him from the
 mercy-seat, is expressely set down (numbers 7.89.) in these words,
 "from that time forward, when moses entred into the tabernacle of the
 congregation to speak with god, heard voice which spake unto him
 from over the mercy-seate, which is over the arke of the testimony, from
 between the cherubins spake unto him." but it is not declared in
 what consisted the praeeminence of the manner of gods speaking to moses,
 above that of his speaking to other prophets, as to samuel, and to
 abraham, to whom also spake by voice, (that is, by vision) unlesse
 the difference consist in the cleernesse of the vision. for face
 to face, and mouth to mouth, cannot be literally understood of the
 infinitenesse, and incomprehensibility of the divine nature.
 
and as to the whole doctrine, i see not yet, but the principles of
 it are true and proper; and the ratiocination solid. for i ground the
 civill right of soveraigns, and both the duty and liberty of subjects,
 upon the known naturall inclinations of mankind, and upon the articles
 of the law of nature; of which man, that pretends but reason enough
 to govern his private family, ought to be ignorant. and for the power
 ecclesiasticall of the same soveraigns, i ground it on such texts, as
 are both evident in themselves, and consonant to the scope of the whole
 scripture. and therefore am perswaded, that that shall read it with
 purpose onely to be informed, shall be informed by it. but for those
 that by writing, or publique discourse, or by their eminent actions,
 have already engaged themselves to the maintaining of contrary opinions,
 they will not bee so easily satisfied. for in such cases, it is naturall
 for men, at one and the same time, both to proceed in reading, and to
 lose their attention, in the search of objections to that they had read
 before: of which, in time wherein the interests of men are changed
 (seeing much of that doctrine, which serveth to the establishing of a
 new government, must needs be contrary to that which conduced to the
 dissolution of the old,) there cannot choose but be very many.
 
in that part which treateth of christian common-wealth, there are
 some new doctrines, which, it may be, in state where the contrary were
 already fully determined, were fault for subject without leave to
 divulge, as being an usurpation of the place of teacher. but in this
 time, that men call not onely for peace, but also for truth, to offer
 such doctrines as i think true, and that manifestly tend to peace and
 loyalty, to the consideration of those that are yet in deliberation, is
 more, but to offer new wine, to bee put into new cask, that bothe may
 be preserved together. and i suppose, that then, when novelty can breed
 trouble, nor disorder in state, men are not generally so much
 inclined to the reverence of antiquity, as to preferre ancient errors,
 before new and well proved truth.
 
there is nothing i distrust more than my elocution; which neverthelesse
 i am confident (excepting the mischances of the presse) is not obscure.
 that i have neglected the ornament of quoting ancient poets, orators,
 and philosophers, contrary to the custome of late time, (whether i have
 done well or ill in it,) proceedeth from my judgment, grounded on many
 reasons. for first, all truth of doctrine dependeth either upon reason,
 or upon scripture; both which give credit to many, but never receive it
 from any writer. secondly, the matters in question are not of fact, but
 of right, wherein there is place for witnesses. there is scarce any
 of those old writers, that contradicteth not sometimes both himself,
 and others; which makes their testimonies insufficient. fourthly,
 such opinions as are taken onely upon credit of antiquity, are not
 intrinsically the judgment of those that cite them, but words that
 passe (like gaping) from mouth to mouth. fiftly, it is many times with a
 fraudulent designe that men stick their corrupt doctrine with the cloves
 of other mens wit. sixtly, i find not that the ancients they cite, took
 it for an ornament, to doe the like with those that wrote before them.
 seventhly, it is an argument of indigestion, when greek and latine
 sentences unchewed come up again, as they use to doe, unchanged. lastly,
 though i reverence those men of ancient time, that either have written
 truth perspicuously, or set us in better way to find it out our
 selves; yet to the antiquity it self i think nothing due: for if we will
 reverence the age, the present is the oldest. if the antiquity of the
 writer, i am not sure, that generally they to whom such honor is given,
 were more ancient when they wrote, than i am that am writing: but if it
 bee well considered, the praise of ancient authors, proceeds not from
 the reverence of the dead, but from the competition, and mutuall envy of
 the living.
 
to conclude, there is nothing in this whole discourse, nor in that i
 writ before of the same subject in latine, as far as i can perceive,
 contrary either to the word of god, or to good manners; or to the
 disturbance of the publique tranquillity. therefore i think it may be
 profitably printed, and more profitably taught in the universities, in
 case they also think so, to whom the judgment of the same belongeth.
 for seeing the universities are the fountains of civill, and morall
 doctrine, from whence the preachers, and the gentry, drawing such water
 as they find, use to sprinkle the same (both from the pulpit, and in
 their conversation) upon the people, there ought certainly to be
 great care taken, to have it pure, both from the venime of heathen
 politicians, and from the incantation of deceiving spirits. and by that
 means the most men, knowing their duties, will be the less subject to
 serve the ambition of few discontented persons, in their purposes
 against the state; and be the lesse grieved with the contributions
 necessary for their peace, and defence; and the governours themselves
 have the lesse cause, to maintain at the common charge any greater
 army, than is necessary to make good the publique liberty, against the
 invasions and encroachments of forraign enemies.
 
and thus i have brought to an end my discourse of civill and
 ecclesiasticall government, occasioned by the disorders of the present
 time, without partiality, without application, and without other
 designe, than to set before mens eyes the mutuall relation between
 protection and obedience; of which the condition of humane nature, and
 the laws divine, (both naturall and positive) require an inviolable
 observation. and though in the revolution of states, there can be no
 very good constellation for truths of this nature to be born under, (as
 having an angry aspect from the dissolvers of an old government, and
 seeing but the backs of them that erect new;) yet i cannot think
 it will be condemned at this time, either by the publique judge of
 doctrine, or by any that desires the continuance of publique peace. and
 in this hope i return to my interrupted speculation of bodies naturall;
 wherein, (if god give health to finish it,) i hope the novelty will
 as much please, as in the doctrine of this artificiall body it useth to
 offend. for such truth, as opposeth man profit, nor pleasure, is to
 all men welcome.
 


finis
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook leviathan ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 

