the project gutenberg ebook of the odyssey
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: the odyssey
 
author: homer
 
translator: samuel butler
 
release date: april 1, 1999 [ebook #1727]
 most recently updated: december 2, 2023
 
language: english
 
credits: jim tinsley and david widger
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the odyssey ***
 



[illustration]
 



the odyssey
 
by homer
 
rendered into english prose for the use of those who cannot read the
 original
 
contents
 
preface to first edition
 preface to second edition
 the odyssey
 book i.
 book ii.
 book iii.
 book iv.
 book v.
 book vi.
 book vii.
 book viii.
 book ix.
 book x.
 book xi.
 book xii.
 book xiii.
 book xiv.
 book xv.
 book xvi.
 book xvii.
 book xviii.
 book xix.
 book xx.
 book xxi.
 book xxii.
 book xxiii.
 book xxiv.
 footnotes:
 

professore
 cav. biagio ingroia,
 prezioso alleato
 l’autore riconoscente.
 



preface to first edition
 

this translation is intended to supplement work entitled “the
 authoress of the odyssey”, which i published in 1897. i could not give
 the whole “odyssey” in that book without making it unwieldy, i
 therefore epitomised my translation, which was already completed and
 which i now publish in full.
 
i shall not here argue the two main points dealt with in the work just
 mentioned; i have nothing either to add to, or to withdraw from, what i
 have there written. the points in question are:
 
(1) that the “odyssey” was written entirely at, and drawn entirely
 from, the place now called trapani on the west coast of sicily, alike
 as regards the phaeacian and the ithaca scenes; while the voyages of
 ulysses, when once is within easy reach of sicily, solve themselves
 into periplus of the island, practically from trapani back to
 trapani, via the lipari islands, the straits of messina, and the island
 of pantellaria.
 
(2) that the poem was entirely written by very young woman, who lived
 at the place now called trapani, and introduced herself into her work
 under the name of nausicaa.
 
the main arguments on which i base the first of these somewhat
 startling contentions, have been prominently and repeatedly before the
 english and italian public ever since they appeared (without rejoinder)
 in the “athenaeum” for january 30 and february 20, 1892. both
 contentions were urged (also without rejoinder) in the johnian “eagle”
 for the lent and october terms of the same year. nothing to which i
 should reply has reached from any quarter, and knowing how anxiously
 i have endeavoured to learn the existence of any flaws in my argument,
 i begin to feel some confidence that, did such flaws exist, i should
 have heard, at any rate about some of them, before now. without,
 therefore, for moment pretending to think that scholars generally
 acquiesce in my conclusions, i shall act as thinking them little likely
 so to gainsay as that it will be incumbent upon to reply, and
 shall confine myself to translating the “odyssey” for english readers,
 with such notes as i think will be found useful. among these i would
 especially call attention to one on xxii. 465-473 which lord grimthorpe
 has kindly allowed to make public.
 
i have repeated several of the illustrations used in “the authoress of
 the odyssey”, and have added two which i hope may bring the outer court
 of ulysses’ house more vividly before the reader. i should like to
 explain that the presence of man and dog in one illustration is
 accidental, and was not observed by till i developed the negative.
 in an appendix i have also reprinted the paragraphs explanatory of the
 plan of ulysses’ house, together with the plan itself. the reader is
 recommended to study this plan with some attention.
 
in the preface to my translation of the “iliad” i have given my views
 as to the main principles by which translator should be guided, and
 need not repeat them here, beyond pointing out that the initial liberty
 of translating poetry into prose involves the continual taking of more
 or less liberty throughout the translation; for much that is right in
 poetry is wrong in prose, and the exigencies of readable prose are the
 first things to be considered in prose translation. that the reader,
 however, may see how far i have departed from strict construe, i will
 print here messrs. butcher and lang’s translation of the sixty lines or
 so of the “odyssey.” their translation runs:
 
tell me, muse, of that man, so ready at need, who wandered far and
 wide, after had sacked the sacred citadel of troy, and many were the
 men whose towns saw and whose mind learnt, yea, and many the woes
 suffered in his heart on the deep, striving to win his own life and
 the return of his company. nay, but even so saved not his company,
 though desired it sore. for through the blindness of their own
 hearts they perished, fools, who devoured the oxen of helios hyperion:
 but the god took from them their day of returning. of these things,
 goddess, daughter of zeus, whencesoever thou hast heard thereof,
 declare thou even unto us.
 
now all the rest, as many as fled from sheer destruction, were at
 home, and had escaped both war and sea, but odysseus only, craving
 for his wife and for his homeward path, the lady nymph calypso
 held, that fair goddess, in her hollow caves, longing to have him
 for her lord. but when now the year had come in the courses of the
 seasons, wherein the gods had ordained that should return home
 to ithaca, not even there was quit of labours, not even among
 his own; but all the gods had pity on him save poseidon, who raged
 continually against godlike odysseus, till came to his own
 country. howbeit poseidon had now departed for the distant
 ethiopians, the ethiopians that are sundered in twain, the
 uttermost of men, abiding some where hyperion sinks and some where
 rises. there looked to receive his hecatomb of bulls and
 rams, there made merry sitting at the feast, but the other gods
 were gathered in the halls of olympian zeus. then among them the
 father of men and gods began to speak, for bethought him in his
 heart of noble aegisthus, whom the of agamemnon, far-famed
 orestes, slew. thinking upon him spake out among the immortals:
 ‘lo you now, how vainly mortal men do blame the gods! for of us
 they say comes evil, whereas they even of themselves, through the
 blindness of their own hearts, have sorrows beyond that which is
 ordained. even as of late aegisthus, beyond that which was
 ordained, took to him the wedded wife of the of atreus, and
 killed her lord on his return, and that with sheer doom before his
 eyes, since we had warned him by the embassy of hermes the
 keen-sighted, the slayer of argos, that should neither kill the
 man, nor woo his wife. for the of atreus shall be avenged at
 the hand of orestes, so soon as shall come to man’s estate and
 long for his own country. so spake hermes, yet prevailed not on
 the heart of aegisthus, for all his good will; but now hath paid
 one price for all.’
 
and the goddess, grey-eyed athene, answered him, saying: ‘o father,
 our father cronides, throned in the highest; that man assuredly
 lies in death that is his due; so perish likewise all who work
 such deeds! but my heart is rent for wise odysseus, the hapless
 one, who far from his friends this long while suffereth affliction
 in sea-girt isle, where is the navel of the sea, woodland isle,
 and therein goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of the
 wizard atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and himself
 upholds the tall pillars which keep earth and sky asunder. his
 daughter it is that holds the hapless man in sorrow: and ever with
 soft and guileful tales she is wooing him to forgetfulness of
 ithaca. but odysseus yearning to see if it were but the smoke leap
 upwards from his own land, hath desire to die. as for thee, thine
 heart regardeth it not at all, olympian! what! did not odysseus by
 the ships of the argives make thee free offering of sacrifice in
 the wide trojan land? wherefore wast thou then so wroth with him, o
 zeus?’
 

the “odyssey” (as every one knows) abounds in passages borrowed from
 the “iliad”; i had wished to print these in slightly different type,
 with marginal references to the “iliad,” and had marked them to this
 end in my ms. i found, however, that the translation would be thus
 hopelessly scholasticised, and abandoned my intention. i would
 nevertheless urge on those who have the management of our university
 presses, that they would render great service to students if they
 would publish greek text of the “odyssey” with the iliadic passages
 printed in different type, and with marginal references. i have given
 the british museum copy of the “odyssey” with the iliadic passages
 underlined and referred to in ms.; i have also given an “iliad” marked
 with all the odyssean passages, and their references; but copies of
 both the “iliad” and “odyssey” so marked ought to be within easy reach
 of all students.
 
any one who at the present day discusses the questions that have arisen
 round the “iliad” since wolf’s time, without keeping it well before his
 reader’s mind that the “odyssey” was demonstrably written from one
 single neighbourhood, and hence (even though nothing else pointed to
 this conclusion) presumably by one person only—that it was written
 certainly before 750, and in all probability before 1000 b.c.—that the
 writer of this very early poem was demonstrably familiar with the
 “iliad” as we now have it, borrowing as freely from those books whose
 genuineness has been most impugned, as from those which are admitted to
 be by homer—any one who fails to keep these points before his readers,
 is hardly dealing equitably by them. any one on the other hand, who
 will mark his “iliad” and his “odyssey” from the copies in the british
 museum above referred to, and who will draw the only inference that
 common sense can draw from the presence of so many identical passages
 in both poems, will, i believe, find difficulty in assigning their
 proper value to large number of books here and on the continent that
 at present enjoy considerable reputations. furthermore, and this
 perhaps is an advantage better worth securing, will find that many
 puzzles of the “odyssey” cease to puzzle him on the discovery that they
 arise from over-saturation with the “iliad.”
 
other difficulties will also disappear as soon as the development of
 the poem in the writer’s mind is understood. i have dealt with this at
 some length in pp. 251-261 of “the authoress of the odyssey”. briefly,
 the “odyssey” consists of two distinct poems: (1) the return of
 ulysses, which alone the muse is asked to sing in the opening lines of
 the poem. this poem includes the phaeacian episode, and the account of
 ulysses’ adventures as told by himself in books ix.-xii. it consists of
 lines 1-79 (roughly) of book i., of line 28 of book v., and thence
 without intermission to the middle of line 187 of book xiii., at which
 point the original scheme was abandoned.
 
(2) the story of penelope and the suitors, with the episode of
 telemachus’ voyage to pylos. this poem begins with line 80 (roughly) of
 book i., is continued to the end of book iv., and not resumed till
 ulysses wakes in the middle of line 187, book xiii., from whence it
 continues to the end of book xxiv.
 
in “the authoress of the odyssey”, i wrote:
 
the introduction of lines xi., 115-137 and of line ix., 535, with the
 writing new council of the gods at the beginning of book v., to take
 the place of the one that was removed to book i., 1-79, were the only
 things that were done to give even semblance of unity to the old
 scheme and the new, and to conceal the fact that the muse, after being
 asked to sing of one subject, spend two-thirds of her time in singing a
 very different one, with climax for which no-one has asked her. for
 roughly the return occupies eight books, and penelope and the suitors
 sixteen.
 

i believe this to be substantially correct.
 
lastly, to deal with very unimportant point, i observe that the
 leipsic teubner edition of 894 makes books ii. and iii. end with a
 comma. stops are things of such far more recent date than the
 “odyssey,” that there does not seem much use in adhering to the text in
 so small matter; still, from spirit of mere conservatism, i have
 preferred to do so. why [greek] at the beginnings of books ii. and
 viii., and [greek], at the beginning of book vii. should have initial
 capitals in an edition far too careful to admit supposition of
 inadvertence, when [greek] at the beginning of books vi. and xiii., and
 [greek] at the beginning of book xvii. have initial capitals, i
 cannot determine. other books of the “odyssey” have initial capitals
 except the three mentioned unless the first word of the book is a
 proper name.
 
s. butler.
 

_july_ 25, 1900.
 



preface to second edition
 

butler’s translation of the “odyssey” appeared originally in 1900, and
 the authoress of the odyssey in 1897. in the preface to the new edition
 of “the authoress”, which is published simultaneously with this new
 edition of the translation, i have given some account of the genesis of
 the two books.
 
the size of the original page has been reduced so as to make both books
 uniform with butler’s other works; and, fortunately, it has been
 possible, by using smaller type, to get the same number of words into
 each page, so that the references remain good, and, with the exception
 of few minor alterations and rearrangements now to be enumerated so
 far as they affect the translation, the new editions are faithful
 reprints of the original editions, with misprints and obvious errors
 corrected—no attempt having been made to edit them or to bring them up
 to date.
 
(a) the index has been revised.
 
(b) owing to the reduction in the size of the page it has been
 necessary to shorten some of the headlines, and here advantage has been
 taken of various corrections of and additions to the headlines and
 shoulder-notes made by butler in his own copies of the two books.
 
(c) for the most part each of the illustrations now occupies page,
 whereas in the original editions they generally appeared two on the
 page. it has been necessary to reduce the plan of the house of ulysses.
 
on page 153 of “the authoress” butler says: “no great poet would
 compare his hero to paunch full of blood and fat, cooking before the
 fire (xx, 24-28).” this passage is not given in the abridged story of
 the “odyssey” at the beginning of the book, but in the translation it
 occurs in these words:
 
“thus chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
 tossed about as one who turns paunch full of blood and fat in front
 of hot fire, doing it first on one side then on the other, that he
 may get it cooked as soon as possible; even so did turn himself
 about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single-handed as he
 was, should contrive to kill so large body of men as the wicked
 suitors.”
 
it looks as though in the interval between the publication of “the
 authoress” (1897) and of the translation (1900) butler had changed his
 mind; for in the first case the comparison is between ulysses and a
 paunch full, etc., and in the second it is between ulysses and man
 who turns paunch full, etc. the second comparison is perhaps one
 which great poet might make.
 
in seeing the works through the press i have had the invaluable
 assistance of mr. a. t. bartholomew of the university library,
 cambridge, and of mr. donald s. robertson, fellow of trinity college,
 cambridge. to both these friends i give my most cordial thanks for the
 care and skill exercised by them. mr. robertson has found time for the
 labour of checking and correcting all the quotations from and
 references to the “iliad” and “odyssey,” and i believe that it could
 not have been better performed. it was, i know, pleasure for him; and
 it would have been pleasure also for butler if could have known
 that his work was being shepherded by the of his old friend, mr. h.
 r. robertson, who more than half century ago was fellow-student
 with him at cary’s school of art in streatham street, bloomsbury.
 
henry festing jones.
 
120 maida vale, w.9.
 4th _december_, 1921.
 
the odyssey
 



book i
 

the gods in council—minerva’s visit to ithaca—the challenge from
 telemachus to the suitors.
 

tell me, muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide
 after had sacked the famous town of troy. many cities did visit,
 and many were the nations with whose manners and customs was
 acquainted; moreover suffered much by while trying to save his
 own life and bring his men safely home; but do what might could
 not save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in
 eating the cattle of the sun-god hyperion; so the god prevented them
 from ever reaching home. tell me, too, about all these things, oh
 daughter of jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.
 
so now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely
 home except ulysses, and he, though was longing to return to his
 wife and country, was detained by the goddess calypso, who had got him
 into large cave and wanted to marry him. but as years went by, there
 came time when the gods settled that should go back to ithaca;
 even then, however, when was among his own people, his troubles were
 not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun to pity him
 except neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would not
 let him get home.
 
now neptune had gone off to the ethiopians, who are at the world’s end,
 and lie in two halves, the one looking west and the other east.1 had
 gone there to accept hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying
 himself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house of
 olympian jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. at that moment
 was thinking of aegisthus, who had been killed by agamemnon’s son
 orestes; so said to the other gods:
 
“see now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing
 but their own folly. look at aegisthus; must needs make love to
 agamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill agamemnon, though knew
 it would be the death of him; for i sent mercury to warn him not to do
 either of these things, inasmuch as orestes would be sure to take his
 revenge when grew up and wanted to return home. mercury told him
 this in all good will but would not listen, and now has paid for
 everything in full.”
 
then minerva said, “father, of saturn, king of kings, it served
 aegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as did; but
 aegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for ulysses that my heart
 bleeds, when i think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island,
 far away, poor man, from all his friends. it is an island covered with
 forest, in the very middle of the sea, and goddess lives there,
 daughter of the magician atlas, who looks after the bottom of the
 ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth
 asunder. this daughter of atlas has got hold of poor unhappy ulysses,
 and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his
 home, so that is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how may
 once more see the smoke of his own chimneys. you, sir, take heed of
 this, and yet when ulysses was before troy did not propitiate you
 with many burnt sacrifice? why then should you keep on being so angry
 with him?”
 
and jove said, “my child, what are you talking about? how can i forget
 ulysses than whom there is more capable man on earth, nor more
 liberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? bear
 in mind, however, that neptune is still furious with ulysses for having
 blinded an eye of polyphemus king of the cyclopes. polyphemus is to
 neptune by the nymph thoosa, daughter to the sea-king phorcys;
 therefore though will not kill ulysses outright, torments him by
 preventing him from getting home. still, let us lay our heads together
 and see how we can help him to return; neptune will then be pacified,
 for if we are all of mind can hardly stand out against us.”
 
and minerva said, “father, of saturn, king of kings, if, then, the
 gods now mean that ulysses should get home, we should first send
 mercury to the ogygian island to tell calypso that we have made up our
 minds and that is to return. in the meantime i will go to ithaca, to
 put heart into ulysses’ telemachus; i will embolden him to call the
 achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his mother
 penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep and oxen; i
 will also conduct him to sparta and to pylos, to see if can hear
 anything about the return of his dear father—for this will make people
 speak well of him.”
 
so saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable,
 with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the
 redoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong,
 wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her, and
 down she darted from the topmost summits of olympus, whereon forthwith
 she was in ithaca, at the gateway of ulysses’ house, disguised as a
 visitor, mentes, chief of the taphians, and she held bronze spear in
 her hand. there she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of the
 oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in front of
 the house. men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait upon
 them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaning
 down the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some
 cutting up great quantities of meat.
 
telemachus saw her long before any one else did. was sitting moodily
 among the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how would
 send them flying out of the house, if were to come to his own again
 and be honoured as in days gone by. thus brooding as sat among them,
 caught sight of minerva and went straight to the gate, for was
 vexed that stranger should be kept waiting for admittance. took
 her right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear. “welcome,”
 said he, “to our house, and when you have partaken of food you shall
 tell us what you have come for.”
 
led the way as spoke, and minerva followed him. when they were
 within took her spear and set it in the spear-stand against strong
 bearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy father,
 and conducted her to richly decorated seat under which threw a
 cloth of damask. there was footstool also for her feet,2 and set
 another seat near her for himself, away from the suitors, that she
 might not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence, and
 that might ask her more freely about his father.
 
maid servant then brought them water in beautiful golden ewer and
 poured it into silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she
 drew clean table beside them. an upper servant brought them bread,
 and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, the
 carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold
 by their side, and manservant brought them wine and poured it out for
 them.
 

then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and
 seats.3 forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maids
 went round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with
 wine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things that
 were before them. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink they
 wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments of a
 banquet, so servant brought lyre to phemius, whom they compelled
 perforce to sing to them. as soon as touched his lyre and began to
 sing telemachus spoke low to minerva, with his head close to hers that
 man might hear.
 
“i hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended with what i am
 going to say. singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, and
 all this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some
 wilderness or grinding to powder in the surf. if these men were to see
 my father come back to ithaca they would pray for longer legs rather
 than longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he, alas, has
 fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes say that is
 coming, we longer heed them; we shall never see him again. and now,
 sir, tell and tell true, who you are and where you come from.
 tell of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how
 your crew brought you to ithaca, and of what nation they declared
 themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land. tell also truly,
 for i want to know, are you stranger to this house, or have you been
 here in my father’s time? in the old days we had many visitors for my
 father went about much himself.”
 
and minerva answered, “i will tell you truly and particularly all about
 it. i am mentes, of anchialus, and i am king of the taphians. i
 have come here with my ship and crew, on voyage to men of foreign
 tongue being bound for temesa4 with cargo of iron, and i shall bring
 back copper. as for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open country
 away from the town, in the harbour rheithron5 under the wooded mountain
 neritum.6 our fathers were friends before us, as old laertes will tell
 you, if you will go and ask him. they say, however, that never comes
 to town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly, with
 an old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when he
 comes in tired from pottering about his vineyard. they told your
 father was at home again, and that was why i came, but it seems the
 gods are still keeping him back, for is not dead yet not on the
 mainland. it is more likely is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean,
 or prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will. i
 am prophet, and know very little about omens, but i speak as it is
 borne in upon from heaven, and assure you that will not be away
 much longer; for is man of such resource that even though were
 in chains of iron would find some means of getting home again. but
 tell me, and tell true, can ulysses really have such fine looking
 fellow for son? you are indeed wonderfully like him about the head
 and eyes, for we were close friends before set sail for troy where
 the flower of all the argives went also. since that time we have never
 either of us seen the other.”
 
“my mother,” answered telemachus, “tells i am to ulysses, but it
 is wise child that knows his own father. would that i were to one
 who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there is
 more ill-starred man under heaven than who they tell is my
 father.”
 
and minerva said, “there is fear of your race dying out yet, while
 penelope has such fine as you are. but tell me, and tell true,
 what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people?
 what is it all about? have you some banquet, or is there wedding in
 the family—for one seems to be bringing any provisions of his own?
 and the guests—how atrociously they are behaving; what riot they make
 over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable person
 who comes near them.”
 
“sir,” said telemachus, “as regards your question, so long as my father
 was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their
 displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more
 closely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. i could have borne it
 better even though were dead, if had fallen with his men before
 troy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fighting
 were done; for then the achaeans would have built mound over his
 ashes, and i should myself have been heir to his renown; but now the
 storm-winds have spirited him away we know not whither; is gone
 without leaving so much as trace behind him, and i inherit nothing
 but dismay. nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss of
 my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon of yet another kind; for the
 chiefs from all our islands, dulichium, same, and the woodland island
 of zacynthus, as also all the principal men of ithaca itself, are
 eating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to my
 mother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry,7 nor
 yet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, and
 before long will do so also with myself.”
 
“is that so?” exclaimed minerva, “then you do indeed want ulysses home
 again. give him his helmet, shield, and couple of lances, and if he
 is the man was when i first knew him in our house, drinking and
 making merry, would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors,
 were to stand once more upon his own threshold. was then coming
 from ephyra, where had been to beg poison for his arrows from ilus,
 of mermerus. ilus feared the ever-living gods and would not give
 him any, but my father let him have some, for was very fond of him.
 if ulysses is the man then was these suitors will have short
 shrift and sorry wedding.
 
“but there! it rests with heaven to determine whether is to return,
 and take his revenge in his own house or no; i would, however, urge you
 to set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once. take my
 advice, call the achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay your
 case before them, and call heaven to bear you witness. bid the suitors
 take themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother’s mind
 is set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will find
 her husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that so dear
 daughter may expect. as for yourself, let prevail upon you to take
 the best ship you can get, with crew of twenty men, and go in quest
 of your father who has so long been missing. some one may tell you
 something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some
 heaven-sent message may direct you. first go to pylos and ask nestor;
 thence go on to sparta and visit menelaus, for got home last of all
 the achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive and on his way
 home, you can put up with the waste these suitors will make for yet
 another twelve months. if on the other hand you hear of his death, come
 home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
 barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again. then, having
 done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means or
 foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. you are too old to
 plead infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing
 orestes’ praises for having killed his father’s murderer aegisthus? you
 are fine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make
 yourself name in story. now, however, i must go back to my ship and
 to my crew, who will be impatient if i keep them waiting longer; think
 the matter over for yourself, and remember what i have said to you.”
 
“sir,” answered telemachus, “it has been very kind of you to talk to me
 in this way, as though i were your own son, and i will do all you tell
 me; i know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a
 little longer till you have taken bath and refreshed yourself. i will
 then give you present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; i will
 give you one of great beauty and value—a keepsake such as only dear
 friends give to one another.”
 
minerva answered, “do not try to keep me, for i would be on my way at
 once. as for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till i
 come again, and i will take it home with me. you shall give very
 good one, and i will give you one of less value in return.”
 
with these words she flew away like bird into the air, but she had
 given telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about
 his father. felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the
 stranger had been god, so went straight to where the suitors were
 sitting.
 
phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he
 told the sad tale of the return from troy, and the ills minerva had
 laid upon the achaeans. penelope, daughter of icarius, heard his song
 from her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase, not
 alone, but attended by two of her handmaids. when she reached the
 suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the roof
 of the cloisters8 with staid maiden on either side of her. she held a
 veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.
 
“phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods and heroes,
 such as poets love to celebrate. sing the suitors some one of these,
 and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for
 it breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds of my lost husband whom i
 mourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all hellas
 and middle argos.”9
 
“mother,” answered telemachus, “let the bard sing what has mind
 to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is jove, not they, who
 makes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own
 good pleasure. this fellow means harm by singing the ill-fated
 return of the danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs most
 warmly. make up your mind to it and bear it; ulysses is not the only
 man who never came back from troy, but many another went down as well
 as he. go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily
 duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for
 speech is man’s matter, and mine above all others 10—for it is i who am
 master here.”
 
she went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in
 her heart. then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she
 mourned her dear husband till minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes.
 but the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters11, and
 prayed each one that might be her bed fellow.
 
then telemachus spoke, “shameless,” cried, “and insolent suitors,
 let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be brawling, for it
 is rare thing to hear man with such divine voice as phemius has;
 but in the morning meet in full assembly that i may give you formal
 notice to depart, and feast at one another’s houses, turn and turn
 about, at your own cost. if on the other hand you choose to persist in
 spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but jove shall reckon with you
 in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be man
 to avenge you.”
 
the suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the
 boldness of his speech. then, antinous, of eupeithes, said, “the
 gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may
 jove never grant you to be chief in ithaca as your father was before
 you.”
 
telemachus answered, “antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing,
 i will be chief too if i can. is this the worst fate you can think of
 for me? it is bad thing to be chief, for it brings both riches and
 honour. still, now that ulysses is dead there are many great men in
 ithaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among them;
 nevertheless i will be chief in my own house, and will rule those whom
 ulysses has won for me.”
 
then eurymachus, of polybus, answered, “it rests with heaven to
 decide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own
 house and over your own possessions; one while there is man in
 ithaca shall do you violence nor rob you. and now, my good fellow, i
 want to know about this stranger. what country does come from? of
 what family is he, and where is his estate? has brought you news
 about the return of your father, or was on business of his own? he
 seemed well to do man, but hurried off so suddenly that was
 gone in moment before we could get to know him.”
 
“my father is dead and gone,” answered telemachus, “and even if some
 rumour reaches i put more faith in it now. my mother does indeed
 sometimes send for soothsayer and question him, but i give his
 prophecyings heed. as for the stranger, was mentes, of
 anchialus, chief of the taphians, an old friend of my father’s.” but in
 his heart knew that it had been the goddess.
 
the suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the
 evening; but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to
 bed each in his own abode.12 telemachus’s room was high up in tower13
 that looked on to the outer court; hither, then, hied, brooding and
 full of thought. good old woman, euryclea, daughter of ops, the son
 of pisenor, went before him with couple of blazing torches. laertes
 had bought her with his own money when she was quite young; gave the
 worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in his
 household as did to his own wedded wife, but did not take her to
 his bed for feared his wife’s resentment.14 she it was who now
 lighted telemachus to his room, and she loved him better than any of
 the other women in the house did, for she had nursed him when was a
 baby. opened the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; as
 took off his shirt15 gave it to the good old woman, who folded it
 tidily up, and hung it for him over peg by his bed side, after which
 she went out, pulled the door to by silver catch, and drew the bolt
 home by means of the strap.16 but telemachus as lay covered with a
 woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage
 and of the counsel that minerva had given him.
 



book ii
 

assembly of the people of ithaca—speeches of telemachus and of the
 suitors—telemachus makes his preparations and starts for pylos with
 minerva disguised as mentor.
 

now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared telemachus
 rose and dressed himself. bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
 girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like an
 immortal god. at once sent the criers round to call the people in
 assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then,
 when they were got together, went to the place of assembly spear in
 hand—not alone, for his two hounds went with him. minerva endowed him
 with presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as
 went by, and when took his place in his father’s seat even the
 oldest councillors made way for him.
 
aegyptius, man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, was
 the first to speak. his antiphus had gone with ulysses to ilius,
 land of noble steeds, but the savage cyclops had killed him when they
 were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him.17
 had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father’s
 land, while the third, eurynomus, was one of the suitors; nevertheless
 their father could not get over the loss of antiphus, and was still
 weeping for him when began his speech.
 
“men of ithaca,” said, “hear my words. from the day ulysses left us
 there has been meeting of our councillors until now; who then can it
 be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? has
 got wind of some host approaching, and does wish to warn us, or
 would speak upon some other matter of public moment? i am sure is
 an excellent person, and i hope jove will grant him his heart’s
 desire.”
 
telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he
 was bursting with what had to say. stood in the middle of the
 assembly and the good herald pisenor brought him his staff. then,
 turning to aegyptius, “sir,” said he, “it is i, as you will shortly
 learn, who have convened you, for it is i who am the most aggrieved. i
 have not got wind of any host approaching about which i would warn you,
 nor is there any matter of public moment on which i would speak. my
 grievance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes which
 have fallen upon my house. the first of these is the loss of my
 excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and was
 like father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, and
 ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. the sons of all the chief
 men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.
 they are afraid to go to her father icarius, asking him to choose the
 one likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but
 day by day they keep hanging about my father’s house, sacrificing our
 oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much
 as thought to the quantity of wine they drink. estate can stand
 such recklessness; we have now ulysses to ward off harm from our
 doors, and i cannot hold my own against them. i shall never all my days
 be as good man as was, still i would indeed defend myself if i had
 power to do so, for i cannot stand such treatment any longer; my house
 is being disgraced and ruined. have respect, therefore, to your own
 consciences and to public opinion. fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest
 the gods should be displeased and turn upon you. i pray you by jove and
 themis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold
 back, my friends, and leave singlehanded18—unless it be that my
 brave father ulysses did some wrong to the achaeans which you would now
 avenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors. moreover, if i am
 to be eaten out of house and home at all, i had rather you did the
 eating yourselves, for i could then take action against you to some
 purpose, and serve you with notices from house to house till i got paid
 in full, whereas now i have remedy.”19
 
with this telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into
 tears. every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no
 one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only antinous, who spoke
 thus:
 
“telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw
 the blame upon us suitors? it is your mother’s fault not ours, for she
 is very artful woman. this three years past, and close on four, she
 had been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us,
 and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she says. and
 then there was that other trick she played us. she set up great
 tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous piece of
 fine needlework. ‘sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘ulysses is indeed dead,
 still do not press to marry again immediately, wait—for i would not
 have skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till i have completed pall
 for the hero laertes, to be in readiness against the time when death
 shall take him. is very rich, and the women of the place will talk
 if is laid out without pall.’
 
“this was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her
 working on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick
 the stitches again by torchlight. she fooled us in this way for three
 years and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was now
 in her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told
 us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to
 finish it whether she would or no. the suitors, therefore, make you
 this answer, that both you and the achaeans may understand—‘send your
 mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her father’s
 choice’; for i do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us
 much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the
 accomplishments minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever.
 we never yet heard of such woman; we know all about tyro, alcmena,
 mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to your
 mother any one of them. it was not fair of her to treat us in that way,
 and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven has now
 endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate; and i do not
 see why she should change, for she gets all the honour and glory, and
 it is you who pay for it, not she. understand, then, that we will not
 go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made her
 choice and married some one or other of us.”
 
telemachus answered, “antinous, how can i drive the mother who bore me
 from my father’s house? my father is abroad and we do not know whether
 is alive or dead. it will be hard on if i have to pay icarius the
 large sum which i must give him if i insist on sending his daughter
 back to him. not only will deal rigorously with me, but heaven will
 also punish me; for my mother when she leaves the house will call on
 the erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not be creditable thing
 to do, and i will have nothing to say to it. if you choose to take
 offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one another’s
 houses at your own cost turn and turn about. if, on the other hand, you
 elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but jove
 shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house
 there shall be man to avenge you.”
 
as spoke jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they
 flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly
 flight. when they were right over the middle of the assembly they
 wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaring
 death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercely
 and tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over the
 town. the people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other what
 all this might be; whereon halitherses, who was the best prophet and
 reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,
 saying:
 
“hear me, men of ithaca, and i speak more particularly to the suitors,
 for i see mischief brewing for them. ulysses is not going to be away
 much longer; indeed is close at hand to deal out death and
 destruction, not on them alone, but on many another of us who live in
 ithaca. let us then be wise in time, and put stop to this wickedness
 before comes. let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will be
 better for them, for i am not prophesying without due knowledge;
 everything has happened to ulysses as i foretold when the argives set
 out for troy, and with them. i said that after going through much
 hardship and losing all his men should come home again in the
 twentieth year and that one would know him; and now all this is
 coming true.”
 
eurymachus of polybus then said, “go home, old man, and prophesy to
 your own children, or it may be worse for them. i can read these omens
 myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about in the
 sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. ulysses has
 died in far country, and it is pity you are not dead along with
 him, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the anger
 of telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. i suppose you think he
 will give you something for your family, but i tell you—and it shall
 surely be—when an old man like you, who should know better, talks a
 young one over till becomes troublesome, in the first place his
 young friend will only fare so much the worse—he will take nothing by
 it, for the suitors will prevent this—and in the next, we will lay a
 heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all like paying, for
 it will bear hardly upon you. as for telemachus, i warn him in the
 presence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who will
 find her husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so dear
 daughter may expect. till then we shall go on harassing him with our
 suit; for we fear man, and care neither for him, with all his fine
 speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. you may preach as much
 as you please, but we shall only hate you the more. we shall go back
 and continue to eat up telemachus’s estate without paying him, till
 such time as his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day
 after day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the other in
 his suit for prize of such rare perfection. besides we cannot go
 after the other women whom we should marry in due course, but for the
 way in which she treats us.”
 
then telemachus said, “eurymachus, and you other suitors, i shall say
 more, and entreat you further, for the gods and the people of
 ithaca now know my story. give me, then, ship and crew of twenty
 men to take hither and thither, and i will go to sparta and to pylos
 in quest of my father who has so long been missing. some one may tell
 something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some
 heaven-sent message may direct me. if i can hear of him as alive and on
 his way home i will put up with the waste you suitors will make for yet
 another twelve months. if on the other hand i hear of his death, i will
 return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
 barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.”
 
with these words sat down, and mentor20 who had been friend of
 ulysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authority
 over the servants, rose to speak. he, then, plainly and in all honesty
 addressed them thus:
 
“hear me, men of ithaca, i hope that you may never have kind and
 well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; i
 hope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for
 there is not one of you but has forgotten ulysses, who ruled you as
 though were your father. i am not half so angry with the suitors,
 for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts,
 and wager their heads that ulysses will not return, they can take the
 high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others i am shocked at
 the way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop such
 scandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, for you are many
 and they are few.”
 
leiocritus, of evenor, answered him saying, “mentor, what folly is
 all this, that you should set the people to stay us? it is hard thing
 for one man to fight with many about his victuals. even though ulysses
 himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do
 his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, would
 have small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his own
 head if fought against such great odds. there is sense in what
 you have been saying. now, therefore, do you people go about your
 business, and let his father’s old friends, mentor and halitherses,
 speed this boy on his journey, if goes at all—which i do not think
 will, for is more likely to stay where is till some one comes
 and tells him something.”
 
on this broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
 abode, while the suitors returned to the house of ulysses.
 
then telemachus went all alone by the side, washed his hands in the
 grey waves, and prayed to minerva.
 
“hear me,” cried, “you god who visited yesterday, and bade me
 sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. i
 would obey you, but the achaeans, and more particularly the wicked
 suitors, are hindering that i cannot do so.”
 
as thus prayed, minerva came close up to him in the likeness and
 with the voice of mentor. “telemachus,” said she, “if you are made of
 the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward
 henceforward, for ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half
 done. if, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless,
 but unless you have the blood of ulysses and of penelope in your veins
 i see likelihood of your succeeding. sons are seldom as good men as
 their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as you are
 not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are not
 entirely without some share of your father’s wise discernment, i look
 with hope upon your undertaking. but mind you never make common cause
 with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense nor
 virtue, and give thought to death and to the doom that will shortly
 fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.
 as for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such
 an old friend of mine that i will find you ship, and will come with
 you myself. now, however, return home, and go about among the suitors;
 begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see everything well
 stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the staff of
 life, in leathern bags, while i go round the town and beat up
 volunteers at once. there are many ships in ithaca both old and new; i
 will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get
 her ready and will put out to without delay.”
 
thus spoke minerva daughter of jove, and telemachus lost time in
 doing as the goddess told him. went moodily home, and found the
 suitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. antinous
 came up to him at once and laughed as took his hand in his own,
 saying, “telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear more ill blood neither
 in word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. the
 achaeans will find you in everything—a ship and picked crew to
 boot—so that you can set sail for pylos at once and get news of your
 noble father.”
 
“antinous,” answered telemachus, “i cannot eat in peace, nor take
 pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. was it not enough that
 you should waste so much good property of mine while i was yet boy?
 now that i am older and know more about it, i am also stronger, and
 whether here among this people, or by going to pylos, i will do you all
 the harm i can. i shall go, and my going will not be in vain—though,
 thanks to you suitors, i have neither ship nor crew of my own, and must
 be passenger not captain.”
 
as spoke snatched his hand from that of antinous. meanwhile the
 others went on getting dinner ready about the buildings,21 jeering at
 him tauntingly as they did so.
 
“telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death of us; i
 suppose thinks can bring friends to help him from pylos, or again
 from sparta, where seems bent on going. or will go to ephyra as
 well, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?”
 
another said, “perhaps if telemachus goes on board ship, will be
 like his father and perish far from his friends. in this case we should
 have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us:
 as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her have
 that.”
 
this was how they talked. but telemachus went down into the lofty and
 spacious store-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze lay
 heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were
 kept in open chests. here, too, there was store of fragrant olive
 oil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for god
 to drink, were ranged against the wall in case ulysses should come home
 again after all. the room was closed with well-made doors opening in
 the middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper euryclea, daughter
 of ops the of pisenor, was in charge of everything both night and
 day. telemachus called her to the store-room and said:
 
“nurse, draw off some of the best wine you have, after what you are
 keeping for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, should
 escape death, and find his way home again after all. let have twelve
 jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill some well-sewn
 leathern bags with barley meal—about twenty measures in all. get these
 things put together at once, and say nothing about it. i will take
 everything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs for
 the night. i am going to sparta and to pylos to see if i can hear
 anything about the return of my dear father.”
 
when euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him,
 saying, “my dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into
 your head? where in the world do you want to go to—you, who are the one
 hope of the house? your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign
 country nobody knows where, and as soon as your back is turned these
 wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out of the way, and
 will share all your possessions among themselves; stay where you are
 among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your life
 out on the barren ocean.”
 
“fear not, nurse,” answered telemachus, “my scheme is not without
 heaven’s sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this
 to my mother, till i have been away some ten or twelve days, unless she
 hears of my having gone, and asks you; for i do not want her to spoil
 her beauty by crying.”
 
the old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she had
 completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and
 getting the barley meal into the bags, while telemachus went back to
 the suitors.
 
then minerva bethought her of another matter. she took his shape, and
 went round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at
 the ship by sundown. she went also to noemon of phronius, and asked
 him to let her have ship—which was very ready to do. when the sun
 had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into the
 water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, and
 stationed her at the end of the harbour. presently the crew came up,
 and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.
 
furthermore she went to the house of ulysses, and threw the suitors
 into deep slumber. she caused their drink to fuddle them, and made
 them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting over
 their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyes
 heavy and full of drowsiness. then she took the form and voice of
 mentor, and called telemachus to come outside.
 
“telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at their oars,
 waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off.”
 
on this she led the way, while telemachus followed in her steps. when
 they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and
 telemachus said, “now my men, help to get the stores on board; they
 are all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not know
 anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one.”
 
with these words led the way and the others followed after. when
 they had brought the things as told them, telemachus went on board,
 minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the
 vessel, while telemachus sat beside her. then the men loosed the
 hawsers and took their places on the benches. minerva sent them fair
 wind from the west,22 that whistled over the deep blue waves23 whereon
 telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and
 they did as told them. they set the mast in its socket in the cross
 plank, raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they
 hoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. as the
 sail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue
 water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. then
 they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing bowls to the
 brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from
 everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of jove.
 
thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night
 from dark till dawn.
 



book iii
 

telemachus visits nestor at pylos.
 

but as the sun was rising from the fair sea24 into the firmament of
 heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached pylos the
 city of neleus. now the people of pylos were gathered on the shore
 to offer sacrifice of black bulls to neptune lord of the earthquake.
 there were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were
 nine bulls to each guild. as they were eating the inward meats25 and
 burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of neptune,
 telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship
 to anchor, and went ashore.
 
minerva led the way and telemachus followed her. presently she said,
 “telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have
 taken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and
 how came by his end; so go straight up to nestor that we may see
 what has got to tell us. beg of him to speak the truth, and will
 tell lies, for is an excellent person.”
 
“but how, mentor,” replied telemachus, “dare i go up to nestor, and how
 am i to address him? i have never yet been used to holding long
 conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who
 is so much older than myself.”
 
“some things, telemachus,” answered minerva, “will be suggested to you
 by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for i am
 assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth
 until now.”
 
she then went quickly on, and telemachus followed in her steps till
 they reached the place where the guilds of the pylian people were
 assembled. there they found nestor sitting with his sons, while his
 company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of
 meat on to the spits26 while other pieces were cooking. when they saw
 the strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade
 them take their places. nestor’s pisistratus at once offered his
 hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were
 lying on the sands near his father and his brother thrasymedes. then he
 gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them
 into golden cup, handing it to minerva first, and saluting her at the
 same time.
 
“offer prayer, sir,” said he, “to king neptune, for it is his feast
 that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink
 offering, pass the cup to your friend that may do so also. i doubt
 not that too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without
 god in the world. still is younger than you are, and is much of an
 age with myself, so i will give you the precedence.”
 
as spoke handed her the cup. minerva thought it very right and
 proper of him to have given it to herself first;27 she accordingly
 began praying heartily to neptune. “o thou,” she cried, “that
 encirclest the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants
 that call upon thee. more especially we pray thee send down thy grace
 on nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the pylian
 people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering
 you. lastly, grant telemachus and myself happy issue, in respect of
 the matter that has brought us in our ship to pylos.”
 
when she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to
 telemachus and prayed likewise. by and by, when the outer meats were
 roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man
 his portion and they all made an excellent dinner. as soon as they had
 had enough to eat and drink, nestor, knight of gerene, began to speak.
 
“now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, it will be
 best to ask them who they are. who, then, sir strangers, are you, and
 from what port have you sailed? are you traders? or do you sail the
 seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man’s hand
 against you?”
 
telemachus answered boldly, for minerva had given him courage to ask
 about his father and get himself good name.
 
“nestor,” said he, “son of neleus, honour to the achaean name, you ask
 whence we come, and i will tell you. we come from ithaca under
 neritum,28 and the matter about which i would speak is of private not
 public import. i seek news of my unhappy father ulysses, who is said to
 have sacked the town of troy in company with yourself. we know what
 fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at troy, but as
 regards ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that is
 dead at all, for one can certify us in what place perished, nor
 say whether fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at amid
 the waves of amphitrite. therefore i am suppliant at your knees, if
 haply you may be pleased to tell of his melancholy end, whether you
 saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for
 was man born to trouble. do not soften things out of any pity for
 me, but tell in all plainness exactly what you saw. if my brave
 father ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when
 you achaeans were harassed among the trojans, bear it in mind now as in
 my favour and tell truly all.”
 
“my friend,” answered nestor, “you recall time of much sorrow to my
 mind, for the brave achaeans suffered much both at sea, while
 privateering under achilles, and when fighting before the great city of
 king priam. our best men all of them fell there—ajax, achilles,
 patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear antilochus, a
 man singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. but we suffered much
 more than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story?
 though you were to stay here and question for five years, or even
 six, i could not tell you all that the achaeans suffered, and you would
 turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. nine long years did we
 try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us;
 during all this time there was one who could compare with your
 father in subtlety—if indeed you are his son—i can hardly believe my
 eyes—and you talk just like him too—no one would say that people of
 such different ages could speak so much alike. and i never had any
 kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, but
 in singleness of heart and purpose we advised the argives how all might
 be ordered for the best.
 
“when, however, we had sacked the city of priam, and were setting sail
 in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then jove saw fit to vex the
 argives on their homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wise
 or understanding, and hence many came to bad end through the
 displeasure of jove’s daughter minerva, who brought about quarrel
 between the two sons of atreus.
 
“the sons of atreus called meeting which was not as it should be, for
 it was sunset and the achaeans were heavy with wine. when they
 explained why they had called the people together, it seemed that
 menelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased
 agamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we had offered
 hecatombs to appease the anger of minerva. fool that was, might
 have known that would not prevail with her, for when the gods have
 made up their minds they do not change them lightly. so the two stood
 bandying hard words, whereon the achaeans sprang to their feet with a
 cry that rent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.
 
“that night we rested and nursed our anger, for jove was hatching
 mischief against us. but in the morning some of us drew our ships into
 the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest,
 about half in number, stayed behind with agamemnon. we—the other
 half—embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had
 smoothed the sea. when we reached tenedos we offered sacrifices to the
 gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel jove, however, did not yet
 mean that we should do so, and raised second quarrel in the course of
 which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away
 under ulysses to make their peace with agamemnon; but i, and all the
 ships that were with pressed forward, for i saw that mischief was
 brewing. the of tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with
 him. later on menelaus joined us at lesbos, and found us making up our
 minds about our course—for we did not know whether to go outside chios
 by the island of psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside chios, over
 against the stormy headland of mimas. so we asked heaven for sign,
 and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out of
 danger if we headed our ships across the open to euboea. this we
 therefore did, and fair wind sprang up which gave us quick passage
 during the night to geraestus,29 where we offered many sacrifices to
 neptune for having helped us so far on our way. four days later diomed
 and his men stationed their ships in argos, but i held on for pylos,
 and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven first made it
 fair for me.
 
“therefore, my dear young friend, i returned without hearing anything
 about the others. i know neither who got home safely nor who were lost
 but, as in duty bound, i will give you without reserve the reports that
 have reached since i have been here in my own house. they say the
 myrmidons returned home safely under achilles’ neoptolemus; so also
 did the valiant of poias, philoctetes. idomeneus, again, lost no
 men at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field got
 safe home with him to crete. matter how far out of the world you
 live, you will have heard of agamemnon and the bad end came to at
 the hands of aegisthus—and fearful reckoning did aegisthus presently
 pay. see what good thing it is for man to leave behind him to
 do as orestes did, who killed false aegisthus the murderer of his noble
 father. you too, then—for you are tall smart-looking fellow—show your
 mettle and make yourself name in story.”
 
“nestor of neleus,” answered telemachus, “honour to the achaean
 name, the achaeans applaud orestes and his name will live through all
 time for has avenged his father nobly. would that heaven might grant
 to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are
 ill treating and plotting my ruin; but the gods have such
 happiness in store for and for my father, so we must bear it as best
 we may.”
 
“my friend,” said nestor, “now that you remind me, i remember to have
 heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards
 you and are making havoc of your estate. do you submit to this tamely,
 or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? who knows
 but what ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in
 full, either single-handed or with force of achaeans behind him? if
 minerva were to take as great liking to you as she did to ulysses
 when we were fighting before troy (for i never yet saw the gods so
 openly fond of any one as minerva then was of your father), if she
 would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would
 soon some of them forget their wooing.”
 
telemachus answered, “i can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far
 too much to hope for. i dare not let myself think of it. even though
 the gods themselves willed it such good fortune could befall me.”
 
on this minerva said, “telemachus, what are you talking about? heaven
 has long arm if it is minded to save man; and if it were me, i
 should not care how much i suffered before getting home, provided i
 could be safe when i was once there. i would rather this, than get home
 quickly, and then be killed in my own house as agamemnon was by the
 treachery of aegisthus and his wife. still, death is certain, and when
 man’s hour is come, not even the gods can save him, matter how
 fond they are of him.”
 
“mentor,” answered telemachus, “do not let us talk about it any more.
 there is chance of my father’s ever coming back; the gods have long
 since counselled his destruction. there is something else, however,
 about which i should like to ask nestor, for knows much more than
 any one else does. they say has reigned for three generations so
 that it is like talking to an immortal. tell me, therefore, nestor, and
 tell true; how did agamemnon come to die in that way? what was
 menelaus doing? and how came false aegisthus to kill so far better a
 man than himself? was menelaus away from achaean argos, voyaging
 elsewhither among mankind, that aegisthus took heart and killed
 agamemnon?”
 
“i will tell you truly,” answered nestor, “and indeed you have yourself
 divined how it all happened. if menelaus when got back from troy had
 found aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been no
 barrow heaped up for him, not even when was dead, but would have
 been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not woman
 would have mourned him, for had done deed of great wickedness; but
 we were over there, fighting hard at troy, and aegisthus, who was
 taking his ease quietly in the heart of argos, cajoled agamemnon’s wife
 clytemnestra with incessant flattery.
 
“at first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she
 was of good natural disposition;30 moreover there was bard with
 her, to whom agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for troy,
 that was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled
 her destruction, aegisthus carried this bard off to desert island and
 left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon—after which she
 went willingly enough to the house of aegisthus. then offered many
 burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples with
 tapestries and gilding, for had succeeded far beyond his
 expectations.
 
“meanwhile menelaus and i were on our way home from troy, on good terms
 with one another. when we got to sunium, which is the point of athens,
 apollo with his painless shafts killed phrontis the steersman of
 menelaus’ ship (and never man knew better how to handle vessel in
 rough weather) so that died then and there with the helm in his
 hand, and menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to wait
 in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites.
 presently, when too could put to again, and had sailed on as far
 as the malean heads, jove counselled evil against him and made it blow
 hard till the waves ran mountains high. here divided his fleet and
 took the one half towards crete where the cydonians dwell round about
 the waters of the river iardanus. there is high headland hereabouts
 stretching out into the from place called gortyn, and all along
 this part of the coast as far as phaestus the runs high when there
 is south wind blowing, but after phaestus the coast is more
 protected, for small headland can make great shelter. here this
 part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews
 just managed to save themselves. as for the other five ships, they were
 taken by winds and seas to egypt, where menelaus gathered much gold and
 substance among people of an alien speech. meanwhile aegisthus here at
 home plotted his evil deed. for seven years after had killed
 agamemnon ruled in mycene, and the people were obedient under him,
 but in the eighth year orestes came back from athens to be his bane,
 and killed the murderer of his father. then celebrated the funeral
 rites of his mother and of false aegisthus by banquet to the people
 of argos, and on that very day menelaus came home,31 with as much
 treasure as his ships could carry.
 
“take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far
 from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your
 house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will
 have been on fool’s errand. still, i should advise you by all means
 to go and visit menelaus, who has lately come off voyage among such
 distant peoples as man could ever hope to get back from, when the
 winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds
 cannot fly the distance in twelve-month, so vast and terrible are the
 seas that they must cross. go to him, therefore, by sea, and take your
 own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have a
 chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you
 to lacedaemon where menelaus lives. beg of him to speak the truth, and
 will tell you lies, for is an excellent person.”
 
as spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon minerva said,
 “sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues
 of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings
 to neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed
 time. people should go away early and not keep late hours at a
 religious festival.”
 
thus spoke the daughter of jove, and they obeyed her saying. men
 servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled
 the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
 every man his drink offering; then they threw the tongues of the
 victims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink offerings. when
 they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as was
 minded, minerva and telemachus were for going on board their ship, but
 nestor caught them up at once and stayed them.
 
“heaven and the immortal gods,” exclaimed, “forbid that you should
 leave my house to go on board of ship. do you think i am so poor and
 short of clothes, or that i have so few cloaks and as to be unable to
 find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? let tell
 you i have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son
 of my old friend ulysses to camp down on the deck of ship—not while i
 live—nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as i
 have done.”
 
then minerva answered, “sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much
 better that telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall
 return with you and sleep at your house, but i must go back to give
 orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. i am the only older
 person among them; the rest are all young men of telemachus’ own age,
 who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so i must return to the
 ship and sleep there. moreover to-morrow i must go to the cauconians
 where i have large sum of money long owing to me. as for telemachus,
 now that is your guest, send him to lacedaemon in chariot, and let
 one of your sons go with him. be pleased to also provide him with your
 best and fleetest horses.”
 
when she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and
 all marvelled as they beheld it. nestor was astonished, and took
 telemachus by the hand. “my friend,” said he, “i see that you are going
 to be great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while
 you are still so young. this can have been none other of those who
 dwell in heaven than jove’s redoubtable daughter, the trito-born, who
 shewed such favour towards your brave father among the argives. holy
 queen,” continued, “vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my
 good wife, and my children. in return, i will offer you in sacrifice a
 broad-browed heifer of year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by
 man under the yoke. i will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you
 in sacrifice.”
 
thus did pray, and minerva heard his prayer. then led the way to
 his own house, followed by his sons and sons in law. when they had got
 there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, mixed
 them bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the
 housekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it. as mixed the
 wine, prayed much and made drink offerings to minerva, daughter of
 aegis-bearing jove. then, when they had made their drink offerings and
 had drunk each as much as was minded, the others went home to bed
 each in his own abode; but nestor put telemachus to sleep in the room
 that was over the gateway along with pisistratus, who was the only
 unmarried now left him. as for himself, slept in an inner room
 of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.
 
now when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared, nestor left
 his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble
 that stood in front of his house. here aforetime sat neleus, peer of
 gods in counsel, but was now dead, and had gone to the house of
 hades; so nestor sat in his seat sceptre in hand, as guardian of the
 public weal. his sons as they left their rooms gathered round him,
 echephron, stratius, perseus, aretus, and thrasymedes; the sixth son
 was pisistratus, and when telemachus joined them they made him sit with
 them. nestor then addressed them.
 
“my sons,” said he, “make haste to do as i shall bid you. i wish first
 and foremost to propitiate the great goddess minerva, who manifested
 herself visibly to during yesterday’s festivities. go, then, one or
 other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look out heifer,
 and come on here with it at once. another must go to telemachus’ ship,
 and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel.
 some one else will run and fetch laerceus the goldsmith to gild the
 horns of the heifer. the rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the
 maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats,
 and logs of wood for burnt offering. tell them also to bring some
 clear spring water.”
 
on this they hurried off on their several errands. the heifer was
 brought in from the plain, and telemachus’s crew came from the ship;
 the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he
 worked his gold, and minerva herself came to accept the sacrifice.
 nestor gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer
 that the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty. then stratius and
 echephron brought her in by the horns; aretus fetched water from the
 house in ewer that had flower pattern on it, and in his other hand
 held basket of barley meal; sturdy thrasymedes stood by with a
 sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while perseus held bucket.
 then nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley
 meal, and offered many prayer to minerva as threw lock from
 the heifer’s head upon the fire.
 
when they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal32 thrasymedes
 dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with stroke that cut
 through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters and
 daughters in law of nestor, and his venerable wife eurydice (she was
 eldest daughter to clymenus) screamed with delight. then they lifted
 the heifer’s head from off the ground, and pisistratus cut her throat.
 when she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up. they
 cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round in two
 layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then
 nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while
 the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands.
 when the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they
 cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the spits and
 toasted them over the fire.
 
meanwhile lovely polycaste, nestor’s youngest daughter, washed
 telemachus. when she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she
 brought him fair mantle and shirt,33 and looked like god as he
 came from the bath and took his seat by the side of nestor. when the
 outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to
 dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept
 pouring them out their wine in cups of gold. as soon as they had had
 enough to eat and drink nestor said, “sons, put telemachus’s horses to
 the chariot that may start at once.”
 
thus did speak, and they did even as had said, and yoked the
 fleet horses to the chariot. the housekeeper packed them up provision
 of bread, wine, and sweet meats fit for the sons of princes. then
 telemachus got into the chariot, while pisistratus gathered up the
 reins and took his seat beside him. lashed the horses on and they
 flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high
 citadel of pylos behind them. all that day did they travel, swaying the
 yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all
 the land. then they reached pherae where diocles lived, who was to
 ortilochus and grandson to alpheus. here they passed the night and
 diocles entertained them hospitably. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and drove
 out through the gateway under the echoing gatehouse.34 pisistratus
 lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently they
 came to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of time
 completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them.35
 
now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,
 



book iv
 

the visit to king menelaus, who tells his story—meanwhile the suitors
 in ithaca plot against telemachus.
 

they reached the low lying city of lacedaemon, where they drove
 straight to the abode of menelaus36 [and found him in his own house,
 feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son,
 and also of his daughter, whom was marrying to the of that
 valiant warrior achilles. had given his consent and promised her to
 him while was still at troy, and now the gods were bringing the
 marriage about; so was sending her with chariots and horses to the
 city of the myrmidons over whom achilles’ was reigning. for his
 only had found bride from sparta,37 the daughter of alector.
 this son, megapenthes, was born to him of bondwoman, for heaven
 vouchsafed helen more children after she had borne hermione, who was
 fair as golden venus herself.
 
so the neighbours and kinsmen of menelaus were feasting and making
 merry in his house. there was bard also to sing to them and play his
 lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them
 when the man struck up with his tune.38
 
telemachus and the of nestor stayed their horses at the gate,
 whereon eteoneus servant to menelaus came out, and as soon as saw
 them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his master. went close
 up to him and said, “menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two
 men, who look like sons of jove. what are we to do? shall we take their
 horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?”
 
menelaus was very angry and said, “eteoneus, of boethous, you never
 used to be fool, but now you talk like simpleton. take their horses
 out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper;
 you and i have staid often enough at other people’s houses before we
 got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace
 henceforward.”
 
so eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him.
 they took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to
 the mangers, and gave them feed of oats and barley mixed. then they
 leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the
 way into the house. telemachus and pisistratus were astonished when
 they saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then,
 when they had admired everything to their heart’s content, they went
 into the bath room and washed themselves.
 
when the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they
 brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by
 the side of menelaus. maid-servant brought them water in beautiful
 golden ewer, and poured it into silver basin for them to wash their
 hands; and she drew clean table beside them. an upper servant brought
 them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the
 house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and
 set cups of gold by their side.
 
menelaus then greeted them saying, “fall to, and welcome; when you have
 done supper i shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you
 cannot have been lost. you must be descended from line of
 sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you
 are.”
 
on this handed them39 piece of fat roast loin, which had been set
 near him as being prime part, and they laid their hands on the good
 things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and
 drink, telemachus said to the of nestor, with his head so close
 that one might hear, “look, pisistratus, man after my own heart, see
 the gleam of bronze and gold—of amber,40 ivory, and silver. everything
 is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of olympian jove. i am
 lost in admiration.”
 
menelaus overheard him and said, “no one, my sons, can hold his own
 with jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but
 among mortal men—well, there may be another who has as much wealth as i
 have, or there may not; but at all events i have travelled much and
 have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before i
 could get home with my fleet. i went to cyprus, phoenicia and the
 egyptians; i went also to the ethiopians, the sidonians, and the
 erembians, and to libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are
 born, and the sheep lamb down three times year. every one in that
 country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good
 milk, for the ewes yield all the year round. but while i was travelling
 and getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretly
 and shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that
 i have pleasure in being lord of all this wealth. whoever your
 parents may be they must have told you about all this, and of my heavy
 loss in the ruin41 of stately mansion fully and magnificently
 furnished. would that i had only third of what i now have so that i
 had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain
 of troy, far from argos. i often grieve, as i sit here in my house, for
 one and all of them. at times i cry aloud for sorrow, but presently i
 leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it.
 yet grieve for these as i may, i do so for one man more than for them
 all. i cannot even think of him without loathing both food and sleep,
 so miserable does make me, for one of all the achaeans worked so
 hard or risked so much as did. took nothing by it, and has left a
 legacy of sorrow to myself, for has been gone long time, and we
 know not whether is alive or dead. his old father, his
 long-suffering wife penelope, and his telemachus, whom left
 behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.”
 
thus spoke menelaus, and the heart of telemachus yearned as he
 bethought him of his father. tears fell from his eyes as heard him
 thus mentioned, so that held his cloak before his face with both
 hands. when menelaus saw this doubted whether to let him choose his
 own time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all
 about.
 
while was thus in two minds helen came down from her high vaulted
 and perfumed room, looking as lovely as diana herself. adraste brought
 her seat, alcippe soft woollen rug while phylo fetched her the
 silver work-box which alcandra wife of polybus had given her. polybus
 lived in egyptian thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world;
 gave menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten
 talents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave helen some beautiful
 presents, to wit, golden distaff, and silver work box that ran on
 wheels, with gold band round the top of it. phylo now placed this by
 her side, full of fine spun yarn, and distaff charged with violet
 coloured wool was laid upon the top of it. then helen took her seat,
 put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband.42
 
“do we know, menelaus,” said she, “the names of these strangers who
 have come to visit us? shall i guess right or wrong?—but i cannot help
 saying what i think. never yet have i seen either man or woman so like
 somebody else (indeed when i look at him i hardly know what to think)
 as this young man is like telemachus, whom ulysses left as baby
 behind him, when you achaeans went to troy with battle in your hearts,
 on account of my most shameless self.”
 
“my dear wife,” replied menelaus, “i see the likeness just as you do.
 his hands and feet are just like ulysses; so is his hair, with the
 shape of his head and the expression of his eyes. moreover, when i was
 talking about ulysses, and saying how much had suffered on my
 account, tears fell from his eyes, and hid his face in his mantle.”
 
then pisistratus said, “menelaus, of atreus, you are right in
 thinking that this young man is telemachus, but is very modest, and
 is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose
 conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. my father, nestor,
 sent to escort him hither, for wanted to know whether you could
 give him any counsel or suggestion. has always trouble at home
 when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this
 is how telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is
 one among his own people to stand by him.”
 
“bless my heart,” replied menelaus, “then i am receiving visit from
 the of very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.
 i had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when
 heaven had granted us safe return from beyond the seas. i should have
 founded city for him in argos, and built him house. i should have
 made him leave ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and
 should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities that
 are subject to me. we should thus have seen one another continually,
 and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an
 intercourse. i suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great good
 fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at
 all.”
 
thus did speak, and his words set them all weeping. helen wept,
 telemachus wept, and so did menelaus, nor could pisistratus keep his
 eyes from filling, when remembered his dear brother antilochus whom
 the of bright dawn had killed. thereon said to menelaus,
 
“sir, my father nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me
 you were person of rare and excellent understanding. if, then, it be
 possible, do as i would urge you. i am not fond of crying while i am
 getting my supper. morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon
 i care not how much i cry for those that are dead and gone. this is all
 we can do for the poor things. we can only shave our heads for them and
 wring the tears from our cheeks. i had brother who died at troy; he
 was by means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him—his
 name was antilochus; i never set eyes upon him myself, but they say
 that was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.”
 
“your discretion, my friend,” answered menelaus, “is beyond your years.
 it is plain you take after your father. one can soon see when man is
 to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and
 offspring—and it has blessed nestor from first to last all his days,
 giving him green old age in his own house, with sons about him who
 are both well disposed and valiant. we will put an end therefore to all
 this weeping, and attend to our supper again. let water be poured over
 our hands. telemachus and i can talk with one another fully in the
 morning.”
 
on this asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands
 and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.
 
then jove’s daughter helen bethought her of another matter. she drugged
 the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.
 whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed single tear all the rest
 of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them drop
 down dead, or sees brother or hewn in pieces before his very
 eyes. this drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given to
 helen by polydamna wife of thon, woman of egypt, where there grow all
 sorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing bowl and others
 poisonous. moreover, every one in the whole country is skilled
 physician, for they are of the race of paeeon. when helen had put this
 drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round,
 she said:
 
“menelaus, of atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable
 men (which is as jove wills, for is the giver both of good and evil,
 and can do what chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while i
 tell you tale in season. i cannot indeed name every single one of the
 exploits of ulysses, but i can say what did when was before troy,
 and you achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. covered himself
 with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the
 enemy’s city looking like menial or beggar, and quite different
 from what did when was among his own people. in this disguise he
 entered the city of troy, and one said anything to him. i alone
 recognised him and began to question him, but was too cunning for
 me. when, however, i had washed and anointed him and had given him
 clothes, and after i had sworn solemn oath not to betray him to the
 trojans till had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships,
 told all that the achaeans meant to do. killed many trojans
 and got much information before reached the argive camp, for all
 which things the trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part i
 was glad, for my heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and i was
 unhappy about the wrong that venus had done in taking over there,
 away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is
 indeed by means deficient either in person or understanding.”
 
then menelaus said, “all that you have been saying, my dear wife, is
 true. i have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but i
 have never seen such another man as ulysses. what endurance too, and
 what courage displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the
 bravest of the argives were lying in wait to bring death and
 destruction upon the trojans.43 at that moment you came up to us; some
 god who wished well to the trojans must have set you on to it and you
 had deiphobus with you. three times did you go all round our hiding
 place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and
 mimicked all our wives—diomed, ulysses, and i from our seats inside
 heard what noise you made. diomed and i could not make up our minds
 whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but
 ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except
 anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when ulysses clapped his two
 brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. it was this that
 saved us all, for muzzled anticlus till minerva took you away
 again.”
 
“how sad,” exclaimed telemachus, “that all this was of avail to save
 him, nor yet his own iron courage. but now, sir, be pleased to send us
 all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”
 
on this helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was
 in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread
 coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to
 wear. so the maids went out, carrying torch, and made the beds, to
 which man-servant presently conducted the strangers. thus, then, did
 telemachus and pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the son
 of atreus lay in an inner room with lovely helen by his side.
 
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn appeared, menelaus rose
 and dressed himself. bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded
 his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an
 immortal god. then, taking seat near telemachus said:
 
“and what, telemachus, has led you to take this long voyage to
 lacedaemon? are you on public, or private business? tell all about
 it.”
 
“i have come, sir,” replied telemachus, “to see if you can tell me
 anything about my father. i am being eaten out of house and home; my
 fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who
 keep killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of
 paying their addresses to my mother. therefore, i am suppliant at your
 knees if haply you may tell about my father’s melancholy end,
 whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other
 traveller; for was man born to trouble. do not soften things out
 of any pity for myself, but tell in all plainness exactly what you
 saw. if my brave father ulysses ever did you loyal service either by
 word or deed, when you achaeans were harassed by the trojans, bear it
 in mind now as in my favour and tell truly all.”
 
menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. “so,” exclaimed,
 “these cowards would usurp brave man’s bed? hind might as well lay
 her new born young in the lair of lion, and then go off to feed in
 the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when comes back to his
 lair will make short work with the pair of them—and so will ulysses
 with these suitors. by father jove, minerva, and apollo, if ulysses is
 still the man that was when wrestled with philomeleides in
 lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the achaeans cheered him—if
 is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have a
 short shrift and sorry wedding. as regards your questions, however, i
 will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without
 concealment all that the old man of the told me.
 
“i was trying to come on here, but the gods detained in egypt, for
 my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are
 very strict about having their dues. now off egypt, about as far as a
 ship can sail in day with good stiff breeze behind her, there is an
 island called pharos—it has good harbour from which vessels can get
 out into open when they have taken in water—and here the gods
 becalmed twenty days without so much as breath of fair wind to
 help forward. we should have run clean out of provisions and my men
 would have starved, if goddess had not taken pity upon and saved
 in the person of idothea, daughter to proteus, the old man of the
 sea, for she had taken great fancy to me.
 
“she came to one day when i was by myself, as i often was, for the
 men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope
 of catching fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger.
 ‘stranger,’ said she, ‘it seems to that you like starving in this
 way—at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day
 after day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by
 inches.’
 
“‘let tell you,’ said i, ‘whichever of the goddesses you may happen
 to be, that i am not staying here of my own accord, but must have
 offended the gods that live in heaven. tell me, therefore, for the gods
 know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering in
 this way, and tell also how i may sail the so as to reach my
 home.’
 
“‘stranger,’ replied she, ‘i will make it all quite clear to you. there
 is an old immortal who lives under the hereabouts and whose name is
 proteus. is an egyptian, and people say is my father; is
 neptune’s head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom
 of the sea. if you can snare him and hold him tight, will tell you
 about your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to
 sail the so as to reach your home. will also tell you, if you so
 will, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while
 you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’
 
“‘can you show me,’ said i, ‘some stratagem by means of which i may
 catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding out? for a
 god is not easily caught—not by mortal man.’
 
“‘stranger,’ said she, ‘i will make it all quite clear to you. about
 the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the
 comes up from under the waves, heralded by the west wind that furs
 the water over his head. as soon as has come up lies down, and
 goes to sleep in great cave, where the seals—halosydne’s chickens
 as they call them—come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in
 shoals all round him; and very strong and fish-like smell do they
 bring with them. 44 early to-morrow morning i will take you to this
 place and will lay you in ambush. pick out, therefore, the three best
 men you have in your fleet, and i will tell you all the tricks that the
 old man will play you.
 
“‘first will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he
 has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, will go to sleep
 among them, as shepherd among his sheep. the moment you see that he
 is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for
 will do his very utmost to get away from you. will turn himself
 into every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will become
 also both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip him
 tighter and tighter, till begins to talk to you and comes back to
 what was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your
 hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that
 is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over the
 seas.’
 
“having so said she dived under the waves, whereon i turned back to the
 place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was
 clouded with care as i went along. when i reached my ship we got supper
 ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.
 
“when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared, i took the
 three men on whose prowess of all kinds i could most rely, and went
 along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. meanwhile the
 goddess fetched up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all
 of them just skinned, for she meant playing trick upon her father.
 then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we
 should come up. when we were close to her, she made us lie down in the
 pits one after the other, and threw seal skin over each of us. our
 ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy
 seals was most distressing45—who would go to bed with monster if
 could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of
 something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under
 each man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of
 the seals.46
 
“we waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the
 seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the shore, till at noon the
 old man of the came up too, and when had found his fat seals he
 went over them and counted them. we were among the first counted,
 and never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as
 soon as had done counting. then we rushed upon him with shout and
 seized him; on which began at once with his old tricks, and changed
 himself first into lion with great mane; then all of sudden he
 became dragon, leopard, wild boar; the next moment was running
 water, and then again directly was tree, but we stuck to him and
 never lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became
 distressed, and said, ‘which of the gods was it, of atreus, that
 hatched this plot with you for snaring and seizing against my
 will? what do you want?’
 
“‘you know that yourself, old man,’ i answered, ‘you will gain nothing
 by trying to put off. it is because i have been kept so long in this
 island, and see sign of my being able to get away. i am losing all
 heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the
 immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell also how i may sail
 the so as to reach my home?’
 
“then,’ said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly,
 you must offer sacrifices to jove and to the rest of the gods before
 embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your
 friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the
 heaven-fed stream of egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal
 gods that reign in heaven. when you have done this they will let you
 finish your voyage.’
 
“i was broken hearted when i heard that i must go back all that long
 and terrible voyage to egypt;47 nevertheless, i answered, ‘i will do
 all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me
 true, whether all the achaeans whom nestor and i left behind us when we
 set sail from troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them
 came to bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends
 when the days of his fighting were done.’
 
“‘son of atreus,’ answered, ‘why ask me? you had better not know
 what i can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard
 my story. many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many
 still remain, and only two of the chief men among the achaeans perished
 during their return home. as for what happened on the field of
 battle—you were there yourself. third achaean leader is still at sea,
 alive, but hindered from returning. ajax was wrecked, for neptune drove
 him on to the great rocks of gyrae; nevertheless, let him get safe
 out of the water, and in spite of all minerva’s hatred would have
 escaped death, if had not ruined himself by boasting. said the
 gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when
 neptune heard this large talk, seized his trident in his two brawny
 hands, and split the rock of gyrae in two pieces. the base remained
 where it was, but the part on which ajax was sitting fell headlong into
 the and carried ajax with it; so drank salt water and was
 drowned.
 
“‘your brother and his ships escaped, for juno protected him, but when
 was just about to reach the high promontory of malea, was caught
 by heavy gale which carried him out to again sorely against his
 will, and drove him to the foreland where thyestes used to dwell, but
 where aegisthus was then living. by and by, however, it seemed as
 though was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the wind
 into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon agamemnon kissed
 his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his own
 country.
 
“‘now there was watchman whom aegisthus kept always on the watch, and
 to whom had promised two talents of gold. this man had been looking
 out for whole year to make sure that agamemnon did not give him the
 slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw agamemnon go by, he
 went and told aegisthus, who at once began to lay plot for him. he
 picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on
 one side the cloister, while on the opposite side prepared a
 banquet. then sent his chariots and horsemen to agamemnon, and
 invited him to the feast, but meant foul play. got him there, all
 unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when the
 banquet was over as though were butchering an ox in the shambles;
 not one of agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one of
 aegisthus’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’
 
“thus spoke proteus, and i was broken hearted as i heard him. i sat
 down upon the sands and wept; i felt as though i could longer bear
 to live nor look upon the light of the sun. presently, when i had had
 my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea
 said, ‘son of atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly;
 it can do manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you
 can, for aegisthus may be still alive, and even though orestes has been
 beforehand with you in killing him, you may yet come in for his
 funeral.’
 
“on this i took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘i know,
 then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom
 you spoke; is still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is
 dead? tell me, matter how much it may grieve me.’
 
“‘the third man,’ answered, ‘is ulysses who dwells in ithaca. i can
 see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph
 calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and cannot reach his home for
 has ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. as for your own
 end, menelaus, you shall not die in argos, but the gods will take you
 to the elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. there
 fair-haired rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any
 where else in the world, for in elysium there falls not rain, nor hail,
 nor snow, but oceanus breathes ever with west wind that sings softly
 from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. this will happen to you
 because you have married helen, and are jove’s son-in-law.’
 
“as spoke dived under the waves, whereon i turned back to the
 ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as i went
 along. when we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was
 falling, and camped down upon the beach. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put
 our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took
 our seats on the benches, and smote the grey with our oars. i again
 stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of egypt, and offered
 hecatombs that were full and sufficient. when i had thus appeased
 heaven’s anger, i raised barrow to the memory of agamemnon that his
 name might live for ever, after which i had quick passage home, for
 the gods sent fair wind.
 
“and now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and i
 will then speed you on your way. i will make you noble present of a
 chariot and three horses. i will also give you beautiful chalice that
 so long as you live you may think of whenever you make a
 drink-offering to the immortal gods.”
 
“son of atreus,” replied telemachus, “do not press to stay longer; i
 should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; i
 find your conversation so delightful that i should never once wish
 myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom i have left at pylos
 are already impatient, and you are detaining from them. as for any
 present you may be disposed to make me, i had rather that it should be
 piece of plate. i will take horses back with to ithaca, but
 will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat
 ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet and
 wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas
 in ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country
 is more fit for goats than horses, and i like it the better for that.
 48 none of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and
 ithaca least of all.”
 
menelaus smiled and took telemachus’s hand within his own. “what you
 say,” said he, “shows that you come of good family. i both can, and
 will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most
 precious piece of plate in all my house. it is mixing bowl by
 vulcan’s own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with
 gold. phaedimus, king of the sidonians, gave it in the course of a
 visit which i paid him when i returned thither on my homeward journey.
 i will make you present of it.”
 
thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house.
 they brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for
 them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the
 courts].49
 
meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a
 mark on the levelled ground in front of ulysses’ house, and were
 behaving with all their old insolence. antinous and eurymachus, who
 were their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were
 sitting together when noemon of phronius came up and said to
 antinous,
 
“have we any idea, antinous, on what day telemachus returns from pylos?
 has ship of mine, and i want it, to cross over to elis: i have
 twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet
 broken in, and i want to bring one of them over here and break him.”
 
they were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that
 telemachus had not gone to the city of neleus. they thought was only
 away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the
 swineherd; so antinous said, “when did go? tell truly, and what
 young men did take with him? were they freemen or his own
 bondsmen—for might manage that too? tell also, did you let him
 have the ship of your own free will because asked you, or did he
 take it without your leave?”
 
“i lent it him,” answered noemon, “what else could i do when man of
 his position said was in difficulty, and asked to oblige him? i
 could not possibly refuse. as for those who went with him they were the
 best young men we have, and i saw mentor go on board as captain—or some
 god who was exactly like him. i cannot understand it, for i saw mentor
 here myself yesterday morning, and yet was then setting out for
 pylos.”
 
noemon then went back to his father’s house, but antinous and
 eurymachus were very angry. they told the others to leave off playing,
 and to come and sit down along with themselves. when they came,
 antinous of eupeithes spoke in anger. his heart was black with
 rage, and his eyes flashed fire as said:
 
“good heavens, this voyage of telemachus is very serious matter; we
 had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has
 got away in spite of us, and with picked crew too. will be giving
 us trouble presently; may jove take him before is full grown. find
 ship, therefore, with crew of twenty men, and i will lie in wait
 for him in the straits between ithaca and samos; will then rue the
 day that set out to try and get news of his father.”
 
thus did speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all
 of them went inside the buildings.
 
it was not long ere penelope came to know what the suitors were
 plotting; for man servant, medon, overheard them from outside the
 outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell
 his mistress. as crossed the threshold of her room penelope said:
 “medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? is it to tell the
 maids to leave their master’s business and cook dinner for them? i wish
 they may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere
 else, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of
 my son’s estate. did not your fathers tell you when you were children,
 how good ulysses had been to them—never doing anything high-handed, nor
 speaking harshly to anybody? kings may say things sometimes, and they
 may take fancy to one man and dislike another, but ulysses never did
 an unjust thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, and
 that there is such thing as gratitude left in this world.”
 
then medon said, “i wish, madam, that this were all; but they are
 plotting something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate their
 design. they are going to try and murder telemachus as is coming
 home from pylos and lacedaemon, where has been to get news of his
 father.”
 
then penelope’s heart sank within her, and for long time she was
 speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no
 utterance. at last, however, she said, “why did my leave me? what
 business had to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over
 the ocean like sea-horses? does want to die without leaving any one
 behind him to keep up his name?”
 
“i do not know,” answered medon, “whether some god set him on to it, or
 whether went on his own impulse to see if could find out if his
 father was dead, or alive and on his way home.”
 
then went downstairs again, leaving penelope in an agony of grief.
 there were plenty of seats in the house, but she had heart for
 sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor
 of her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both old
 and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in a
 transport of sorrow she exclaimed,
 
“my dears, heaven has been pleased to try with more affliction than
 any other woman of my age and country. first i lost my brave and
 lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and
 whose name was great over all hellas and middle argos, and now my
 darling is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my having
 heard one word about his leaving home. you hussies, there was not one
 of you would so much as think of giving call out of my bed, though
 you all of you very well knew when was starting. if i had known he
 meant taking this voyage, would have had to give it up, matter
 how much was bent upon it, or leave corpse behind him—one or
 other. now, however, go some of you and call old dolius, who was given
 by my father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. bid him go at
 once and tell everything to laertes, who may be able to hit on some
 plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those who
 are trying to exterminate his own race and that of ulysses.”
 
then the dear old nurse euryclea said, “you may kill me, madam, or let
 live on in your house, whichever you please, but i will tell you the
 real truth. i knew all about it, and gave him everything wanted in
 the way of bread and wine, but made take my solemn oath that i
 would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless you
 asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for did not want you
 to spoil your beauty by crying. and now, madam, wash your face, change
 your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to
 minerva, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, for she can save him even
 though be in the jaws of death. do not trouble laertes: has
 trouble enough already. besides, i cannot think that the gods hate the
 race of the of arceisius so much, but there will be left to
 come up after him, and inherit both the house and the fair fields that
 lie far all round it.”
 
with these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the
 tears from her eyes. penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and
 went upstairs with her maids. she then put some bruised barley into a
 basket and began praying to minerva.
 
“hear me,” she cried, “daughter of aegis-bearing jove, unweariable. if
 ever ulysses while was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or
 heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son
 from the villainy of the suitors.”
 
she cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer;
 meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister,
 and one of them said:
 
“the queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us.
 little does she dream that her has now been doomed to die.”
 
this was what they said, but they did not know what was going to
 happen. then antinous said, “comrades, let there be loud talking,
 lest some of it get carried inside. let us be up and do that in
 silence, about which we are all of mind.”
 
then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the
 side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and
 sails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted
 thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft,
 while their fine servants brought them their armour. then they made the
 ship fast little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, and
 waited till night should fall.
 
but penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and
 wondering whether her brave would escape, or be overpowered by the
 wicked suitors. like lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen
 hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank into
 slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.
 
then minerva bethought her of another matter, and made vision in the
 likeness of penelope’s sister iphthime daughter of icarius who had
 married eumelus and lived in pherae. she told the vision to go to the
 house of ulysses, and to make penelope leave off crying, so it came
 into her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling the
 door to, and hovered over her head saying,
 
“you are asleep, penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer
 you to weep and be so sad. your has done them wrong, so will
 yet come back to you.”
 
penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,
 “sister, why have you come here? you do not come very often, but i
 suppose that is because you live such long way off. am i, then, to
 leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me?
 i, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good
 quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all hellas and
 middle argos; and now my darling has gone off on board of ship—a
 foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to going
 about among gatherings of men. i am even more anxious about him than
 about my husband; i am all in tremble when i think of him, lest
 something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he
 has gone, or by sea, for has many enemies who are plotting against
 him, and are bent on killing him before can return home.”
 
then the vision said, “take heart, and be not so much dismayed. there
 is one gone with him whom many man would be glad enough to have stand
 by his side, i mean minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and
 who has sent to bear you this message.”
 
“then,” said penelope, “if you are god or have been sent here by
 divine commission, tell also about that other unhappy one—is he
 still alive, or is already dead and in the house of hades?”
 
and the vision said, “i shall not tell you for certain whether is
 alive or dead, and there is use in idle conversation.”
 
then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated
 into thin air; but penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and
 comforted, so vivid had been her dream.
 
meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea,
 intent on murdering telemachus. now there is rocky islet called
 asteris, of great size, in mid channel between ithaca and samos, and
 there is harbour on either side of it where ship can lie. here then
 the achaeans placed themselves in ambush.
 



book v
 

calypso—ulysses reaches scheria on raft.
 

and now, as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus—harbinger of light
 alike to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them,
 jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. thereon minerva began to
 tell them of the many sufferings of ulysses, for she pitied him away
 there in the house of the nymph calypso.
 
“father jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live in
 everlasting bliss, i hope there may never be such thing as kind and
 well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. i hope
 they will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of
 his subjects but has forgotten ulysses, who ruled them as though he
 were their father. there is, lying in great pain in an island where
 dwells the nymph calypso, who will not let him go; and cannot get
 back to his own country, for can find neither ships nor sailors to
 take him over the sea. furthermore, wicked people are now trying to
 murder his only telemachus, who is coming home from pylos and
 lacedaemon, where has been to see if can get news of his father.”
 
“what, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father, “did you
 not send him there yourself, because you thought it would help ulysses
 to get home and punish the suitors? besides, you are perfectly able to
 protect telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors
 have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him.”
 
when had thus spoken, said to his mercury, “mercury, you are
 our messenger, go therefore and tell calypso we have decreed that poor
 ulysses is to return home. is to be convoyed neither by gods nor
 men, but after perilous voyage of twenty days upon raft is to
 reach fertile scheria,50 the land of the phaeacians, who are near of
 kin to the gods, and will honour him as though were one of
 ourselves. they will send him in ship to his own country, and will
 give him more bronze and gold and raiment than would have brought
 back from troy, if had had all his prize money and had got home
 without disaster. this is how we have settled that shall return to
 his country and his friends.”
 
thus spoke, and mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of argus, did as
 was told. forthwith bound on his glittering golden sandals with
 which could fly like the wind over land and sea. took the wand
 with which seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he
 pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over pieria; then swooped
 down through the firmament till reached the level of the sea, whose
 waves skimmed like cormorant that flies fishing every hole and
 corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray. he
 flew and flew over many weary wave, but when at last got to the
 island which was his journey’s end, left the and went on by land
 till came to the cave where the nymph calypso lived.
 
found her at home. there was large fire burning on the hearth, and
 one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal
 wood. as for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden
 shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. round her cave there
 was thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees,
 wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests—owls, hawks, and
 chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters. vine
 loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth of
 the cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cut
 pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigate
 the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed. 51
 even god could not help being charmed with such lovely spot, so
 mercury stood still and looked at it; but when had admired it
 sufficiently went inside the cave.
 
calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, matter
 how far they live from one another—but ulysses was not within; was
 on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears
 in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. calypso gave
 mercury seat and said: “why have you come to see me,
 mercury—honoured, and ever welcome—for you do not visit often? say
 what you want; i will do it for you at once if i can, and if it can be
 done at all; but come inside, and let set refreshment before you.”
 
as she spoke she drew table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed
 him some red nectar, so mercury ate and drank till had had enough,
 and then said:
 
“we are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask why i
 have come here, and i will tell you truly as you would have do. jove
 sent me; it was doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all
 this way over the where there are cities full of people to offer
 sacrifices or choice hecatombs? nevertheless i had to come, for none
 of us other gods can cross jove, nor transgress his orders. says
 that you have here the most ill-starred of all those who fought nine
 years before the city of king priam and sailed home in the tenth year
 after having sacked it. on their way home they sinned against
 minerva,52 who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all his
 brave companions perished, and alone was carried hither by wind and
 tide. jove says that you are to let this man go at once, for it is
 decreed that shall not perish here, far from his own people, but
 shall return to his house and country and see his friends again.”
 
calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “you gods,” she
 exclaimed, “ought to be ashamed of yourselves. you are always jealous
 and hate seeing goddess take fancy to mortal man, and live with
 him in open matrimony. so when rosy-fingered dawn made love to orion,
 you precious gods were all of you furious till diana went and killed
 him in ortygia. so again when ceres fell in love with iasion, and
 yielded to him in thrice-ploughed fallow field, jove came to hear of
 it before so very long and killed iasion with his thunderbolts. and now
 you are angry with too because i have man here. i found the poor
 creature sitting all alone astride of keel, for jove had struck his
 ship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were
 drowned, while himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island.
 i got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him
 immortal, so that should never grow old all his days; still i cannot
 cross jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if insists
 upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but i cannot send him
 anywhere myself for i have neither ships nor men who can take him.
 nevertheless i will readily give him such advice, in all good faith, as
 will be likely to bring him safely to his own country.”
 
“then send him away,” said mercury, “or jove will be angry with you and
 punish you”.
 
on this took his leave, and calypso went out to look for ulysses,
 for she had heard jove’s message. she found him sitting upon the beach
 with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness;
 for had got tired of calypso, and though was forced to sleep with
 her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so. as
 for the day time, spent it on the rocks and on the shore,
 weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon the
 sea. calypso then went close up to him said:
 
“my poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your
 life out any longer. i am going to send you away of my own free will;
 so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself large raft with an
 upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. i will put bread,
 wine, and water on board to save you from starving. i will also give
 you clothes, and will send you fair wind to take you home, if the
 gods in heaven so will it—for they know more about these things, and
 can settle them better than i can.”
 
ulysses shuddered as heard her. “now goddess,” answered, “there
 is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me
 home when you bid do such dreadful thing as put to on raft.
 not even well found ship with fair wind could venture on such a
 distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall make go on
 board raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean no
 mischief.”
 
calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “you know a
 great deal,” said she, “but you are quite wrong here. may heaven above
 and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river styx—and
 this is the most solemn oath which blessed god can take—that i mean
 you sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what i
 should do myself in your place. i am dealing with you quite
 straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and i am very sorry
 for you.”
 
when she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and
 ulysses followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on
 and on till they came to calypso’s cave, where ulysses took the seat
 that mercury had just left. calypso set meat and drink before him of
 the food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar
 for herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were
 before them. when they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink,
 calypso spoke, saying:
 
“ulysses, noble of laertes, so you would start home to your own
 land at once? good luck go with you, but if you could only know how
 much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own
 country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and
 let make you immortal, matter how anxious you may be to see this
 wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yet
 i flatter myself that i am whit less tall or well-looking than she
 is, for it is not to be expected that mortal woman should compare in
 beauty with an immortal.”
 
“goddess,” replied ulysses, “do not be angry with about this. i am
 quite aware that my wife penelope is nothing like so tall or so
 beautiful as yourself. she is only woman, whereas you are an
 immortal. nevertheless, i want to get home, and can think of nothing
 else. if some god wrecks when i am on the sea, i will bear it and
 make the best of it. i have had infinite trouble both by land and sea
 already, so let this go with the rest.”
 
presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into
 the inner part of the cave and went to bed.
 
when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared, ulysses put on
 his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore dress of light gossamer
 fabric, very fine and graceful, with beautiful golden girdle about
 her waist and veil to cover her head. she at once set herself to
 think how she could speed ulysses on his way. so she gave him great
 bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, and
 had beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. she also gave
 him sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the island
 where the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, that reached the
 sky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the
 water.53 then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew,
 calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which soon finished
 doing. cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring
 them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. meanwhile calypso came back
 with some augers, so bored holes with them and fitted the timbers
 together with bolts and rivets. made the raft as broad as skilled
 shipwright makes the beam of large vessel, and fixed deck on top
 of the ribs, and ran gunwale all round it. also made mast with a
 yard arm, and rudder to steer with. fenced the raft all round with
 wicker hurdles as protection against the waves, and then threw on
 quantity of wood. by and by calypso brought him some linen to make
 the sails, and made these too, excellently, making them fast with
 braces and sheets. last of all, with the help of levers, drew the
 raft down into the water.
 
in four days had completed the whole work, and on the fifth calypso
 sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean
 clothes. she gave him goat skin full of black wine, and another
 larger one of water; she also gave him wallet full of provisions, and
 found him in much good meat. moreover, she made the wind fair and warm
 for him, and gladly did ulysses spread his sail before it, while sat
 and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder. never closed
 his eyes, but kept them fixed on the pleiads, on late-setting bootes,
 and on the bear—which men also call the wain, and which turns round and
 round where it is, facing orion, and alone never dipping into the
 stream of oceanus—for calypso had told him to keep this to his left.
 days seven and ten did sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the
 dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the phaeacian
 coast appeared, rising like shield on the horizon.
 
but king neptune, who was returning from the ethiopians, caught sight
 of ulysses long way off, from the mountains of the solymi. could
 see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so wagged
 his head and muttered to himself, saying, “good heavens, so the gods
 have been changing their minds about ulysses while i was away in
 ethiopia, and now is close to the land of the phaeacians, where it
 is decreed that shall escape from the calamities that have befallen
 him. still, shall have plenty of hardship yet before has done
 with it.”
 
thereon gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred
 it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till
 earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of
 the heavens. winds from east, south, north, and west fell upon him all
 at the same time, and tremendous got up, so that ulysses’ heart
 began to fail him. “alas,” said to himself in his dismay, “what ever
 will become of me? i am afraid calypso was right when she said i should
 have trouble by before i got back home. it is all coming true. how
 black is jove making heaven with his clouds, and what the winds
 are raising from every quarter at once. i am now safe to perish. blest
 and thrice blest were those danaans who fell before troy in the cause
 of the sons of atreus. would that i had been killed on the day when the
 trojans were pressing so sorely about the dead body of achilles, for
 then i should have had due burial and the achaeans would have honoured
 my name; but now it seems that i shall come to most pitiable end.”
 
as spoke broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft
 reeled again, and was carried overboard long way off. let go
 the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the
 mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea. for a
 long time ulysses was under water, and it was all could do to rise
 to the surface again, for the clothes calypso had given him weighed him
 down; but at last got his head above water and spat out the bitter
 brine that was running down his face in streams. in spite of all this,
 however, did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as he
 could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to
 escape drowning. the took the raft and tossed it about as autumn
 winds whirl thistledown round and round upon road. it was as though
 the south, north, east, and west winds were all playing battledore and
 shuttlecock with it at once.
 
when was in this plight, ino daughter of cadmus, also called
 leucothea, saw him. she had formerly been mere mortal, but had been
 since raised to the rank of marine goddess. seeing in what great
 distress ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like
 sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft.
 
“my poor good man,” said she, “why is neptune so furiously angry with
 you? is giving you great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster
 will not kill you. you seem to be sensible person, do then as i
 bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to
 the phaeacian coast where better luck awaits you. and here, take my
 veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to
 harm so long as you wear it. as soon as you touch land take it off,
 throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again.”
 with these words she took off her veil and gave it him. then she dived
 down again like sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.
 
but ulysses did not know what to think. “alas,” said to himself in
 his dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring
 to ruin by advising to quit my raft. at any rate i will not do so
 at present, for the land where she said i should be quit of all
 troubles seemed to be still good way off. i know what i will do—i am
 sure it will be best—no matter what happens i will stick to the raft as
 long as her timbers hold together, but when the breaks her up i
 will swim for it; i do not see how i can do any better than this.”
 
while was thus in two minds, neptune sent terrible great wave that
 seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft,
 which then went to pieces as though it were heap of dry chaff tossed
 about by whirlwind. ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it
 as if were on horseback; then took off the clothes calypso had
 given him, bound ino’s veil under his arms, and plunged into the
 sea—meaning to swim on shore. king neptune watched him as did so,
 and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, “there now, swim
 up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people. i
 do not think you will be able to say that i have let you off too
 lightly.” on this lashed his horses and drove to aegae where his
 palace is.
 
but minerva resolved to help ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the
 winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused good
 stiff breeze from the north that should lay the waters till ulysses
 reached the land of the phaeacians where would be safe.
 
thereon floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with
 heavy swell on the and death staring him in the face; but when
 the third day broke, the wind fell and there was dead calm without so
 much as breath of air stirring. as rose on the swell looked
 eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. then, as children rejoice
 when their dear father begins to get better after having for long
 time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the gods
 deliver him from evil, so was ulysses thankful when again saw land
 and trees, and swam on with all his strength that might once more
 set foot upon dry ground. when, however, got within earshot, he
 began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell
 still broke against them with terrific roar. everything was enveloped
 in spray; there were harbours where ship might ride, nor shelter
 of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.
 
ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and said despairingly to
 himself, “alas, jove has let see land after swimming so far that i
 had given up all hope, but i can find landing place, for the coast
 is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the
 sea, with deep water close under them so that i cannot climb out for
 want of foot hold. i am afraid some great wave will lift off my legs
 and dash against the rocks as i leave the water—which would give me
 sorry landing. if, on the other hand, i swim further in search of
 some shelving beach or harbour, hurricane may carry out to sea
 again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster of
 the deep to attack me; for amphitrite breeds many such, and i know that
 neptune is very angry with me.”
 
while was thus in two minds wave caught him and took him with such
 force against the rocks that would have been smashed and torn to
 pieces if minerva had not shown him what to do. caught hold of the
 rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the wave
 retired, so was saved that time; but presently the wave came on
 again and carried him back with it far into the sea—tearing his hands
 as the suckers of polypus are torn when some one plucks it from its
 bed, and the stones come up along with it—even so did the rocks tear
 the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep down
 under the water.
 
here poor ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his
 own destiny, if minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him.
 swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating
 against the land, and at the same time kept looking towards the
 shore to see if could find some haven, or spit that should take
 the waves aslant. by and by, as swam on, came to the mouth of a
 river, and here thought would be the best place, for there were no
 rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. felt that there was a
 current, so prayed inwardly and said:
 
“hear me, king, whoever you may be, and save from the anger of the
 sea-god neptune, for i approach you prayerfully. any one who has lost
 his way has at all times claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my
 distress i draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of your
 riverhood. have mercy upon me, king, for i declare myself your
 suppliant.”
 
then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm
 before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. here
 at last ulysses’ knees and strong hands failed him, for the had
 completely broken him. his body was all swollen, and his mouth and
 nostrils ran down like river with sea-water, so that could neither
 breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,
 when had got his breath and came to himself again, took off the
 scarf that ino had given him and threw it back into the salt54 stream
 of the river, whereon ino received it into her hands from the wave that
 bore it towards her. then left the river, laid himself down among
 the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.
 
“alas,” cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of
 me, and how is it all to end? if i stay here upon the river bed through
 the long watches of the night, i am so exhausted that the bitter cold
 and damp may make an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be keen
 wind blowing from off the river. if, on the other hand, i climb the
 hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, i may
 escape the cold and have good night’s rest, but some savage beast may
 take advantage of and devour me.”
 
in the end deemed it best to take to the woods, and found one
 upon some high ground not far from the water. there crept beneath
 two shoots of olive that grew from single stock—the one an ungrafted
 sucker, while the other had been grafted. wind, however squally,
 could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun’s rays
 pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow
 into one another. ulysses crept under these and began to make himself a
 bed to lie on, for there was great litter of dead leaves lying
 about—enough to make covering for two or three men even in hard
 winter weather. was glad enough to see this, so laid himself down
 and heaped the leaves all round him. then, as one who lives alone in
 the country, far from any neighbor, hides brand as fire-seed in the
 ashes to save himself from having to get light elsewhere, even so did
 ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and minerva shed sweet sleep
 upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories of
 his sorrows.
 



book vi
 

the meeting between nausicaa and ulysses.
 

so here ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but minerva went off
 to the country and city of the phaeacians—a people who used to live in
 the fair town of hypereia, near the lawless cyclopes. now the cyclopes
 were stronger than they and plundered them, so their king nausithous
 moved them thence and settled them in scheria, far from all other
 people. surrounded the city with wall, built houses and temples,
 and divided the lands among his people; but was dead and gone to the
 house of hades, and king alcinous, whose counsels were inspired of
 heaven, was now reigning. to his house, then, did minerva hie in
 furtherance of the return of ulysses.
 
she went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there
 slept girl who was as lovely as goddess, nausicaa, daughter to king
 alcinous. two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty,
 one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well made
 folding doors. minerva took the form of the famous captain dymas’s
 daughter, who was bosom friend of nausicaa and just her own age;
 then, coming up to the girl’s bedside like breath of wind, she
 hovered over her head and said:
 
“nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such lazy
 daughter? here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are
 going to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well
 dressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend
 you. this is the way to get yourself good name, and to make your
 father and mother proud of you. suppose, then, that we make tomorrow a
 washing day, and start at daybreak. i will come and help you so that
 you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best
 young men among your own people are courting you, and you are not going
 to remain maid much longer. ask your father, therefore, to have a
 waggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and
 girdles, and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you
 than walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town.”
 
when she had said this minerva went away to olympus, which they say is
 the everlasting home of the gods. here wind beats roughly, and
 neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine
 and in great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are
 illumined for ever and ever. this was the place to which the goddess
 went when she had given instructions to the girl.
 
by and by morning came and woke nausicaa, who began wondering about her
 dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her
 father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room. her
 mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with her
 maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as was
 going out to attend meeting of the town council, which the phaeacian
 aldermen had convened. she stopped him and said:
 
“papa dear, could you manage to let have good big waggon? i want
 to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. you are the
 chief man here, so it is only right that you should have clean shirt
 when you attend meetings of the council. moreover, you have five sons
 at home, two of them married, while the other three are good looking
 bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they go
 to dance, and i have been thinking about all this.”
 
she did not say word about her own wedding, for she did not like to,
 but her father knew and said, “you shall have the mules, my love, and
 whatever else you have mind for. be off with you, and the men shall
 get you good strong waggon with body to it that will hold all your
 clothes.”
 
on this gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out,
 harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the
 clothes down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. her
 mother prepared her basket of provisions with all sorts of good
 things, and goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon,
 and her mother gave her also golden cruse of oil, that she and her
 women might anoint themselves. then she took the whip and reins and
 lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on
 the road. they pulled without flagging, and carried not only nausicaa
 and her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.
 
when they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns,
 through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any
 quantity of linen, matter how dirty. here they unharnessed the mules
 and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the
 water side. they took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in the
 water, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to get
 the dirt out. after they had washed them and got them quite clean, they
 laid them out by the side, where the waves had raised high beach
 of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselves
 with olive oil. then they got their dinner by the side of the stream,
 and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. when they had done
 dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to
 play at ball, while nausicaa sang for them. as the huntress diana goes
 forth upon the mountains of taygetus or erymanthus to hunt wild boars
 or deer, and the wood nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing jove, take
 their sport along with her (then is leto proud at seeing her daughter
 stand full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliest
 amid whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine her
 handmaids.
 
when it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the
 clothes and putting them into the waggon, minerva began to consider how
 ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him
 to the city of the phaeacians. the girl, therefore, threw ball at one
 of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. on this they
 all shouted, and the noise they made woke ulysses, who sat up in his
 bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.
 
“alas,” said to himself, “what kind of people have i come amongst?
 are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? i
 seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of
 the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows
 of green grass. at any rate i am among race of men and women. let me
 try if i cannot manage to get look at them.”
 
as said this crept from under his bush, and broke off bough
 covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. looked like some
 lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and
 defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as prowls in quest of
 oxen, sheep, or deer, for is famished, and will dare break even into
 well fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep—even such did
 ulysses seem to the young women, as drew near to them all naked as
 was, for was in great want. on seeing one so unkempt and so
 begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that
 jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of alcinous stood firm, for
 minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. she
 stood right in front of ulysses, and doubted whether should go up
 to her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a
 suppliant, or stay where was and entreat her to give him some
 clothes and show him the way to the town. in the end deemed it best
 to entreat her from distance in case the girl should take offence at
 his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so addressed her in
 honeyed and persuasive language.
 
“o queen,” said, “i implore your aid—but tell me, are you goddess
 or are you mortal woman? if you are goddess and dwell in heaven, i
 can only conjecture that you are jove’s daughter diana, for your face
 and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a
 mortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and
 mother—thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and
 delighted they must feel when they see so fair scion as yourself
 going out to dance; most happy, however, of all will be whose
 wedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home.
 i never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am
 lost in admiration as i behold you. i can only compare you to young
 palm tree which i saw when i was at delos growing near the altar of
 apollo—for i was there, too, with much people after me, when i was on
 that journey which has been the source of all my troubles. never yet
 did such young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and i
 admired and wondered at it exactly as i now admire and wonder at
 yourself. i dare not clasp your knees, but i am in great distress;
 yesterday made the twentieth day that i had been tossing about upon the
 sea. the winds and waves have taken all the way from the ogygian
 island,55 and now fate has flung upon this coast that i may endure
 still further suffering; for i do not think that i have yet come to the
 end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for me.
 
“and now, queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person i
 have met, and i know one else in this country. show the way to
 your town, and let have anything that you may have brought hither to
 wrap your clothes in. may heaven grant you in all things your heart’s
 desire—husband, house, and happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing
 better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in a
 house. it discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friends
 glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one.”
 
to this nausicaa answered, “stranger, you appear to be sensible,
 well-disposed person. there is accounting for luck; jove gives
 prosperity to rich and poor just as chooses, so you must take what
 has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. now, however,
 that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes
 nor for anything else that foreigner in distress may reasonably look
 for. i will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name of
 our people; we are called phaeacians, and i am daughter to alcinous, in
 whom the whole power of the state is vested.”
 
then she called her maids and said, “stay where you are, you girls. can
 you not see man without running away from him? do you take him for a
 robber or murderer? neither nor any one else can come here to do
 us phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on
 land’s end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do
 with any other people. this is only some poor man who has lost his way,
 and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distress
 are under jove’s protection, and will take what they can get and be
 thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink,
 and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from the
 wind.”
 
on this the maids left off running away and began calling one another
 back. they made ulysses sit down in the shelter as nausicaa had told
 them, and brought him shirt and cloak. they also brought him the
 little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream.
 but ulysses said, “young women, please to stand little on one side
 that i may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil,
 for it is long enough since my skin has had drop of oil upon it. i
 cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. i am ashamed to
 strip56 before number of good looking young women.”
 
then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while ulysses
 washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and
 from his broad shoulders. when had thoroughly washed himself, and
 had got the brine out of his hair, anointed himself with oil, and
 put on the clothes which the girl had given him; minerva then made him
 look taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thick
 on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
 she glorified him about the head and shoulders as skilful workman who
 has studied art of all kinds under vulcan and minerva enriches piece
 of silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full of beauty. then he
 went and sat down little way off upon the beach, looking quite young
 and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said
 to her maids:
 
“hush, my dears, for i want to say something. i believe the gods who
 live in heaven have sent this man to the phaeacians. when i first saw
 him i thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of the
 gods who dwell in heaven. i should like my future husband to be just
 such another as is, if would only stay here and not want to go
 away. however, give him something to eat and drink.”
 
they did as they were told, and set food before ulysses, who ate and
 drank ravenously, for it was long since had had food of any kind.
 meanwhile, nausicaa bethought her of another matter. she got the linen
 folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she
 took her seat, she called ulysses:
 
“stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to the town; i
 will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where i can
 tell you that you will meet all the best people among the phaeacians.
 but be sure and do as i bid you, for you seem to be sensible person.
 as long as we are going past the fields and farm lands, follow briskly
 behind the waggon along with the maids and i will lead the way myself.
 presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find a
 high wall running all round it, and good harbour on either side with
 narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by the
 road side, for every one has place where his own ship can lie. you
 will see the market place with temple of neptune in the middle of it,
 and paved with large stones bedded in the earth. here people deal in
 ship’s gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are
 the places where oars are made, for the phaeacians are not nation of
 archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are sea-faring
 folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which
 they travel far over the sea.
 
“i am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against
 later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low
 fellow, if met us, might say, ‘who is this fine-looking stranger
 that is going about with nausicaa? where did she find him? i suppose
 she is going to marry him. perhaps is vagabond sailor whom she has
 taken from some foreign vessel, for we have neighbours; or some god
 has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she is
 going to live with him all the rest of her life. it would be good
 thing if she would take herself off and find husband somewhere else,
 for she will not look at one of the many excellent young phaeacians who
 are in love with her.’ this is the kind of disparaging remark that
 would be made about me, and i could not complain, for i should myself
 be scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with
 men in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still
 alive, and without having been married in the face of all the world.
 
“if, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help
 you home, do as i bid you; you will see beautiful grove of poplars by
 the road side dedicated to minerva; it has well in it and meadow
 all round it. here my father has field of rich garden ground, about
 as far from the town as man’s voice will carry. sit down there and
 wait for while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach my
 father’s house. then, when you think we must have done this, come into
 the town and ask the way to the house of my father alcinous. you will
 have difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you,
 for one else in the whole town has anything like such fine house
 as has. when you have got past the gates and through the outer
 court, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. you
 will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by
 firelight. it is fine sight to see her as she leans back against one
 of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind her. close to her
 seat stands that of my father, on which sits and topes like an
 immortal god. never mind him, but go up to my mother, and lay your
 hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. if you can gain her
 over, you may hope to see your own country again, matter how distant
 it may be.”
 
so saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
 the mules drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
 she was careful not to go too fast for ulysses and the maids who were
 following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with
 judgement. as the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove of
 minerva, and there ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter
 of jove.
 
“hear me,” cried, “daughter of aegis-bearing jove, unweariable, hear
 now, for you gave heed to my prayers when neptune was wrecking
 me. now, therefore, have pity upon and grant that i may find friends
 and be hospitably received by the phaeacians.”
 
thus did pray, and minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show
 herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle neptune, who was
 still furious in his endeavors to prevent ulysses from getting home.
 



book vii
 

reception of ulysses at the palace of king alcinous.
 

thus, then, did ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
 town. when she reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway,
 and her brothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mules
 out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she
 went to her own room, where an old servant, eurymedusa of apeira, lit
 the fire for her. this old woman had been brought by from apeira,
 and had been chosen as prize for alcinous because was king over
 the phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though were god.57
 she had been nurse to nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and
 brought her supper for her into her own room.
 
presently ulysses got up to go towards the town; and minerva shed a
 thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud
 phaeacians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who was.
 then, as was just entering the town, she came towards him in the
 likeness of little girl carrying pitcher. she stood right in front
 of him, and ulysses said:
 
“my dear, will you be so kind as to show the house of king alcinous?
 i am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your
 town and country.”
 
then minerva said, “yes, father stranger, i will show you the house you
 want, for alcinous lives quite close to my own father. i will go before
 you and show the way, but say not word as you go, and do not look at
 any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide
 strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. they are
 sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of neptune in ships
 that glide along like thought, or as bird in the air.”
 
on this she led the way, and ulysses followed in her steps; but not one
 of the phaeacians could see him as passed through the city in the
 midst of them; for the great goddess minerva in her good will towards
 him had hidden him in thick cloud of darkness. admired their
 harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city,
 which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when
 they reached the king’s house minerva said:
 
“this is the house, father stranger, which you would have show you.
 you will find number of great people sitting at table, but do not be
 afraid; go straight in, for the bolder man is the more likely is
 to carry his point, even though is stranger. first find the queen.
 her name is arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband
 alcinous. they both descend originally from neptune, who was father to
 nausithous by periboea, woman of great beauty. periboea was the
 youngest daughter of eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the
 giants, but ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own life to
 boot.
 
“neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had by him, the
 great nausithous, who reigned over the phaeacians. nausithous had two
 sons rhexenor and alcinous;58 apollo killed the first of them while he
 was still bridegroom and without male issue; but left daughter
 arete, whom alcinous married, and honours as other woman is honoured
 of all those that keep house along with their husbands.
 
“thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her
 children, by alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon
 her as goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for
 she is thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any
 women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle
 their disputes. if you can gain her good will, you may have every hope
 of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and
 country.”
 
then minerva left scheria and went away over the sea. she went to
 marathon59 and to the spacious streets of athens, where she entered the
 abode of erechtheus; but ulysses went on to the house of alcinous, and
 pondered much as paused while before reaching the threshold of
 bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or
 moon. the walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the
 cornice was of blue enamel. the doors were gold, and hung on pillars of
 silver that rose from floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver
 and the hook of the door was of gold.
 
on either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which vulcan, with
 his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the
 palace of king alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow
 old. seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end
 to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the
 house had made. here the chief persons of the phaeacians used to sit
 and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there
 were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands,
 raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table.
 there are60 fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always
 grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom,
 or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the
 fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it
 will turn oil. as the phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so
 their women excel all others in weaving, for minerva has taught them
 all manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.
 
outside the gate of the outer court there is large garden of about
 four acres with wall all round it. it is full of beautiful
 trees—pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. there are
 luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. the fruits never rot nor
 fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so
 soft that new crop ripens before the old has dropped. pear grows on
 pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for
 there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of part of this,
 the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
 gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on
 have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again
 are just changing colour. in the furthest part of the ground there are
 beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year
 round. two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout
 the whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the
 outer court to the house itself, and the town’s people draw water from
 it. such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the
 house of king alcinous.
 
so here ulysses stood for while and looked about him, but when had
 looked long enough crossed the threshold and went within the
 precincts of the house. there found all the chief people among the
 phaeacians making their drink offerings to mercury, which they always
 did the last thing before going away for the night.61 went straight
 through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which
 minerva had enveloped him, till reached arete and king alcinous;
 then laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at that moment
 the miraculous darkness fell away from him and became visible. every
 one was speechless with surprise at seeing man there, but ulysses
 began at once with his petition.
 
“queen arete,” exclaimed, “daughter of great rhexenor, in my
 distress i humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests
 (whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they
 leave their possessions to their children, and all the honours
 conferred upon them by the state) to help home to my own country as
 soon as possible; for i have been long in trouble and away from my
 friends.”
 
then sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their
 peace, till presently the old hero echeneus, who was an excellent
 speaker and an elder among the phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
 addressed them thus:
 
“alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that stranger
 should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is
 waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and
 take seat on stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix
 some wine and water that we may make drink offering to jove the lord
 of thunder, who takes all well disposed suppliants under his
 protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever
 there may be in the house.”
 
when alcinous heard this took ulysses by the hand, raised him from
 the hearth, and bade him take the seat of laodamas, who had been
 sitting beside him, and was his favourite son. maid servant then
 brought him water in beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a
 silver basin for him to wash his hands, and she drew clean table
 beside him; an upper servant brought him bread and offered him many
 good things of what there was in the house, and ulysses ate and drank.
 then alcinous said to one of the servants, “pontonous, mix cup of
 wine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to jove the
 lord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants.”
 
pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving
 every man his drink-offering. when they had made their offerings, and
 had drunk each as much as was minded, alcinous said:
 
“aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians, hear my words. you
 have had your supper, so now go home to bed. to-morrow morning i shall
 invite still larger number of aldermen, and will give sacrificial
 banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his
 escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his
 own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, matter how
 distant it may be. we must see that comes to harm while on his
 homeward journey, but when is once at home will have to take the
 luck was born with for better or worse like other people. it is
 possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who has
 come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are
 departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made
 themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them
 hecatombs. they come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves,
 and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other
 of them, they affect concealment, for we are as near of kin to the
 gods as the cyclopes and the savage giants are.”62
 
then ulysses said: “pray, alcinous, do not take any such notion into
 your head. i have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor
 mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
 indeed, were i to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me,
 you would say that i was still worse off than they are. nevertheless,
 let sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is very
 importunate thing, and thrusts itself on man’s notice matter how
 dire is his distress. i am in great trouble, yet it insists that i
 shall eat and drink, bids lay aside all memory of my sorrows and
 dwell only on the due replenishing of itself. as for yourselves, do as
 you propose, and at break of day set about helping to get home. i
 shall be content to die if i may first once more behold my property, my
 bondsmen, and all the greatness of my house.”63
 
thus did speak. every one approved his saying, and agreed that he
 should have his escort inasmuch as had spoken reasonably. then when
 they had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he
 was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving
 ulysses in the cloister with arete and alcinous while the servants were
 taking the things away after supper. arete was the first to speak, for
 she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that ulysses was
 wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said,
 “stranger, before we go any further, there is question i should like
 to ask you. who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes?
 did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?”
 
and ulysses answered, “it would be long story madam, were i to relate
 in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been
 laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island
 far away in the which is called ‘the ogygian.’ here dwells the
 cunning and powerful goddess calypso, daughter of atlas. she lives by
 herself far from all neighbours human or divine. fortune, however,
 brought to her hearth all desolate and alone, for jove struck my
 ship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. my brave
 comrades were drowned every man of them, but i stuck to the keel and
 was carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last
 during the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought to the
 ogygian island where the great goddess calypso lives. she took in
 and treated with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me
 immortal that i might never grow old, but she could not persuade to
 let her do so.
 
“i stayed with calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the
 good clothes she gave with my tears during the whole time; but at
 last when the eighth year came round she bade depart of her own free
 will, either because jove had told her she must, or because she had
 changed her mind. she sent from her island on raft, which she
 provisioned with abundance of bread and wine. moreover she gave good
 stout clothing, and sent wind that blew both warm and fair. days
 seven and ten did i sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth i caught
 sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast—and glad
 indeed was i to set eyes upon them. nevertheless there was still much
 trouble in store for me, for at this point neptune would let go no
 further, and raised great storm against me; the was so terribly
 high that i could longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under
 the fury of the gale, and i had to swim for it, till wind and current
 brought to your shores.
 
“there i tried to land, but could not, for it was bad place and the
 waves dashed against the rocks, so i again took to the and swam
 on till i came to river that seemed the most likely landing place,
 for there were rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. here, then,
 i got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. night was
 coming on, so i left the river, and went into thicket, where i
 covered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent off
 into very deep sleep. sick and sorry as i was i slept among the
 leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when i woke
 as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’s maid servants playing
 upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like goddess. i
 besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition,
 much more so than could be expected from so young person—for young
 people are apt to be thoughtless. she gave plenty of bread and wine,
 and when she had had washed in the river she also gave the
 clothes in which you see me. now, therefore, though it has pained to
 do so, i have told you the whole truth.”
 
then alcinous said, “stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to
 bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she
 was the first person whose aid you asked.”
 
“pray do not scold her,” replied ulysses; “she is not to blame. she did
 tell to follow along with the maids, but i was ashamed and afraid,
 for i thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. every
 human being is sometimes little suspicious and irritable.”
 
“stranger,” replied alcinous, “i am not the kind of man to get angry
 about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by father
 jove, minerva, and apollo, now that i see what kind of person you are,
 and how much you think as i do, i wish you would stay here, marry my
 daughter, and become my son-in-law. if you will stay i will give you a
 house and an estate, but one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here
 against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this i will attend
 tomorrow to the matter of your escort. you can sleep64 during the whole
 voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters
 either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be a
 long way further off than euboea, which those of my people who saw it
 when they took yellow-haired rhadamanthus to see tityus the of
 gaia, tell is the furthest of any place—and yet they did the whole
 voyage in single day without distressing themselves, and came back
 again afterwards. you will thus see how much my ships excel all others,
 and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are.”
 
then was ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “father jove, grant that
 alcinous may do all as has said, for so will win an imperishable
 name among mankind, and at the same time i shall return to my country.”
 
thus did they converse. then arete told her maids to set bed in the
 room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to
 spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for ulysses to
 wear. the maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when
 they had made the bed they came up to ulysses and said, “rise, sir
 stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready,” and glad indeed was
 to go to his rest.
 
so ulysses slept in bed placed in room over the echoing gateway;
 but alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his
 wife by his side.
 



book viii
 

banquet in the house of alcinous—the games.
 

now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, alcinous
 and ulysses both rose, and alcinous led the way to the phaeacian place
 of assembly, which was near the ships. when they got there they sat
 down side by side on seat of polished stone, while minerva took the
 form of one of alcinous’ servants, and went round the town in order to
 help ulysses to get home. she went up to the citizens, man by man, and
 said, “aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians, come to the
 assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off a
 long voyage to the house of king alcinous; looks like an immortal
 god.”
 
with these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to
 the assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. every one
 was struck with the appearance of ulysses, for minerva had beautified
 him about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter
 than really was, that might impress the phaeacians favourably as
 being very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trials
 of skill to which they would challenge him. then, when they were got
 together, alcinous spoke:
 
“hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians,
 that i may speak even as i am minded. this stranger, whoever may be,
 has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either east or
 west. wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. let us
 then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him;
 indeed, one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain
 of for not speeding on his way soon enough. let us draw ship into
 the sea—one that has never yet made voyage—and man her with two and
 fifty of our smartest young sailors. then when you have made fast your
 oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to
 prepare feast.65 i will find you in everything. i am giving these
 instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regards
 you aldermen and town councillors, you will join in entertaining our
 guest in the cloisters. i can take excuses, and we will have
 demodocus to sing to us; for there is bard like him whatever may
 choose to sing about.”
 
alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a
 servant went to fetch demodocus. the fifty-two picked oarsmen went to
 the shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drew
 the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound the
 oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due
 course, and spread the white sails aloft. they moored the vessel a
 little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the house
 of king alcinous. the out houses,66 yards, and all the precincts were
 filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and
 alcinous killed them dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two
 oxen. these they skinned and dressed so as to provide magnificent
 banquet.
 
servant presently led in the famous bard demodocus, whom the muse had
 dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though
 she had endowed him with divine gift of song, she had robbed him of
 his eyesight. pontonous set seat for him among the guests, leaning it
 up against bearing-post. hung the lyre for him on peg over his
 head, and showed him where was to feel for it with his hands. he
 also set fair table with basket of victuals by his side, and cup
 of wine from which might drink whenever was so disposed.
 
the company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before
 them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse
 inspired demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a
 matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel
 between ulysses and achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on
 one another as they sat together at banquet. but agamemnon was glad
 when heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for apollo
 had foretold him this at pytho when crossed the stone floor to
 consult the oracle. here was the beginning of the evil that by the will
 of jove fell both upon danaans and trojans.
 
thus sang the bard, but ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head
 and covered his face, for was ashamed to let the phaeacians see that
 was weeping. when the bard left off singing wiped the tears from
 his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a
 drink-offering to the gods; but when the phaeacians pressed demodocus
 to sing further, for they delighted in his lays, then ulysses again
 drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly. one noticed his
 distress except alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy
 sighs that was heaving. so at once said, “aldermen and town
 councillors of the phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the
 feast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us
 proceed therefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his
 return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all
 other nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners.”
 
with these words led the way, and the others followed after. a
 servant hung demodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the
 cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief
 men of the phaeacians were going to see the sports; crowd of several
 thousands of people followed them, and there were many excellent
 competitors for all the prizes. acroneos, ocyalus, elatreus, nauteus,
 prymneus, anchialus, eretmeus, ponteus, proreus, thoon, anabesineus,
 and amphialus of polyneus of tecton. there was also euryalus
 of naubolus, who was like mars himself, and was the best looking
 man among the phaeacians except laodamas. three sons of alcinous,
 laodamas, halios, and clytoneus, competed also.
 
the foot races came first. the course was set out for them from the
 starting post, and they raised dust upon the plain as they all flew
 forward at the same moment. clytoneus came in first by long way; he
 left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a
 couple of mules can plough in fallow field.67 they then turned to the
 painful art of wrestling, and here euryalus proved to be the best man.
 amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the
 disc there was one who could approach elatreus. alcinous’s son
 laodamas was the best boxer, and it was who presently said, when
 they had all been diverted with the games, “let us ask the stranger
 whether excels in any of these sports; seems very powerfully
 built; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength,
 nor is at all old, but has suffered much lately, and there is
 nothing like the for making havoc with man, matter how strong
 is.”
 
“you are quite right, laodamas,” replied euryalus, “go up to your guest
 and speak to him about it yourself.”
 
when laodamas heard this made his way into the middle of the crowd
 and said to ulysses, “i hope, sir, that you will enter yourself for
 some one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of
 them—and you must have gone in for many one before now. there is
 nothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as the
 showing himself proper man with his hands and feet. have try
 therefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. your
 return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn
 into the water, and the crew is found.”
 
ulysses answered, “laodamas, why do you taunt in this way? my mind
 is set rather on cares than contests; i have been through infinite
 trouble, and am come among you now as suppliant, praying your king
 and people to further on my return home.”
 
then euryalus reviled him outright and said, “i gather, then, that you
 are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in.
 i suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships
 as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward
 freights and homeward cargoes. there does not seem to be much of the
 athlete about you.”
 
“for shame, sir,” answered ulysses, fiercely, “you are an insolent
 fellow—so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in
 speech, person, and understanding. one man may be of weak presence, but
 heaven has adorned this with such good conversation that charms
 every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with
 him so that is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever
 goes is looked up to. another may be as handsome as god, but
 his good looks are not crowned with discretion. this is your case. no
 god could make finer looking fellow than you are, but you are fool.
 your ill-judged remarks have made exceedingly angry, and you are
 quite mistaken, for i excel in great many athletic exercises; indeed,
 so long as i had youth and strength, i was among the first athletes of
 the age. now, however, i am worn out by labour and sorrow, for i have
 gone through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of the
 weary sea; still, in spite of all this i will compete, for your taunts
 have stung to the quick.”
 
so hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized disc,
 larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the phaeacians
 when disc-throwing among themselves.68 then, swinging it back, threw
 it from his brawny hand, and it made humming sound in the air as he
 did so. the phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it
 sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been
 made yet. minerva, in the form of man, came and marked the place
 where it had fallen. “a blind man, sir,” said she, “could easily tell
 your mark by groping for it—it is so far ahead of any other. you may
 make your mind easy about this contest, for phaeacian can come near
 to such throw as yours.”
 
ulysses was glad when found had friend among the lookers-on, so
 began to speak more pleasantly. “young men,” said he, “come up to
 that throw if you can, and i will throw another disc as heavy or even
 heavier. if anyone wants to have bout with let him come on, for i
 am exceedingly angry; i will box, wrestle, or run, i do not care what
 it is, with any man of you all except laodamas, but not with him
 because i am his guest, and one cannot compete with one’s own personal
 friend. at least i do not think it prudent or sensible thing for a
 guest to challenge his host’s family at any game, especially when is
 in foreign country. will cut the ground from under his own feet if
 does; but i make exception as regards any one else, for i want to
 have the matter out and know which is the best man. i am good hand at
 every kind of athletic sport known among mankind. i am an excellent
 archer. in battle i am always the first to bring man down with my
 arrow, matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me.
 philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than i could when
 we achaeans were before troy and in practice. i far excel every one
 else in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of
 the earth, but i should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such
 as hercules, or eurytus the oechalian—men who could shoot against the
 gods themselves. this in fact was how eurytus came prematurely by his
 end, for apollo was angry with him and killed him because challenged
 him as an archer. i can throw dart farther than any one else can
 shoot an arrow. running is the only point in respect of which i am
 afraid some of the phaeacians might beat me, for i have been brought
 down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore i am still
 weak.”
 
they all held their peace except king alcinous, who began, “sir, we
 have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which
 i understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been
 displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one
 of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who
 knows how to talk with propriety. i hope you will apprehend my meaning,
 and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining with
 yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary
 aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. we are not particularly
 remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly
 fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. we are extremely fond of good
 dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen,
 warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best
 dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be
 able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as
 sailors, runners, dancers, and minstrels. demodocus has left his lyre
 at my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him.”
 
on this servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house,
 and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. it was
 their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so they
 made the ground smooth and marked wide space for the dancers.
 presently the servant came back with demodocus’s lyre, and took his
 place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town
 began to foot and trip it so nimbly that ulysses was delighted with the
 merry twinkling of their feet.
 
meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of mars and venus, and how
 they first began their intrigue in the house of vulcan. mars made venus
 many presents, and defiled king vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who
 saw what they were about, told vulcan. vulcan was very angry when he
 heard such dreadful news, so went to his smithy brooding mischief,
 got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains
 which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there
 in that place.69 when had finished his snare went into his
 bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs;
 also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. not even
 god could see them so fine and subtle were they. as soon as had
 spread the chains all over the bed, made as though were setting
 out for the fair state of lemnos, which of all places in the world was
 the one was most fond of. but mars kept blind look out, and as
 soon as saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love
 for venus.
 
now venus was just come in from visit to her father jove, and was
 about sitting down when mars came inside the house, and said as took
 her hand in his own, “let us go to the couch of vulcan: is not at
 home, but is gone off to lemnos among the sintians, whose speech is
 barbarous.”
 
she was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,
 whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning vulcan had spread
 for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too
 late that they were in trap. then vulcan came up to them, for had
 turned back before reaching lemnos, when his scout the sun told him
 what was going on. was in furious passion, and stood in the
 vestibule making dreadful noise as shouted to all the gods.
 
“father jove,” cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live for
 ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that i
 will show you. jove’s daughter venus is always dishonouring because
 i am lame. she is in love with mars, who is handsome and clean built,
 whereas i am cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not i;
 they ought never to have begotten me. come and see the pair together
 asleep on my bed. it makes furious to look at them. they are very
 fond of one another, but i do not think they will lie there longer than
 they can help, nor do i think that they will sleep much; there,
 however, they shall stay till her father has repaid the sum i gave
 him for his baggage of daughter, who is fair but not honest.”
 
on this the gods gathered to the house of vulcan. earth-encircling
 neptune came, and mercury the bringer of luck, and king apollo, but the
 goddesses staid at home all of them for shame. then the givers of all
 good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with
 inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning vulcan had been,
 whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:
 
“ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. see how
 limping vulcan, lame as is, has caught mars who is the fleetest god
 in heaven; and now mars will be cast in heavy damages.”
 
thus did they converse, but king apollo said to mercury, “messenger
 mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains
 were, would you, if you could sleep with venus?”
 
“king apollo,” answered mercury, “i only wish i might get the chance,
 though there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, all
 of you, gods and goddesses, but i would sleep with her if i could.”
 
the immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but neptune
 took it all seriously, and kept on imploring vulcan to set mars free
 again. “let him go,” cried, “and i will undertake, as you require,
 that shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among
 the immortal gods.”
 
“do not,” replied vulcan, “ask to do this; bad man’s bond is bad
 security; what remedy could i enforce against you if mars should go
 away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?”
 
“vulcan,” said neptune, “if mars goes away without paying his damages,
 i will pay you myself.” so vulcan answered, “in this case i cannot and
 must not refuse you.”
 
thereon loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were
 free they scampered off, mars to thrace and laughter-loving venus to
 cyprus and to paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with
 burnt offerings. here the graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil
 of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her
 in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.
 
thus sang the bard, and both ulysses and the seafaring phaeacians were
 charmed as they heard him.
 
then alcinous told laodamas and halius to dance alone, for there was no
 one to compete with them. so they took red ball which polybus had
 made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up
 towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and
 caught it with ease before it came down again. when they had done
 throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at
 the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one
 another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made great
 stamping with their feet. then ulysses said:
 
“king alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the
 world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. i was
 astonished as i saw them.”
 
the king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the phaeacians,
 “aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be person of
 singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he
 may reasonably expect. there are twelve chief men among you, and
 counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, clean
 cloak, shirt, and talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in
 lump down at once, so that when gets his supper may do so with
 light heart. as for euryalus will have to make formal apology
 and present too, for has been rude.”
 
thus did speak. the others all of them applauded his saying, and
 sent their servants to fetch the presents. then euryalus said, “king
 alcinous, i will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. he
 shall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of
 silver. i will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into
 which it fits. it will be worth great deal to him.”
 
as spoke placed the sword in the hands of ulysses and said, “good
 luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the
 winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you safe return,
 for i understand you have been long away from home, and have gone
 through much hardship.”
 
to which ulysses answered, “good luck to you too my friend, and may the
 gods grant you every happiness. i hope you will not miss the sword you
 have given along with your apology.”
 
with these words girded the sword about his shoulders and towards
 sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of
 the donors kept bringing them to the house of king alcinous; here his
 sons received them, and placed them under their mother’s charge. then
 alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.
 
“wife,” said he, turning to queen arete, “go, fetch the best chest we
 have, and put clean cloak and shirt in it. also, set copper on the
 fire and heat some water; our guest will take warm bath; see also to
 the careful packing of the presents that the noble phaeacians have made
 him; will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that
 will follow. i shall myself give him this golden goblet—which is of
 exquisite workmanship—that may be reminded of for the rest of his
 life whenever makes drink offering to jove, or to any of the
 gods.”70
 
then arete told her maids to set large tripod upon the fire as fast
 as they could, whereon they set tripod full of bath water on to a
 clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became
 hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod.71 meanwhile
 arete brought magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it she
 packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the
 phaeacians had brought. lastly she added cloak and good shirt from
 alcinous, and said to ulysses:
 
“see to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for
 fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your
 ship.” 72
 
when ulysses heard this put the lid on the chest and made it fast
 with bond that circe had taught him. had done so before an upper
 servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. was very glad
 of warm bath, for had had one to wait upon him ever since he
 left the house of calypso, who as long as remained with her had
 taken as good care of him as though had been god. when the
 servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him
 clean cloak and shirt, left the bath room and joined the guests
 who were sitting over their wine. lovely nausicaa stood by one of the
 bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as
 she saw him pass. “farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget when
 you are safe at home again, for it is to first that you owe ransom
 for having saved your life.”
 
and ulysses said, “nausicaa, daughter of great alcinous, may jove the
 mighty husband of juno, grant that i may reach my home; so shall i
 bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved
 me.”
 
when had said this, seated himself beside alcinous. supper was
 then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. servant led in the
 favourite bard demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near
 one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that might lean
 against it. then ulysses cut off piece of roast pork with plenty of
 fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to servant,
 “take this piece of pork over to demodocus and tell him to eat it; for
 all the pain his lays may cause i will salute him none the less;
 bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse
 teaches them their songs and loves them.”
 
the servant carried the pork in his fingers over to demodocus, who took
 it and was very much pleased. they then laid their hands on the good
 things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and
 drink, ulysses said to demodocus, “demodocus, there is one in the
 world whom i admire more than i do you. you must have studied under the
 muse, jove’s daughter, and under apollo, so accurately do you sing the
 return of the achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. if you
 were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who
 was. now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse
 which epeus made with the assistance of minerva, and which ulysses got
 by stratagem into the fort of troy after freighting it with the men who
 afterwards sacked the city. if you will sing this tale aright i will
 tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”
 
the bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some
 of the argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others,
 hidden within the horse,73 were waiting with ulysses in the trojan
 place of assembly. for the trojans themselves had drawn the horse into
 their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it,
 and were in three minds as to what they should do. some were for
 breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top
 of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the
 precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering
 and propitiation for the gods. and this was how they settled it in the
 end, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which
 were all the bravest of the argives waiting to bring death and
 destruction on the trojans. anon sang how the sons of the achaeans
 issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their
 ambuscade. sang how they overran the city hither and thither and
 ravaged it, and how ulysses went raging like mars along with menelaus
 to the house of deiphobus. it was there that the fight raged most
 furiously, nevertheless by minerva’s help was victorious.
 
all this told, but ulysses was overcome as heard him, and his
 cheeks were wet with tears. wept as woman weeps when she throws
 herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city
 and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. she
 screams aloud and flings her arms about him as lies gasping for
 breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back
 and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to life of labour and
 sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously did
 ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
 alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
 that was heaving. the king, therefore, at once rose and said:
 
“aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians, let demodocus cease
 his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. from
 the moment that we had done supper and demodocus began to sing, our
 guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. is evidently in
 great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy
 ourselves, hosts and guest alike. this will be much more as it should
 be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we
 are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any one
 with even moderate amount of right feeling knows that ought to
 treat guest and suppliant as though were his own brother.
 
“therefore, sir, do you on your part affect more concealment nor
 reserve in the matter about which i shall ask you; it will be more
 polite in you to give plain answer; tell the name by which your
 father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were
 known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. there is one,
 neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for
 people’s fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.
 tell also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape
 their purpose accordingly and take you there. for the phaeacians have
 pilots; their vessels have rudders as those of other nations
 have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are
 thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the
 whole world, and can traverse the just as well even when it is
 covered with mist and cloud, so that there is danger of being
 wrecked or coming to any harm. still i do remember hearing my father
 say that neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the
 matter of giving people escorts. said that one of these days he
 should wreck ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted
 some one,74 and bury our city under high mountain. this is what my
 father used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or no
 is matter which will decide for himself.
 
“and now, tell and tell true. where have you been wandering, and
 in what countries have you travelled? tell us of the peoples
 themselves, and of their cities—who were hostile, savage and
 uncivilised, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. tell us
 also why you are made so unhappy on hearing about the return of the
 argive danaans from troy. the gods arranged all this, and sent them
 their misfortunes in order that future generations might have something
 to sing about. did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when you
 were before troy? son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearest
 relations man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some
 brave and kindly-natured comrade—for good friend is as dear to man
 as his own brother?”
 



book ix
 

ulysses declares himself and begins his story—-the cicons, lotophagi,
 and cyclopes.
 

and ulysses answered, “king alcinous, it is good thing to hear bard
 with such divine voice as this man has. there is nothing better or
 more delightful than when whole people make merry together, with the
 guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
 and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every
 man. this is indeed as fair sight as man can see. now, however,
 since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my
 own sad memories in respect of them, i do not know how to begin, nor
 yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has
 been laid heavily upon me.
 
“firstly, then, i will tell you my name that you too may know it, and
 one day, if i outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though
 i live so far away from all of you. i am ulysses of laertes,
 renowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame
 ascends to heaven. i live in ithaca, where there is high mountain
 called neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is a
 group of islands very near to one another—dulichium, same, and the
 wooded island of zacynthus. it lies squat on the horizon, all highest
 up in the towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it
 towards dawn.75 it is rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my
 eyes know none that they better love to look upon. the goddess calypso
 kept with her in her cave, and wanted to marry her, as did also
 the cunning aeaean goddess circe; but they could neither of them
 persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to man than his own country
 and his parents, and however splendid home may have in foreign
 country, if it be far from father or mother, does not care about it.
 now, however, i will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by
 jove’s will i met with on my return from troy.
 
“when i had set sail thence the wind took first to ismarus, which is
 the city of the cicons. there i sacked the town and put the people to
 the sword. we took their wives and also much booty, which we divided
 equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. i
 then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very
 foolishly would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine and
 killing great numbers of sheep and oxen on the shore. meanwhile the
 cicons cried out for help to other cicons who lived inland. these were
 more in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of
 war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the
 occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as
 leaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so
 that we were hard pressed. they set the battle in array near the ships,
 and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.76 so long
 as the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against
 them, though they were more in number than we; but as the sun went
 down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the cicons got the
 better of us, and we lost half dozen men from every ship we had; so
 we got away with those that were left.
 
“thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have
 escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we
 had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the
 hands of the cicons. then jove raised the north wind against us till it
 blew hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and
 night sprang forth out of the heavens. we let the ships run before the
 gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took
 them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the
 land. there we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from
 toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again
 raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and
 steersmen direct our ship. i should have got home at that time unharmed
 had not the north wind and the currents been against as i was
 doubling cape malea, and set off my course hard by the island of
 cythera.
 
“i was driven thence by foul winds for space of nine days upon the
 sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the lotus-eaters, who
 live on food that comes from kind of flower. here we landed to take
 in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near
 the ships. when they had eaten and drunk i sent two of my company to
 see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had a
 third man under them. they started at once, and went about among the
 lotus-eaters, who did them hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus,
 which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about
 home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to
 them, but were for staying and munching lotus77 with the lotus-eaters
 without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they
 wept bitterly i forced them back to the ships and made them fast under
 the benches. then i told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of
 them should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so
 they took their places and smote the grey with their oars.
 
“we sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of
 the lawless and inhuman cyclopes. now the cyclopes neither plant nor
 plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and
 grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes
 yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. they have no
 laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of
 high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no
 account of their neighbours.
 
“now off their harbour there lies wooded and fertile island not quite
 close to the land of the cyclopes, but still not far. it is over-run
 with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never
 disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen—who as rule will suffer so
 much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices—do not go there,
 nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies wilderness
 untilled and unsown from year to year, and has living thing upon it
 but only goats. for the cyclopes have ships, nor yet shipwrights who
 could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city,
 or sail over the to one another’s country as people who have ships
 can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island,78
 for it is very good one, and would yield everything in due season.
 there are meadows that in some places come right down to the shore,
 well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there
 excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always
 yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. there is good
 harbour where cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need ship be
 moored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vessel and stay there
 till the wind becomes fair for putting out to again. at the head of
 the harbour there is spring of clear water coming out of cave, and
 there are poplars growing all round it.
 
“here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have
 brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. thick mist
 hung all round our ships;79 the moon was hidden behind mass of clouds
 so that one could have seen the island if had looked for it, nor
 were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we
 found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the
 ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach
 till daybreak.
 
“when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn appeared, we admired the
 island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs jove’s daughters
 roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. on
 this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and
 dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. heaven
 sent us excellent sport; i had twelve ships with me, and each ship got
 nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to
 the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plenty
 of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we
 sacked the city of the cicons, and this had not yet run out. while we
 were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the
 cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires.
 we could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their
 sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we
 camped down upon the beach, and next morning i called council.
 
“‘stay here, my brave fellows,’ said i, ‘all the rest of you, while i
 go with my ship and exploit these people myself: i want to see if they
 are uncivilised savages, or hospitable and humane race.’
 
“i went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers;
 so they took their places and smote the grey with their oars. when
 we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of cliff
 near the sea, we saw great cave overhung with laurels. it was a
 station for great many sheep and goats, and outside there was large
 yard, with high wall round it made of stones built into the ground
 and of trees both pine and oak. this was the abode of huge monster
 who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. would have
 nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. was
 horrid creature, not like human being at all, but resembling rather
 some crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of high
 mountain.
 
“i told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all
 but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. i
 also took goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given by
 maron, of euanthes, who was priest of apollo the patron god of
 ismarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. when we
 were sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also
 his wife and child; so made some presents of great value—seven
 talents of fine gold, and bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet
 wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. not man nor maid
 in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and one
 housekeeper: when drank it mixed twenty parts of water to one of
 wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that
 it was impossible to refrain from drinking. i filled large skin with
 this wine, and took wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind
 misgave that i might have to deal with some savage who would be of
 great strength, and would respect neither right nor law.
 
“we soon reached his cave, but was out shepherding, so we went
 inside and took stock of all that we could see. his cheese-racks were
 loaded with cheeses, and had more lambs and kids than his pens could
 hold. they were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets,
 then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones80
 all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels,
 bowls, and milk pails into which milked, were swimming with whey.
 when they saw all this, my men begged to let them first steal some
 cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return,
 drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with
 them. it would have been indeed better if we had done so but i would
 not listen to them, for i wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope
 that might give present. when, however, we saw him my poor men
 found him ill to deal with.
 
“we lit fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of
 them, and then sat waiting till the cyclops should come in with his
 sheep. when came, brought in with him huge load of dry firewood
 to light the fire for his supper, and this flung with such noise
 on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far
 end of the cavern. meanwhile drove all the ewes inside, as well as
 the she-goats that was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams
 and he-goats, outside in the yards. then rolled huge stone to the
 mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled
 waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the
 doorway. when had so done sat down and milked his ewes and goats,
 all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young. he
 curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the
 other half poured into bowls that might drink it for his supper.
 when had got through with all his work, lit the fire, and then
 caught sight of us, whereon said:
 
“‘strangers, who are you? where do sail from? are you traders, or do
 you sail the as rovers, with your hands against every man, and
 every man’s hand against you?’
 
“we were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
 form, but i managed to say, ‘we are achaeans on our way home from troy,
 but by the will of jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far
 out of our course. we are the people of agamemnon, of atreus, who
 has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
 city and killing so many people. we therefore humbly pray you to show
 us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors
 may reasonably expect. may your excellency fear the wrath of heaven,
 for we are your suppliants, and jove takes all respectable travellers
 under his protection, for is the avenger of all suppliants and
 foreigners in distress.’
 
“to this gave but pitiless answer, ‘stranger,’ said he, ‘you
 are fool, or else you know nothing of this country. talk to me,
 indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? we cyclopes do
 not care about jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so
 much stronger than they. i shall not spare either yourself or your
 companions out of any regard for jove, unless i am in the humour for
 doing so. and now tell where you made your ship fast when you came
 on shore. was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the
 land?’
 
“he said this to draw out, but i was too cunning to be caught in
 that way, so i answered with lie; ‘neptune,’ said i, ‘sent my ship on
 to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. we were
 driven on to them from the open sea, but i and those who are with me
 escaped the jaws of death.’
 
“the cruel wretch vouchsafed not one word of answer, but with a
 sudden clutch gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
 upon the ground as though they had been puppies. their brains were shed
 upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. then tore
 them limb from limb and supped upon them. gobbled them up like a
 lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without
 leaving anything uneaten. as for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to
 heaven on seeing such horrid sight, for we did not know what else to
 do; but when the cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed
 down his meal of human flesh with drink of neat milk, stretched
 himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep.
 i was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into
 his vitals, but i reflected that if i did we should all certainly be
 lost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monster
 had put in front of the door. so we stayed sobbing and sighing where we
 were till morning came.
 
“when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, again lit
 his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let
 each have her own young one; as soon as had got through with all his
 work, clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
 morning’s meal. presently, with the utmost ease, rolled the stone
 away from the door and drove out his sheep, but at once put it back
 again—as easily as though were merely clapping the lid on to a
 quiver full of arrows. as soon as had done so shouted, and cried
 ‘shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so i
 was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself
 with glory.
 
“in the end i deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: the
 cyclops had great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it
 was of green olive wood, and had cut it intending to use it for a
 staff as soon as it should be dry. it was so huge that we could only
 compare it to the mast of twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
 burden, and able to venture out into open sea. i went up to this club
 and cut off about six feet of it; i then gave this piece to the men and
 told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
 and lastly i brought it to point myself, charring the end in the fire
 to make it harder. when i had done this i hid it under dung, which was
 lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of
 them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the
 monster’s eye while was asleep. the lot fell upon the very four whom
 i should have chosen, and i myself made five. in the evening the wretch
 came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—this
 time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; i
 suppose some fancy must have taken him, or god must have prompted him
 to do so. as soon as had put the stone back to its place against the
 door, sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and
 then let each have her own young one; when had got through with all
 this work, gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off
 them. so i went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my
 hands:
 
“‘look here, cyclops,’ said i, you have been eating great deal of
 man’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
 kind of liquor we had on board my ship. i was bringing it to you as a
 drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon and
 further on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and
 raving most intolerably. you ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can
 you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this
 way?’
 
“he then took the cup and drank. was so delighted with the taste of
 the wine that begged for another bowl full. ‘be so kind,’ he
 said, ‘as to give some more, and tell your name at once. i want
 to make you present that you will be glad to have. we have wine even
 in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but
 this drinks like nectar and ambrosia all in one.’
 
“i then gave him some more; three times did i fill the bowl for him,
 and three times did drain it without thought or heed; then, when i
 saw that the wine had got into his head, i said to him as plausibly as
 i could: ‘cyclops, you ask my name and i will tell it you; give me,
 therefore, the present you promised me; my name is noman; this is what
 my father and mother and my friends have always called me.’
 
“but the cruel wretch said, ‘then i will eat all noman’s comrades
 before noman himself, and will keep noman for the last. this is the
 present that i will make him.’
 
“as spoke reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
 his great neck hung heavily backwards and deep sleep took hold upon
 him. presently turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets
 of human flesh on which had been gorging, for was very drunk.
 then i thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and
 encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. when the
 wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, i drew it out of the
 fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had
 filled their hearts with courage. we drove the sharp end of the beam
 into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight i kept
 turning it round and round as though i were boring hole in ship’s
 plank with an auger, which two men with wheel and strap can keep on
 turning as long as they choose. even thus did we bore the red hot beam
 into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked
 it round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded
 his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the
 fire. as blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to
 temper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and it makes a
 great hiss as does so, even thus did the cyclops’ eye hiss round the
 beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. we
 ran away in fright, but plucked the beam all besmirched with gore
 from his eye, and hurled it from him in frenzy of rage and pain,
 shouting as did so to the other cyclopes who lived on the bleak
 headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave
 when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.
 
“‘what ails you, polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such noise,
 breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able
 to sleep? surely man is carrying off your sheep? surely man is
 trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’
 
“but polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘noman is killing
 by fraud; man is killing by force.’
 
“‘then,’ said they, ‘if man is attacking you, you must be ill; when
 jove makes people ill, there is help for it, and you had better pray
 to your father neptune.’
 
“then they went away, and i laughed inwardly at the success of my
 clever stratagem, but the cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,
 felt about with his hands till found the stone and took it from the
 door; then sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it
 to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for thought i might be
 foolish enough to attempt this.
 
“as for myself i kept on puzzling to think how i could best save my own
 life and those of my companions; i schemed and schemed, as one who
 knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. in
 the end i deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were
 well grown, and carried heavy black fleece, so i bound them
 noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which the
 wicked monster used to sleep. there was to be man under the middle
 sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there were
 three sheep to each man. as for myself there was ram finer than any
 of the others, so i caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in
 the thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece,
 face upwards, keeping firm hold on it all the time.
 
“thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but
 when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, the male sheep
 hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens
 waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
 master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they
 stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were
 underneath their bellies. as the ram was going out, last of all, heavy
 with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, polyphemus laid
 hold of it and said:
 
“‘my good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
 morning? you are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the
 mob with run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are
 the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. is
 it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because
 that wicked noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and
 blinded him? but i will have his life yet. if you could understand and
 talk, you would tell where the wretch is hiding, and i would dash
 his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. i should
 thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good noman has done
 me.’
 
“as spoke drove the ram outside, but when we were little way
 out from the cave and yards, i first got from under the ram’s belly,
 and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
 constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them
 down to the ship. the crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who
 had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the cyclops had killed.
 however, i made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to
 hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once
 and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote
 the grey with their oars. then, when i had got as far out as my
 voice would reach, i began to jeer at the cyclops.
 
“‘cyclops,’ said i, ‘you should have taken better measure of your man
 before eating up his comrades in your cave. you wretch, eat up your
 visitors in your own house? you might have known that your would
 find you out, and now jove and the other gods have punished you.’
 
“he got more and more furious as heard me, so tore the top from
 off high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it
 was within little of hitting the end of the rudder.81 the quaked
 as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us
 back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. but i
 snatched up long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men
 by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they
 laid out with will. when we had got twice as far as we were before, i
 was for jeering at the cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of
 to hold my tongue.
 
“‘do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savage
 creature further; has thrown one rock at us already which drove us
 back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of
 us; if had then heard any further sound of voices would have
 pounded our heads and our ship’s timbers into jelly with the rugged
 rocks would have heaved at us, for can throw them long way.’
 
“but i would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
 ‘cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
 spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior ulysses, of
 laertes, who lives in ithaca.’
 
“on this groaned, and cried out, ‘alas, alas, then the old prophecy
 about is coming true. there was prophet here, at one time, man
 both brave and of great stature, telemus of eurymus, who was an
 excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the cyclopes till he
 grew old; told that all this would happen to some day, and
 said i should lose my sight by the hand of ulysses. i have been all
 along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength,
 whereas turns out to be little insignificant weakling, who has
 managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of in my drink; come
 here, then, ulysses, that i may make you presents to show my
 hospitality, and urge neptune to help you forward on your journey—for
 neptune and i are father and son. he, if so will, shall heal me,
 which one else neither god nor man can do.’
 
“then i said, ‘i wish i could be as sure of killing you outright and
 sending you down to the house of hades, as i am that it will take more
 than neptune to cure that eye of yours.’
 
“on this lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
 saying, ‘hear me, great neptune; if i am indeed your own true begotten
 son, grant that ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if must
 get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
 after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man’s ship
 and find trouble in his house.’82
 
“thus did pray, and neptune heard his prayer. then picked up a
 rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
 prodigious force. it fell just short of the ship, but was within a
 little of hitting the end of the rudder. the quaked as the rock
 fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on
 our way towards the shore of the island.
 
“when at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
 ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our
 return. we ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the
 shore; we also landed the cyclops’ sheep, and divided them
 equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. as for
 the ram, my companions agreed that i should have it as an extra share;
 so i sacrificed it on the shore, and burned its thigh bones to
 jove, who is the lord of all. but heeded not my sacrifice, and only
 thought how might destroy both my ships and my comrades.
 
“thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
 our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on
 dark, we camped upon the beach. when the child of morning rosy-fingered
 dawn appeared, i bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. then they
 took their places and smote the grey with their oars; so we sailed
 on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
 had lost our comrades.
 



book x
 

aeolus, the laestrygones, circe.
 

“thence we went on to the aeolian island where lives aeolus of
 hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. it is an island that floats (as it
 were) upon the sea,83 iron bound with wall that girds it. now, aeolus
 has six daughters and six lusty sons, so made the sons marry the
 daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,
 feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. all day long
 the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats
 till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their
 well made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. these
 were the people among whom we had now come.
 
“aeolus entertained for whole month asking questions all the
 time about troy, the argive fleet, and the return of the achaeans. i
 told him exactly how everything had happened, and when i said i must
 go, and asked him to further on my way, made sort of
 difficulty, but set about doing so at once. moreover, flayed a
 prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which shut up
 in the hide as in sack—for jove had made him captain over the winds,
 and could stir or still each one of them according to his own
 pleasure. put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly
 with silver thread that not even breath of side-wind could blow
 from any quarter. the west wind which was fair for us did alone let
 blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through
 our own folly.
 
“nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native
 land showed on the horizon. we got so close in that we could see the
 stubble fires burning, and i, being then dead beat, fell into light
 sleep, for i had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we
 might get home the faster. on this the men fell to talking among
 themselves, and said i was bringing back gold and silver in the sack
 that aeolus had given me. ‘bless my heart,’ would one turn to his
 neighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends to
 whatever city or country may go. see what fine prizes is taking
 home from troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as has,
 come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now aeolus has
 given him ever so much more. quick—let us see what it all is, and how
 much gold and silver there is in the sack gave him.’
 
“thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. they loosed the sack,
 whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised storm that carried
 us weeping out to and away from our own country. then i awoke, and
 knew not whether to throw myself into the or to live on and make
 the best of it; but i bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the
 ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our
 fleet back to the aeolian island.
 
“when we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by
 the ships. immediately after dinner i took herald and one of my men
 and went straight to the house of aeolus, where i found him feasting
 with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the
 threshold. they were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘ulysses,
 what brings you here? what god has been ill-treating you? we took great
 pains to further you on your way home to ithaca, or wherever it was
 that you wanted to go to.’
 
“thus did they speak, but i answered sorrowfully, ‘my men have undone
 me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. my friends, mend this
 mischief, for you can if you will.’
 
“i spoke as movingly as i could, but they said nothing, till their
 father answered, ‘vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the
 island; him whom heaven hates will i in wise help. be off, for you
 come here as one abhorred of heaven.’ and with these words sent me
 sorrowing from his door.
 
“thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and
 fruitless rowing, for there was longer any wind to help them. six
 days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the
 rocky stronghold of lamus—telepylus, the city of the laestrygonians,
 where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]
 salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last
 answers the salute. in that country man who could do without sleep
 might earn double wages, one as herdsman of cattle, and another as a
 shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day.84
 
“when we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep
 cliffs, with narrow entrance between two headlands. my captains took
 all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for
 there was never so much as breath of wind inside, but it was always
 dead calm. i kept my own ship outside, and moored it to rock at the
 very end of the point; then i climbed high rock to reconnoitre, but
 could see sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising
 from the ground. so i sent two of my company with an attendant to find
 out what sort of people the inhabitants were.
 
“the men when they got on shore followed level road by which the
 people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till
 presently they met young woman who had come outside to fetch water,
 and who was daughter to laestrygonian named antiphates. she was going
 to the fountain artacia from which the people bring in their water, and
 when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of
 that country might be, and over what kind of people ruled; so she
 directed them to her father’s house, but when they got there they found
 his wife to be giantess as huge as mountain, and they were
 horrified at the sight of her.
 
“she at once called her husband antiphates from the place of assembly,
 and forthwith set about killing my men. snatched up one of them,
 and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other
 two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. but antiphates
 raised hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy laestrygonians
 sprang up from every quarter—ogres, not men. they threw vast rocks at
 us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and i heard the
 horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the
 death cries of my men, as the laestrygonians speared them like fishes
 and took them home to eat them. while they were thus killing my men
 within the harbour i drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and
 told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare like
 the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough
 when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at
 us. as for the others there was not one of them left.
 
“thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had
 lost our comrades, and came to the aeaean island, where circe lives—a
 great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician aeetes—for
 they are both children of the sun by perse, who is daughter to oceanus.
 we brought our ship into safe harbour without word, for some god
 guided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two
 nights, worn out in body and mind. when the morning of the third day
 came i took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to
 reconnoitre, and see if i could discover signs of human handiwork, or
 hear the sound of voices. climbing to the top of high look-out i
 espied the smoke of circe’s house rising upwards amid dense forest of
 trees, and when i saw this i doubted whether, having seen the smoke, i
 would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end i deemed it
 best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some
 of them instead of going myself.
 
“when i had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
 solitude, and sent fine antlered stag right into the middle of my
 path. was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
 river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as passed i struck him
 in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean
 through him, and lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of
 him. then i set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and
 laid it down; i also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them
 into fathom or so of good stout rope, with which i bound the four
 feet of the noble creature together; having so done i hung him round my
 neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag
 was much too big for to be able to carry him on my shoulder,
 steadying him with one hand. as i threw him down in front of the ship,
 i called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘look
 here my friends,’ said i, ‘we are not going to die so much before our
 time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have
 got something to eat and drink on board.’ on this they uncovered their
 heads upon the shore and admired the stag, for was indeed a
 splendid fellow. then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him
 sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.
 
“thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
 there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it
 came on dark, we camped upon the shore. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, i called council and said, ‘my friends,
 we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. we have no
 idea where the sun either sets or rises,85 so that we do not even know
 east from west. i see way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and
 find one. we are certainly on an island, for i went as high as i could
 this morning, and saw the reaching all round it to the horizon; it
 lies low, but towards the middle i saw smoke rising from out of thick
 forest of trees.’
 
“their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had
 been treated by the laestrygonian antiphates, and by the savage ogre
 polyphemus. they wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing
 to be got by crying, so i divided them into two companies and set a
 captain over each; i gave one company to eurylochus, while i took
 command of the other myself. then we cast lots in helmet, and the lot
 fell upon eurylochus; so set out with his twenty-two men, and they
 wept, as also did we who were left behind.
 
“when they reached circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, on
 site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. there
 were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor
 bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
 into subjection. they did not attack my men, but wagged their great
 tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against
 them.86 as hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming
 from dinner—for they know will bring them something—even so did
 these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the
 men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.
 presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as they
 stood there they could hear circe within, singing most beautifully as
 she worked at her loom, making web so fine, so soft, and of such
 dazzling colours as one but goddess could weave. on this polites,
 whom i valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘there
 is some one inside working at loom and singing most beautifully; the
 whole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is
 woman or goddess.’
 
“they called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them
 enter. they, thinking evil, followed her, all except eurylochus, who
 suspected mischief and staid outside. when she had got them into her
 house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them mess with
 cheese, honey, meal, and pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked
 poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she
 turned them into pigs by stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her
 pig-styes. they were like pigs—head, hair, and all, and they grunted
 just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they
 remembered everything.
 
“thus then were they shut up squealing, and circe threw them some
 acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but eurylochus hurried back to
 tell about the sad fate of our comrades. was so overcome with
 dismay that though tried to speak could find words to do so;
 his eyes filled with tears and could only sob and sigh, till at last
 we forced his story out of him, and told us what had happened to the
 others.
 
“‘we went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in the
 middle of it there was fine house built with cut stones in place
 that could be seen from far. there we found woman, or else she was a
 goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to
 her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and
 invited us in. the others did not suspect any mischief so they followed
 her into the house, but i staid where i was, for i thought there might
 be some treachery. from that moment i saw them more, for not one of
 them ever came out, though i sat long time watching for them.’
 
“then i took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; i also
 took my bow, and told eurylochus to come back with and shew the
 way. but laid hold of with both his hands and spoke piteously,
 saying, ‘sir, do not force to go with you, but let stay here, for
 i know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return
 alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with
 the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.’
 
“‘stay where you are, then,’ answered i, ‘eating and drinking at the
 ship, but i must go, for i am most urgently bound to do so.’
 
“with this i left the ship and went up inland. when i got through the
 charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress circe, i
 met mercury with his golden wand, disguised as young man in the
 hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
 face. came up to and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘my
 poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone
 and without knowing the way? your men are shut up in circe’s pigstyes,
 like so many wild boars in their lairs. you surely do not fancy that
 you can set them free? i can tell you that you will never get back and
 will have to stay there with the rest of them. but never mind, i will
 protect you and get you out of your difficulty. take this herb, which
 is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to circe’s
 house, it will be talisman to you against every kind of mischief.
 
“‘and i will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that circe will try
 to practice upon you. she will mix mess for you to drink, and she
 will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to
 charm you, for the virtue of the herb that i shall give you will
 prevent her spells from working. i will tell you all about it. when
 circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as
 though you were going to kill her. she will then be frightened, and
 will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank
 refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to take
 good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all
 the blessed gods that she will plot further mischief against you, or
 else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for
 nothing.’
 
“as spoke pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed what it
 was like. the root was black, while the flower was as white as milk;
 the gods call it moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods
 can do whatever they like.
 
“then mercury went back to high olympus passing over the wooded island;
 but i fared onward to the house of circe, and my heart was clouded with
 care as i walked along. when i got to the gates i stood there and
 called the goddess, and as soon as she heard she came down, opened
 the door, and asked to come in; so i followed her—much troubled in
 my mind. she set on richly decorated seat inlaid with silver,
 there was footstool also under my feet, and she mixed mess in a
 golden goblet for to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me
 mischief. when she had given it me, and i had drunk it without its
 charming me, she struck with her wand. ‘there now,’ she cried, ‘be
 off to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’
 
“but i rushed at her with my sword drawn as though i would kill her,
 whereon she fell with loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke
 piteously, saying, ‘who and whence are you? from what place and people
 have you come? how can it be that my drugs have power to charm you?
 never yet was any man able to stand so much as taste of the herb i
 gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than
 the bold hero ulysses, who mercury always said would come here some day
 with his ship while on his way home from troy; so be it then; sheathe
 your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to
 trust each other.’
 
“and i answered, ‘circe, how can you expect to be friendly with you
 when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? and now that you
 have got here myself, you mean mischief when you ask to go to
 bed with you, and will unman and make fit for nothing. i shall
 certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take
 your solemn oath to plot further harm against me.’
 
“so she swore at once as i had told her, and when she had completed her
 oath then i went to bed with her.
 
“meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their
 work. they are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the
 holy waters that run down into the sea. one of them spread fair
 purple cloth over seat, and laid carpet underneath it. another
 brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of
 gold. third mixed some sweet wine with water in silver bowl and put
 golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set
 it to boil in large cauldron over good fire which she had lighted.
 when the water in the cauldron was boiling,87 she poured cold into it
 till it was just as i liked it, and then she set in bath and began
 washing from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the
 tire and stiffness out of my limbs. as soon as she had done washing me
 and anointing with oil, she arrayed in good cloak and shirt and
 led to richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a
 footstool also under my feet. maid servant then brought water in a
 beautiful golden ewer and poured it into silver basin for to wash
 my hands, and she drew clean table beside me; an upper servant
 brought bread and offered many things of what there was in the
 house, and then circe bade eat, but i would not, and sat without
 heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.
 
“when circe saw sitting there without eating, and in great grief,
 she came to and said, ‘ulysses, why do you sit like that as though
 you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and
 drink? is it that you are still suspicious? you ought not to be, for i
 have already sworn solemnly that i will not hurt you.’
 
“and i said, ‘circe, man with any sense of what is right can think
 of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his
 friends free and let him see them. if you want to eat and drink, you
 must free my men and bring them to that i may see them with my own
 eyes.’
 
“when i had said this she went straight through the court with her wand
 in her hand and opened the pigstye doors. my men came out like so many
 prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and
 anointed each with second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad
 drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than
 they were before, and much taller and better looking. they knew at
 once, seized each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the
 whole house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, and
 circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to and said,
 ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, go back at once to the where you
 have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. then, hide all
 your ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with
 your men.’
 
“i agreed to this, so i went back to the shore, and found the men
 at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. when they saw the
 silly blubbering fellows began frisking round as calves break out
 and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be
 milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds
 with their lowing. they seemed as glad to see as though they had got
 back to their own rugged ithaca, where they had been born and bred.
 ‘sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see you back
 as though we had got safe home to ithaca; but tell us all about the
 fate of our comrades.’
 
“i spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘we must draw our ship on to
 the land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave;
 then come with all of you as fast as you can to circe’s house, where
 you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great
 abundance.’
 
“on this the men would have come with at once, but eurylochus tried
 to hold them back and said, ‘alas, poor wretches that we are, what will
 become of us? rush not on your ruin by going to the house of circe, who
 will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to
 keep guard over her house. remember how the cyclops treated us when our
 comrades went inside his cave, and ulysses with them. it was all
 through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.’
 
“when i heard him i was in two minds whether or to draw the keen
 blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his
 being near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and
 said, ‘sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the
 ship, but take the rest of us with you to circe’s house.’
 
“on this we all went inland, and eurylochus was not left behind after
 all, but came on too, for was frightened by the severe reprimand
 that i had given him.
 
“meanwhile circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind
 were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them
 woollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all
 comfortably at dinner in her house. as soon as the men saw each other
 face to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud
 till the whole palace rang again. thereon circe came up to and said,
 ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; i
 know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have
 fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so
 stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and
 hearty as you were when you left ithaca; for at present you are
 weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the
 hardships you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no
 more cheerfulness left in you.’
 
“thus did she speak and we assented. we stayed with circe for whole
 twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. but
 when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had
 come round, my men called apart and said, ‘sir, it is time you began
 to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your
 house and native country at all.’
 
“thus did they speak and i assented. thereon through the livelong day
 to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but
 when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down
 to sleep in the covered cloisters. i, however, after i had got into bed
 with circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what
 i had got to say. ‘circe,’ said i, ‘please to keep the promise you made
 about furthering on my homeward voyage. i want to get back and so
 do my men, they are always pestering with their complaints as soon
 as ever your back is turned.’
 
“and the goddess answered, ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, you shall
 none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is
 another journey which you have got to take before you can sail
 homewards. you must go to the house of hades and of dread proserpine to
 consult the ghost of the blind theban prophet teiresias, whose reason
 is still unshaken. to him alone has proserpine left his understanding
 even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.’
 
“i was dismayed when i heard this. i sat up in bed and wept, and would
 gladly have lived longer to see the light of the sun, but presently
 when i was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, i said, ‘and who
 shall guide upon this voyage—for the house of hades is port that
 ship can reach.’
 
“‘you will want guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set your
 white sails, sit quite still, and the north wind will blow you there of
 itself. when your ship has traversed the waters of oceanus, you will
 reach the fertile shore of proserpine’s country with its groves of tall
 poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your
 ship upon the shore of oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of
 hades. you will find it near the place where the rivers pyriphlegethon
 and cocytus (which is branch of the river styx) flow into acheron,
 and you will see rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run
 into one another.
 
“‘when you have reached this spot, as i now tell you, dig trench a
 cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a
 drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then
 wine, and in the third place water—sprinkling white barley meal over
 the whole. moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble
 ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to ithaca you will
 sacrifice barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the
 pyre with good things. more particularly you must promise that
 teiresias shall have black sheep all to himself, the finest in all
 your flocks.
 
“‘when you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer
 them ram and black ewe, bending their heads towards erebus; but
 yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the
 river. on this, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you must
 tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and
 offer them as burnt sacrifice with prayers to hades and to
 proserpine. then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any
 other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before teiresias
 shall have answered your questions. the seer will presently come to
 you, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are to make,
 and how you are to sail the so as to reach your home.’
 
“it was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me
 in my shirt and cloak. as for herself she threw beautiful light
 gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with golden girdle
 round her waist, and she covered her head with mantle. then i went
 about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to
 each of them man by man: ‘you must not lie sleeping here any longer,’
 said i to them, ‘we must be going, for circe has told all about it.’
 and on this they did as i bade them.
 
“even so, however, i did not get them away without misadventure. we had
 with us certain youth named elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or
 courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the
 rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. when heard the
 noise of the men bustling about, jumped up on sudden and forgot
 all about coming down by the main staircase, so tumbled right off
 the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of
 hades.
 
“when i had got the men together i said to them, ‘you think you are
 about to start home again, but circe has explained to that instead
 of this, we have got to go to the house of hades and proserpine to
 consult the ghost of the theban prophet teiresias.’
 
“the men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on
 the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend
 matters by crying. when we reached the shore, weeping and lamenting
 our fate, circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard
 by the ship. she passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,
 for who can see the comings and goings of god, if the god does not
 wish to be seen?
 



book xi
 

the visit to the dead.88
 

“then, when we had got down to the shore we drew our ship into the
 water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on
 board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.
 circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us fair wind that blew
 dead aft and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well
 filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear and let her
 go as the wind and helmsman headed her. all day long her sails were
 full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down
 and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the
 river oceanus, where lie the land and city of the cimmerians who live
 enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce
 neither at his rising nor as goes down again out of the heavens, but
 the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. when we got there
 we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the
 waters of oceanus till we came to the place of which circe had told us.
 
“here perimedes and eurylochus held the victims, while i drew my sword
 and dug the trench cubit each way. i made drink-offering to all the
 dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with
 water, and i sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying
 earnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when i
 got back to ithaca i would sacrifice barren heifer for them, the best
 i had, and would load the pyre with good things. i also particularly
 promised that teiresias should have black sheep to himself, the best
 in all my flocks. when i had prayed sufficiently to the dead, i cut the
 throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon
 the ghosts came trooping up from erebus—brides,89 young bachelors, old
 men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave
 men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched
 with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench
 with strange kind of screaming sound that made turn pale with
 fear. when i saw them coming i told the men to be quick and flay the
 carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and
 at the same time to repeat prayers to hades and to proserpine; but i
 sat where i was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor feckless
 ghosts come near the blood till teiresias should have answered my
 questions.
 
“the first ghost that came was that of my comrade elpenor, for had
 not yet been laid beneath the earth. we had left his body unwaked and
 unburied in circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do. i was
 very sorry for him, and cried when i saw him: ‘elpenor,’ said i, ‘how
 did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? you have got here
 on foot quicker than i have with my ship.’
 
“‘sir,’ answered with groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own
 unspeakable drunkenness. i was lying asleep on the top of circe’s
 house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase
 but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to
 the house of hades. and now i beseech you by all those whom you have
 left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father
 who brought you up when you were child, and by telemachus who is the
 one hope of your house, do what i shall now ask you. i know that when
 you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the aeaean
 island. do not go thence leaving unwaked and unburied behind you, or
 i may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn with whatever armour i
 have, build barrow for on the shore, that may tell people in
 days to come what poor unlucky fellow i was, and plant over my grave
 the oar i used to row with when i was yet alive and with my messmates.’
 and i said, ‘my poor fellow, i will do all that you have asked of me.’
 
“thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, i on the
 one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
 of my comrade saying all this to from the other side. then came the
 ghost of my dead mother anticlea, daughter to autolycus. i had left her
 alive when i set out for troy and was moved to tears when i saw her,
 but even so, for all my sorrow i would not let her come near the blood
 till i had asked my questions of teiresias.
 
“then came also the ghost of theban teiresias, with his golden sceptre
 in his hand. knew and said, ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, why,
 poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the
 dead in this sad place? stand back from the trench and withdraw your
 sword that i may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’
 
“so i drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when had drank of
 the blood began with his prophecy.
 
“‘you want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will
 make this hard for you. i do not think that you will escape the eye of
 neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
 blinded his son. still, after much suffering you may get home if you
 can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
 thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging
 to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. if you leave these
 flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet
 after much hardship reach ithaca; but if you harm them, then i forewarn
 you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. even though
 you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all
 your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your
 house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring
 your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to
 your wife.
 
“‘when you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
 after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you
 must take well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a
 country where the people have never heard of the and do not even
 mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and
 oars that are as the wings of ship. i will give you this certain
 token which cannot escape your notice. wayfarer will meet you and
 will say it must be winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
 shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a
 ram, bull, and boar to neptune.90 then go home and offer hecatombs
 to all the gods in heaven one after the other. as for yourself, death
 shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very
 gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people
 shall bless you. all that i have said will come true].’91
 
“‘this,’ i answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell and
 tell and tell true, i see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she
 is sitting by the blood without saying word, and though i am her own
 she does not remember and speak to me; tell me, sir, how i can
 make her know me.’
 
“‘that,’ said he, ‘i can soon do. any ghost that you let taste of the
 blood will talk with you like reasonable being, but if you do not let
 them have any blood they will go away again.’
 
“on this the ghost of teiresias went back to the house of hades, for
 his prophecyings had now been spoken, but i sat still where i was until
 my mother came up and tasted the blood. then she knew at once and
 spoke fondly to me, saying, ‘my son, how did you come down to this
 abode of darkness while you are still alive? it is hard thing for the
 living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and
 terrible waters, and there is oceanus, which man can cross on foot,
 but must have good ship to take him. are you all this time trying
 to find your way home from troy, and have you never yet got back to
 ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’
 
“‘mother,’ said i, ‘i was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
 the theban prophet teiresias. i have never yet been near the achaean
 land nor set foot on my native country, and i have had nothing but one
 long series of misfortunes from the very first day that i set out with
 agamemnon for ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the trojans.
 but tell me, and tell true, in what way did you die? did you have a
 long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you gentle easy passage to
 eternity? tell also about my father, and the whom i left behind
 me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold
 of it, who thinks that i shall not return to claim it? tell again
 what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with
 my and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she
 could and married again?’
 
“my mother answered, ‘your wife still remains in your house, but she is
 in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
 and day. one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
 telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. has to entertain
 largely, as of course must, considering his position as a
 magistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at his
 old place in the country and never goes near the town. has no
 comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter sleeps on the floor in
 front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in
 summer, when the warm weather comes on again, lies out in the
 vineyard on bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground. he
 grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more
 and more as grows older. as for my own end it was in this wise:
 heaven did not take swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was
 i attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out
 and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force
 of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93
 
“then i tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.
 thrice i sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
 time she flitted from my embrace as it were dream or phantom, and
 being touched to the quick i said to her, ‘mother, why do you not stay
 still when i would embrace you? if we could throw our arms around one
 another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
 the house of hades; does proserpine want to lay still further load of
 grief upon by mocking with phantom only?’
 
“‘my son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
 proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when
 they are dead. the sinews longer hold the flesh and bones together;
 these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has
 left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were dream. now,
 however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all
 these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’
 
“thus did we converse, and anon proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
 wives and daughters of all the most famous men. they gathered in crowds
 about the blood, and i considered how i might question them severally.
 in the end i deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
 hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
 once. so they came up one after the other, and each one as i questioned
 her told her race and lineage.
 
“the first i saw was tyro. she was daughter of salmoneus and wife of
 cretheus the of aeolus.94 she fell in love with the river enipeus
 who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. once when she
 was taking walk by his side as usual, neptune, disguised as her
 lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and huge blue wave
 arched itself like mountain over them to hide both woman and god,
 whereon loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in deep slumber.
 when the god had accomplished the deed of love, took her hand in his
 own and said, ‘tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods
 are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve
 months. take great care of them. i am neptune, so now go home, but hold
 your tongue and do not tell any one.’
 
“then dived under the sea, and she in due course bore pelias and
 neleus, who both of them served jove with all their might. pelias was a
 great breeder of sheep and lived in iolcus, but the other lived in
 pylos. the rest of her children were by cretheus, namely, aeson,
 pheres, and amythaon, who was mighty warrior and charioteer.
 
“next to her i saw antiope, daughter to asopus, who could boast of
 having slept in the arms of even jove himself, and who bore him two
 sons amphion and zethus. these founded thebes with its seven gates, and
 built wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not
 hold thebes till they had walled it.
 
“then i saw alcmena, the wife of amphitryon, who also bore to jove
 indomitable hercules; and megara who was daughter to great king creon,
 and married the redoubtable of amphitryon.
 
“i also saw fair epicaste mother of king oedipodes whose awful lot it
 was to marry her own without suspecting it. married her after
 having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to
 the world; whereon remained king of thebes, in great grief for the
 spite the gods had borne him; but epicaste went to the house of the
 mighty jailor hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging
 spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother—to his ruing bitterly
 thereafter.
 
“then i saw chloris, whom neleus married for her beauty, having given
 priceless presents for her. she was youngest daughter to amphion of
 iasus and king of minyan orchomenus, and was queen in pylos. she bore
 nestor, chromius, and periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
 lovely woman pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but neleus
 would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of iphicles from
 the grazing grounds of phylace, and this was hard task. the only man
 who would undertake to raid them was certain excellent seer,95 but
 the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle
 caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when full year had
 passed and the same season came round again, iphicles set him at
 liberty, after had expounded all the oracles of heaven. thus, then,
 was the will of jove accomplished.
 
“and i saw leda the wife of tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
 castor breaker of horses, and pollux the mighty boxer. both these
 heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a
 special dispensation of jove, they die and come to life again, each one
 of them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of
 gods.
 
“after her i saw iphimedeia wife of aloeus who boasted the embrace of
 neptune. she bore two sons otus and ephialtes, but both were short
 lived. they were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
 and the best looking, orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
 were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. they
 threatened to make war with the gods in olympus, and tried to set mount
 ossa on the top of mount olympus, and mount pelion on the top of ossa,
 that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if
 they had been grown up, but apollo, of leto, killed both of them,
 before they had got so much as sign of hair upon their cheeks or
 chin.
 
“then i saw phaedra, and procris, and fair ariadne daughter of the
 magician minos, whom theseus was carrying off from crete to athens, but
 did not enjoy her, for before could do so diana killed her in the
 island of dia on account of what bacchus had said against her.
 
“i also saw maera and clymene and hateful eriphyle, who sold her own
 husband for gold. but it would take all night if i were to name
 every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom i saw, and
 it is time for to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or
 here. as for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it.”
 
here ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
 throughout the covered cloister. then arete said to them:—
 
“what do you think of this man, phaeacians? is not tall and good
 looking, and is not clever? true, is my own guest, but all of you
 share in the distinction. do not be in hurry to send him away, nor
 niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need,
 for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance.”
 
then spoke the aged hero echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
 them, “my friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to us
 is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;
 but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with king
 alcinous.”
 
“the thing shall be done,” exclaimed alcinous, “as surely as i still
 live and reign over the phaeacians. our guest is indeed very anxious to
 get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
 by which time i shall be able to get together the whole sum that i mean
 to give him. as regards his escort it will be matter for you all, and
 mine above all others as the chief person among you.”
 
and ulysses answered, “king alcinous, if you were to bid to stay
 here for whole twelve months, and then speed on my way, loaded
 with your noble gifts, i should obey you gladly and it would redound
 greatly to my advantage, for i should return fuller-handed to my own
 people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me
 when i get back to ithaca.”
 
“ulysses,” replied alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any idea
 that you are charlatan or swindler. i know there are many people
 going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see
 through them, but there is style about your language which assures me
 of your good disposition. moreover you have told the story of your own
 misfortunes, and those of the argives, as though you were practiced
 bard; but tell me, and tell true, whether you saw any of the mighty
 heroes who went to troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
 there. the evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed
 time—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for i could stay here
 listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell
 us of your adventures.”
 
“alcinous,” answered ulysses, “there is time for making speeches, and
 time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, i will not
 refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades
 who did not fall fighting with the trojans, but perished on their
 return, through the treachery of wicked woman.
 
“when proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the
 ghost of agamemnon of atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by
 those who had perished with him in the house of aegisthus. as soon as
 had tasted the blood, knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out
 his arms towards to embrace me; but had strength nor substance
 any more, and i too wept and pitied him as i beheld him. ‘how did you
 come by your death,’ said i, ‘king agamemnon? did neptune raise his
 winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies
 make an end of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or
 sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wives
 and city?’
 
“‘ulysses,’ answered, ‘noble of laertes, i was not lost at sea
 in any storm of neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch upon the
 mainland, but aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of between
 them. asked to his house, feasted me, and then butchered most
 miserably as though i were fat beast in slaughter house, while all
 around my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding
 breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. you
 must have seen numbers of men killed either in general engagement, or
 in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the
 way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
 loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. i
 heard priam’s daughter cassandra scream as clytemnestra killed her
 close beside me. i lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body,
 and raised my hands to kill the slut of murderess, but she slipped
 away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when i was
 dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as
 woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. fancy
 murdering her own husband! i thought i was going to be welcomed home by
 my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought
 disgrace on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the good
 ones.’
 
“and i said, ‘in truth jove has hated the house of atreus from first to
 last in the matter of their women’s counsels. see how many of us fell
 for helen’s sake, and now it seems that clytemnestra hatched mischief
 against you too during your absence.’
 
“‘be sure, therefore,’ continued agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendly
 even with your own wife. do not tell her all that you know perfectly
 well yourself. tell her part only, and keep your own counsel about
 the rest. not that your wife, ulysses, is likely to murder you, for
 penelope is very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. we
 left her young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for
 troy. this child doubt is now grown up happily to man’s estate,96
 and and his father will have joyful meeting and embrace one
 another as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not
 even allow the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed ere i
 could do so. furthermore i say—and lay my saying to your heart—do not
 tell people when you are bringing your ship to ithaca, but steal a
 march upon them, for after all this there is trusting women. but now
 tell me, and tell true, can you give any news of my orestes?
 is in orchomenus, or at pylos, or is at sparta with menelaus—for
 i presume that is still living.’
 
“and i said, ‘agamemnon, why do you ask me? i do not know whether your
 is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not
 know.’
 
“as we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the
 ghost of achilles came up to us with patroclus, antilochus, and ajax
 who was the finest and goodliest man of all the danaans after the son
 of peleus. the fleet descendant of aeacus knew and spoke piteously,
 saying, ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, what deed of daring will you
 undertake next, that you venture down to the house of hades among us
 silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour more?’
 
“and i said, ‘achilles, of peleus, foremost champion of the
 achaeans, i came to consult teiresias, and see if could advise me
 about my return home to ithaca, for i have never yet been able to get
 near the achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
 in trouble all the time. as for you, achilles, one was ever yet so
 fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by
 all us argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you
 are great prince among the dead. do not, therefore, take it so much
 to heart even if you are dead.’
 
“‘say not word,’ answered, ‘in death’s favour; i would rather be a
 paid servant in poor man’s house and be above ground than king of
 kings among the dead. but give news about my son; is gone to the
 wars and will be great soldier, or is this not so? tell also if
 you have heard anything about my father peleus—does still rule among
 the myrmidons, or do they show him respect throughout hellas and
 phthia now that is old and his limbs fail him? could i but stand by
 his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that i had when i
 killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of troy—could i but be as
 i then was and go even for short time to my father’s house, any one
 who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’
 
“‘i have heard nothing,’ i answered, ‘of peleus, but i can tell you all
 about your neoptolemus, for i took him in my own ship from scyros
 with the achaeans. in our councils of war before troy was always
 first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. nestor and i were the
 only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
 plain of troy, would never remain with the body of his men, but
 would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. many man
 did kill in battle—i cannot name every single one of those whom he
 slew while fighting on the side of the argives, but will only say how
 killed that valiant hero eurypylus of telephus, who was the
 handsomest man i ever saw except memnon; many others also of the
 ceteians fell around him by reason of woman’s bribes. moreover, when
 all the bravest of the argives went inside the horse that epeus had
 made, and it was left to to settle when we should either open the
 door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and
 chief men among the danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every
 limb, i never once saw him turn pale nor wipe tear from his cheek; he
 was all the time urging to break out from the horse—grasping the
 handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury
 against the foe. yet when we had sacked the city of priam got his
 handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the
 fortune of war) without wound upon him, neither from thrown spear
 nor in close combat, for the rage of mars is matter of great chance.’
 
“when i had told him this, the ghost of achilles strode off across a
 meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what i had said concerning the
 prowess of his son.
 
“the ghosts of other dead men stood near and told each his own
 melancholy tale; but that of ajax of telamon alone held aloof—still
 angry with for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour
 of achilles. thetis had offered it as prize, but the trojan prisoners
 and minerva were the judges. would that i had never gained the day in
 such contest, for it cost the life of ajax, who was foremost of all
 the danaans after the of peleus, alike in stature and prowess.
 
“when i saw him i tried to pacify him and said, ‘ajax, will you not
 forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
 hateful armour still rankle with you? it cost us argives dear enough to
 lose such tower of strength as you were to us. we mourned you as much
 as we mourned achilles of peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid
 on anything but on the spite which jove bore against the danaans, for
 it was this that made him counsel your destruction—come hither,
 therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what i can
 tell you.’
 
“he would not answer, but turned away to erebus and to the other
 ghosts; nevertheless, i should have made him talk to in spite of his
 being so angry, or i should have gone on talking to him,97 only that
 there were still others among the dead whom i desired to see.
 
“then i saw minos of jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
 sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
 and standing round him in the spacious house of hades, to learn his
 sentences upon them.
 
“after him i saw huge orion in meadow full of asphodel driving the
 ghosts of the wild beasts that had killed upon the mountains, and he
 had great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.
 
“and i saw tityus of gaia stretched upon the plain and covering
 some nine acres of ground. two vultures on either side of him were
 digging their beaks into his liver, and kept on trying to beat them
 off with his hands, but could not; for had violated jove’s mistress
 leto as she was going through panopeus on her way to pytho.
 
“i saw also the dreadful fate of tantalus, who stood in lake that
 reached his chin; was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
 reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it
 dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parched
 by the spite of heaven. there were tall trees, moreover, that shed
 their fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and
 juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to
 take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.
 
“and i saw sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
 with both his hands. with hands and feet tried to roll it up to the
 top of the hill, but always, just before could roll it over on to
 the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless
 stone98 would come thundering down again on to the plain. then would
 begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and
 the steam rose after him.
 
“after him i saw mighty hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he
 is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely hebe to wife,
 who is daughter of jove and juno. the ghosts were screaming round him
 like scared birds flying all whithers. looked black as night with
 his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around
 as though ever on the point of taking aim. about his breast there was a
 wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears,
 wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle,
 and death. the man who made that belt, do what might, would never be
 able to make another like it. hercules knew at once when saw me,
 and spoke piteously, saying, ‘my poor ulysses, noble of laertes,
 are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that i did when i was
 above ground? i was of jove, but i went through an infinity of
 suffering, for i became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a low
 fellow who set all manner of labours. once sent here to fetch
 the hell-hound—for did not think could find anything harder for
 than this, but i got the hound out of hades and brought him to him,
 for mercury and minerva helped me.’
 
“on this hercules went down again into the house of hades, but i stayed
 where i was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
 and i should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom i
 would fain have seen—theseus and pirithous—glorious children of the
 gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round and uttered such
 appalling cries, that i was panic stricken lest proserpine should send
 up from the house of hades the head of that awful monster gorgon. on
 this i hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at
 once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
 whereon the ship went down the stream of the river oceanus. we had to
 row at first, but presently fair wind sprang up.
 



book xii
 

the sirens, scylla and charybdis, the cattle of the sun.
 

“after we were clear of the river oceanus, and had got out into the
 open sea, we went on till we reached the aeaean island where there is
 dawn and sun-rise as in other places. we then drew our ship on to the
 sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and
 waited till day should break.
 
“then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, i sent
 some men to circe’s house to fetch the body of elpenor. we cut firewood
 from wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we
 had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. when
 his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised cairn, set a
 stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that had
 been used to row with.
 
“while we were doing all this, circe, who knew that we had got back
 from the house of hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she
 could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and
 wine. then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘you have done bold
 thing in going down alive to the house of hades, and you will have died
 twice, to other people’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the
 day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow
 morning. in the meantime i will tell ulysses about your course, and
 will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from
 misadventure either by land or sea.’
 
“we agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day
 to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on
 dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the
 ship. then circe took by the hand and bade be seated away from
 the others, while she reclined by my side and asked all about our
 adventures.
 
“‘so far so good,’ said she, when i had ended my story, ‘and now pay
 attention to what i am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, will
 recall it to your recollection. first you will come to the sirens who
 enchant all who come near them. if any one unwarily draws in too close
 and hears the singing of the sirens, his wife and children will never
 welcome him home again, for they sit in green field and warble him to
 death with the sweetness of their song. there is great heap of dead
 men’s bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.
 therefore pass these sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax that
 none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you
 may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on cross piece half
 way up the mast,99 and they must lash the rope’s ends to the mast
 itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. if you beg and
 pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.
 
“‘when your crew have taken you past these sirens, i cannot give you
 coherent directions100 as to which of two courses you are to take; i
 will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them
 for yourself. on the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against
 which the deep blue waves of amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the
 blessed gods call these rocks the wanderers. here not even bird may
 pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to father jove,
 but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and father jove has
 to send another to make up their number; ship that ever yet came to
 these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire
 are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. the only
 vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous argo on her way
 from the house of aetes, and she too would have gone against these
 great rocks, only that juno piloted her past them for the love she bore
 to jason.
 
“‘of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a
 dark cloud. this never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not
 even in summer and early autumn. man though had twenty hands and
 twenty feet could get foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer
 up, as smooth as though it had been polished. in the middle of it there
 is large cavern, looking west and turned towards erebus; you must
 take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the
 stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. inside it scylla sits and
 yelps with voice that you might take to be that of young hound, but
 in truth she is dreadful monster and one—not even god—could face
 her without being terror-struck. she has twelve mis-shapen feet, and
 six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck
 she has frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very
 close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in moment,
 and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and
 peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any
 larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which
 amphitrite teems. ship ever yet got past her without losing some
 men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off man in
 each mouth.
 
“‘you will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close
 together that there is not more than bow-shot between them. [a large
 fig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
 whirlpool of charybdis. three times in the day does she vomit forth her
 waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not
 there when she is sucking, for if you are, neptune himself could not
 save you; you must hug the scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
 can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’
 
“‘is there way,’ said i, ‘of escaping charybdis, and at the same
 time keeping scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’
 
“‘you dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to
 fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even
 by the immortals. for scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
 extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. there is help for it; your best
 chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle
 about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you
 with second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of
 your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out
 lustily to crataiis who is scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will then
 stop her from making second raid upon you.’
 
“‘you will now come to the thrinacian island, and here you will see
 many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven
 herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
 flock. they do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they
 are tended by the goddesses phaethusa and lampetie, who are children of
 the sun-god hyperion by neaera. their mother when she had borne them
 and had done suckling them sent them to the thrinacian island, which
 was long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocks
 and herds. if you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but
 getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach ithaca; but if you
 harm them, then i forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and
 of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will
 return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’
 
“here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
 whereon she returned inland. i then went on board and told my men to
 loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took
 their places, and began to smite the grey with their oars.
 presently the great and cunning goddess circe befriended us with fair
 wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails
 well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, and
 let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.
 
“then, being much troubled in mind, i said to my men, ‘my friends, it
 is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies
 that circe has made me, i will therefore tell you about them, so that
 whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. first she said
 we were to keep clear of the sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully
 in field of flowers; but she said i might hear them myself so long as
 one else did. therefore, take and bind to the crosspiece half
 way up the mast; bind as i stand upright, with bond so fast that i
 cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mast
 itself. if i beg and pray you to set free, then bind more tightly
 still.’
 
“i had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached
 the island of the two sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.
 then all of sudden it fell dead calm; there was not breath of wind
 nor ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed
 them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam
 they raised in rowing. meanwhile i look large wheel of wax and cut it
 up small with my sword. then i kneaded the wax in my strong hands till
 it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of
 the sun-god of hyperion. then i stopped the ears of all my men, and
 they bound hands and feet to the mast as i stood upright on the
 cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. when we had got within
 earshot of the land, and the ship was going at good rate, the sirens
 saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.
 
“‘come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned ulysses, honour to the achaean name,
 and listen to our two voices. one ever sailed past us without
 staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and who listens
 will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the
 ills that the gods laid upon the argives and trojans before troy, and
 can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’
 
“they sang these words most musically, and as i longed to hear them
 further i made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me
 free; but they quickened their stroke, and eurylochus and perimedes
 bound with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of
 the sirens’ voices. then my men took the wax from their ears and
 unbound me.
 
“immediately after we had got past the island i saw great wave from
 which spray was rising, and i heard loud roaring sound. the men were
 so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea
 resounded with the rushing of the waters,103 but the ship stayed where
 it was, for the men had left off rowing. i went round, therefore, and
 exhorted them man by man not to lose heart.
 
“‘my friends,’ said i, ‘this is not the first time that we have been in
 danger, and we are in nothing like so bad case as when the cyclops
 shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved
 us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. now,
 therefore, let us all do as i say, trust in jove and row on with might
 and main. as for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them,
 for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming
 rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over
 yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’
 
“so they did as i told them; but i said nothing about the awful monster
 scylla, for i knew the men would not go on rowing if i did, but would
 huddle together in the hold. in one thing only did i disobey circe’s
 strict instructions—i put on my armour. then seizing two strong spears
 i took my stand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that i expected
 first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much
 harm; but i could not make her out anywhere, though i strained my eyes
 with looking the gloomy rock all over and over.
 
“then we entered the straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand
 was scylla, and on the other dread charybdis kept sucking up the salt
 water. as she vomited it up, it was like the water in cauldron when
 it is boiling over upon great fire, and the spray reached the top of
 the rocks on either side. when she began to suck again, we could see
 the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made deafening
 sound as it broke against the rocks. we could see the bottom of the
 whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wits
 ends for fear. while we were taken up with this, and were expecting
 each moment to be our last, scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and
 snatched up my six best men. i was looking at once after both ship and
 men, and in moment i saw their hands and feet ever so high above me,
 struggling in the air as scylla was carrying them off, and i heard them
 call out my name in one last despairing cry. as fisherman, seated,
 spear in hand, upon some jutting rock104 throws bait into the water to
 deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox’s horn with
 which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he
 catches them one by one—even so did scylla land these panting creatures
 on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they
 screamed and stretched out their hands to in their mortal agony.
 this was the most sickening sight that i saw throughout all my voyages.
 
“when we had passed the [wandering] rocks, with scylla and terrible
 charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the
 goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun hyperion. while still at
 in my ship i could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the
 yards, and the sheep bleating. then i remembered what the blind theban
 prophet teiresias had told me, and how carefully aeaean circe had
 warned to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. so being much
 troubled i said to the men, ‘my men, i know you are hard pressed, but
 listen while i tell you the prophecy that teiresias made me, and how
 carefully aeaean circe warned to shun the island of the blessed
 sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.
 head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’
 
“the men were in despair at this, and eurylochus at once gave an
 insolent answer. ‘ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are very
 strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron,
 and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you
 will not let them land and cook themselves good supper upon this
 island, but bid them put out to and go faring fruitlessly on
 through the watches of the flying night. it is by night that the winds
 blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one of
 those sudden squalls spring up from south west or west, which so often
 wreck vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? now,
 therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper here
 hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put
 out to sea.’
 
“thus spoke eurylochus, and the men approved his words. i saw that
 heaven meant us mischief and said, ‘you force to yield, for you
 are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his
 solemn oath that if meet with herd of cattle or large flock of
 sheep, will not be so mad as to kill single head of either, but
 will be satisfied with the food that circe has given us.’
 
“they all swore as i bade them, and when they had completed their oath
 we made the ship fast in harbour that was near stream of fresh
 water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. as soon as
 they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their
 poor comrades whom scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them
 weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into sound sleep.
 
“in the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their
 places, jove raised great gale of wind that flew hurricane so that
 land and were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out
 of the heavens. when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn,
 appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into cave wherein
 the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and i called the men
 together in council.
 
“‘my friends,’ said i, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let us
 mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it;
 for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives
 ear to everything.’ and again they promised that they would obey.
 
“for whole month the wind blew steadily from the south, and there was
 other wind, but only south and east.105 as long as corn and wine
 held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,
 however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to
 go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking
 whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. one
 day, therefore, i went up inland that i might pray heaven to show me
 some means of getting away. when i had gone far enough to be clear of
 all my men, and had found place that was well sheltered from the
 wind, i washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in olympus till by
 and by they sent off into sweet sleep.
 
“meanwhile eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘listen
 to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. all deaths are bad enough but there
 is none so bad as famine. why should not we drive in the best of these
 cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? if we ever get
 back to ithaca, we can build fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it
 with every kind of ornament; if, however, is determined to sink our
 ship out of revenge for these horned cattle, and the other gods are of
 the same mind, i for one would rather drink salt water once for all and
 have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such desert
 island as this is.’
 
“thus spoke eurylochus, and the men approved his words. now the cattle,
 so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men,
 therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them
 saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of
 barley-meal, for there was barley left. when they had done praying
 they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the
 thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some
 pieces of raw meat on top of them. they had wine with which to make
 drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept
 pouring on little water from time to time while the inward meats were
 being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had
 tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces
 upon the spits.
 
“by this time my deep sleep had left me, and i turned back to the ship
 and to the shore. as i drew near i began to smell hot roast meat,
 so i groaned out prayer to the immortal gods. ‘father jove,’ i
 exclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you
 have done cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me;
 see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’
 
“meanwhile lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had
 been killing his cows, whereon flew into great rage, and said to
 the immortals, ‘father jove, and all you other gods who live in
 everlasting bliss, i must have vengeance on the crew of ulysses’ ship:
 they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing i
 loved to look upon, whether i was going up heaven or down again. if
 they do not square accounts with about my cows, i will go down to
 hades and shine there among the dead.’
 
“‘sun,’ said jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over
 the fruitful earth. i will shiver their ship into little pieces with a
 bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’
 
“i was told all this by calypso, who said she had heard it from the
 mouth of mercury.
 
“as soon as i got down to my ship and to the shore i rebuked each
 one of the men separately, but we could see way out of it, for the
 cows were dead already. and indeed the gods began at once to show signs
 and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and
 the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether
 cooked or raw, kept on making noise just as cows do.
 
“for six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon
 them, but when jove the of saturn had added seventh day, the fury
 of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts,
 spread sail, and put out to sea. as soon as we were well away from the
 island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the of saturn raised
 black cloud over our ship, and the grew dark beneath it. we did
 not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by a
 terrific squall from the west that snapped the forestays of the mast so
 that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the bottom
 of the vessel. the mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the
 ship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and
 fell overboard as though were diving, with more life left in
 him.
 
“then jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and
 round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck
 it. the men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water
 round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently
 deprived them of all chance of getting home again.
 
“i stuck to the ship till the knocked her sides from her keel
 (which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the
 direction of the keel; but there was backstay of stout ox-thong still
 hanging about it, and with this i lashed the mast and keel together,
 and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to
 take me.
 
“[the gale from the west had now spent its force, and the wind got into
 the south again, which frightened lest i should be taken back to the
 terrible whirlpool of charybdis. this indeed was what actually
 happened, for i was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise
 had reached the rock of scylla, and the whirlpool. she was then sucking
 down the salt water,106 but i was carried aloft toward the fig
 tree, which i caught hold of and clung on to like bat. i could not
 plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a
 long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too
 high, too vast, and too far apart for to reach them; so i hung
 patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft
 again—and very long while it seemed. jury-man is not more glad to
 get home to supper, after having been long detained in court by
 troublesome cases, than i was to see my raft beginning to work its way
 out of the whirlpool again. at last i let go with my hands and feet,
 and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to which i then got,
 and began to row with my hands. as for scylla, the father of gods and
 men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise i should have
 certainly been lost.107
 
“hence i was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the
 gods stranded on the ogygian island, where dwells the great and
 powerful goddess calypso. she took in and was kind to me, but i need
 say more about this, for i told you and your noble wife all about it
 yesterday, and i hate saying the same thing over and over again.”
 



book xiii
 

ulysses leaves scheria and returns to ithaca.
 

thus did speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
 cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently alcinous
 began to speak.
 
“ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house i doubt not you
 will get home without further misadventure matter how much you have
 suffered in the past. to you others, however, who come here night after
 night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, i would insist
 as follows. our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought
 gold,108 and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;
 let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a
 large tripod and cauldron. we will recoup ourselves by the levy of a
 general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the
 burden of such handsome present.”
 
every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his
 own abode. when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared they
 hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.
 alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the
 ship’s benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers.
 then they went to the house of alcinous to get dinner, and he
 sacrificed bull for them in honour of jove who is the lord of all.
 they set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which
 the inspired bard, demodocus, who was favourite with every one, sang
 to them; but ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as
 though to hasten his setting, for was longing to be on his way. as
 one who has been all day ploughing fallow field with couple of oxen
 keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he
 may go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so
 did ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and at once said to the
 phaeacians, addressing himself more particularly to king alcinous:
 
“sir, and all of you, farewell. make your drink-offerings and send me
 on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving
 an escort, and making presents, which heaven grant that i may
 turn to good account; may i find my admirable wife living in peace
 among friends,109 and may you whom i leave behind give satisfaction
 to your wives and children;110 may heaven vouchsafe you every good
 grace, and may evil thing come among your people.”
 
thus did speak. his hearers all of them approved his saying and
 agreed that should have his escort inasmuch as had spoken
 reasonably. alcinous therefore said to his servant, “pontonous, mix
 some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer prayer to
 father jove, and speed our guest upon his way.”
 
pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others
 each from his own seat made drink-offering to the blessed gods that
 live in heaven, but ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands
 of queen arete.
 
“farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age and
 death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. i now take
 my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and
 with king alcinous.”
 
as spoke crossed the threshold, and alcinous sent man to
 conduct him to his ship and to the shore. arete also sent some
 maidservants with him—one with clean shirt and cloak, another to
 carry his strong box, and third with corn and wine. when they got to
 the water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with
 all the meat and drink; but for ulysses they spread rug and linen
 sheet on deck that might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship.
 then too went on board and lay down without word, but the crew
 took every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone
 to which it had been bound. thereon, when they began rowing out to sea,
 ulysses fell into deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.111
 
the ship bounded forward on her way as four in hand chariot flies
 over the course when the horses feel the whip. her prow curvetted as it
 were the neck of stallion, and great wave of dark blue water
 seethed in her wake. she held steadily on her course, and even a
 falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. thus,
 then, she cut her way through the water, carrying one who was as
 cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of
 all that had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves
 of the weary sea.
 
when the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show,
 the ship drew near to land.112 now there is in ithaca haven of the
 old merman phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line
 of the and shut the harbour in. these shelter it from the storms of
 wind and that rage outside, so that, when once within it, ship
 may lie without being even moored. at the head of this harbour there is
 large olive tree, and at great distance fine overarching cavern
 sacred to the nymphs who are called naiads.113 there are mixing bowls
 within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. moreover,
 there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of
 purple—very curious to see—and at all times there is water within
 it. it has two entrances, one facing north by which mortals can go down
 into the cave, while the other comes from the south and is more
 mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken
 by the gods.
 
into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the
 place.114 she had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length
 on to the shore;115 when, however, they had landed, the first thing
 they did was to lift ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the
 ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. then they took
 out the presents which minerva had persuaded the phaeacians to give him
 when was setting out on his voyage homewards. they put these all
 together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear
 some passer by116 might come and steal them before ulysses awoke; and
 then they made the best of their way home again.
 
but neptune did not forget the threats with which had already
 threatened ulysses, so took counsel with jove. “father jove,” said
 he, “i shall longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods,
 if mortals like the phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show
 such small regard for me. i said i would let ulysses get home when he
 had suffered sufficiently. i did not say that should never get home
 at all, for i knew you had already nodded your head about it, and
 promised that should do so; but now they have brought him in ship
 fast asleep and have landed him in ithaca after loading him with more
 magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than would ever
 have brought back from troy, if had had his share of the spoil and
 got home without misadventure.”
 
and jove answered, “what, lord of the earthquake, are you talking
 about? the gods are by means wanting in respect for you. it would be
 monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. as
 regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and
 treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal
 with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please.”
 
“i should have done so at once,” replied neptune, “if i were not
 anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, i
 should like to wreck the phaeacian ship as it is returning from its
 escort. this will stop them from escorting people in future; and i
 should also like to bury their city under huge mountain.”
 
“my good friend,” answered jove, “i should recommend you at the very
 moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,
 to turn it into rock near the land and looking like ship. this will
 astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the
 mountain.”
 
when earth-encircling neptune heard this went to scheria where the
 phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid
 way, had got close in. then went up to it, turned it into stone, and
 drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.
 after this went away.
 
the phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn
 towards his neighbour, saying, “bless my heart, who is it that can have
 rooted the ship in the just as she was getting into port? we could
 see the whole of her only moment ago.”
 
this was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and alcinous
 said, “i remember now the old prophecy of my father. said that
 neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the
 sea, and would one day wreck phaeacian ship as it was returning from
 an escort, and bury our city under high mountain. this was what my
 old father used to say, and now it is all coming true.117 now therefore
 let us all do as i say; in the first place we must leave off giving
 people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice
 twelve picked bulls to neptune that may have mercy upon us, and not
 bury our city under the high mountain.” when the people heard this they
 were afraid and got ready the bulls.
 
thus did the chiefs and rulers of the phaeacians pray to king neptune,
 standing round his altar; and at the same time118 ulysses woke up once
 more upon his own soil. had been so long away that did not know
 it again; moreover, jove’s daughter minerva had made it foggy day, so
 that people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell
 him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and
 friends recognising him119 until had taken his revenge upon the
 wicked suitors. everything, therefore, seemed quite different to
 him—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the
 goodly trees, appeared all changed as started up and looked upon his
 native land. so smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and
 cried aloud despairingly.
 
“alas,” exclaimed, “among what manner of people am i fallen? are
 they savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? where shall i put
 all this treasure, and which way shall i go? i wish i had staid over
 there with the phaeacians; or i could have gone to some other great
 chief who would have been good to and given an escort. as it is i
 do not know where to put my treasure, and i cannot leave it here for
 fear somebody else should get hold of it. in good truth the chiefs and
 rulers of the phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have
 left in the wrong country; they said they would take back to
 ithaca and they have not done so: may jove the protector of suppliants
 chastise them, for watches over everybody and punishes those who do
 wrong. still, i suppose i must count my goods and see if the crew have
 gone off with any of them.”
 
counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his
 clothes, but there was nothing missing; still kept grieving about
 not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore of
 the sounding bewailing his hard fate. then minerva came up to him
 disguised as young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a
 good cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her
 comely feet and held javelin in her hand. ulysses was glad when he
 saw her, and went straight up to her.
 
“my friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom i have met with in
 this country; i salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposed
 towards me. protect these my goods, and myself too, for i embrace your
 knees and pray to you as though you were god. tell me, then, and tell
 truly, what land and country is this? who are its inhabitants? am i
 on an island, or is this the board of some continent?”
 
minerva answered, “stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come
 from somewhere long way off, not to know what country this is. it is
 very celebrated place, and everybody knows it east and west. it is
 rugged and not good driving country, but it is by means bad
 island for what there is of it. it grows any quantity of corn and also
 wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also and
 goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places
 where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of ithaca is known
 even as far as troy, which i understand to be long way off from this
 achaean country.”
 
ulysses was glad at finding himself, as minerva told him, in his own
 country, and began to answer, but did not speak the truth, and
 made up lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.
 
“i heard of ithaca,” said he, “when i was in crete beyond the seas, and
 now it seems i have reached it with all these treasures. i have left as
 much more behind for my children, but am flying because i killed
 orsilochus of idomeneus, the fleetest runner in crete. i killed him
 because wanted to rob of the spoils i had got from troy with so
 much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves of
 the weary sea; said i had not served his father loyally at troy as
 vassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so i lay in wait
 for him with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him as
 was coming into town from the country. it was very dark night and
 nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that i had killed him, but
 as soon as i had done so i went to ship and besought the owners, who
 were phoenicians, to take on board and set in pylos or in elis
 where the epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them.
 they meant guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we
 sailed on till we came hither by night. it was all we could do to get
 inside the harbour, and none of us said word about supper though we
 wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were.
 i was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of
 the ship, and placed them beside where i was lying upon the sand.
 then they sailed away to sidonia, and i was left here in great distress
 of mind.”
 
such was his story, but minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.
 then she took the form of woman, fair, stately, and wise, “he must be
 indeed shifty lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in all
 manner of craft even though you had god for your antagonist. dare
 devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not
 drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are
 in your own country again? we will say more, however, about this,
 for we can both of us deceive upon occasion—you are the most
 accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while i for
 diplomacy and subtlety have equal among the gods. did you not know
 jove’s daughter minerva—me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch
 over you in all your troubles, and who made the phaeacians take so
 great liking to you? and now, again, i am come here to talk things
 over with you, and help you to hide the treasure i made the phaeacians
 give you; i want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your
 own house; you have got to face them, but tell one, neither man nor
 woman, that you have come home again. bear everything, and put up with
 every man’s insolence, without word.”
 
and ulysses answered, “a man, goddess, may know great deal, but you
 are so constantly changing your appearance that when meets you it is
 hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. this much,
 however, i know exceedingly well; you were very kind to as long as
 we achaeans were fighting before troy, but from the day on which we
 went on board ship after having sacked the city of priam, and heaven
 dispersed us—from that day, minerva, i saw more of you, and cannot
 ever remember your coming to my ship to help in difficulty; i had
 to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered from evil and i
 reached the city of the phaeacians, where you encouraged and took me
 into the town.120 and now, i beseech you in your father’s name, tell me
 the truth, for i do not believe i am really back in ithaca. i am in
 some other country and you are mocking and deceiving in all you
 have been saying. tell then truly, have i really got back to my own
 country?”
 
“you are always taking something of that sort in your head,” replied
 minerva, “and that is why i cannot desert you in your afflictions; you
 are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. any one but yourself on returning
 from so long voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife and
 children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or
 hearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife, who
 remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having peace night or
 day for the tears she sheds on your behalf. as for my not coming near
 you, i was never uneasy about you, for i was certain you would get back
 safely though you would lose all your men, and i did not wish to
 quarrel with my uncle neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded
 his son.121 i will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land,
 and you will then perhaps believe me. this is the haven of the old
 merman phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of
 it; [near it is the cave sacred to the naiads;122 here too is the
 overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable
 hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain neritum.”
 
as she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. then
 ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed
 the bounteous soil; lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs,
 saying, “naiad nymphs, daughters of jove, i made sure that i was never
 again to see you, now therefore i greet you with all loving
 salutations, and i will bring you offerings as in the old days, if
 jove’s redoubtable daughter will grant life, and bring my to
 manhood.”
 
“take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined minerva,
 “let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where
 they will be quite safe. let us see how we can best manage it all.”
 
therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding
 places, while ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and
 good clothing which the phaeacians had given him. they stowed
 everything carefully away, and minerva set stone against the door of
 the cave. then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and
 consulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.
 
“ulysses,” said minerva, “noble of laertes, think how you can lay
 hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your
 house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents
 to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and
 sending encouraging messages123 to every one of them, but meaning the
 very opposite of all she says.”
 
and ulysses answered, “in good truth, goddess, it seems i should have
 come to much the same bad end in my own house as agamemnon did, if you
 had not given such timely information. advise how i shall best
 avenge myself. stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as
 on the day when we loosed troy’s fair diadem from her brow. help now
 as you did then, and i will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess,
 will be with me.”
 
“trust for that,” said she, “i will not lose sight of you when once
 we set about it, and i imagine that some of those who are devouring
 your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and
 brains. i will begin by disguising you so that human being shall
 know you; i will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your
 yellow hair; i will clothe you in garment that shall fill all who see
 it with loathing; i will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an
 unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the
 whom you left behind you. then go at once to the swineherd who is
 in charge of your pigs; has been always well affected towards you,
 and is devoted to penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his
 pigs near the rock that is called raven124 by the fountain arethusa,
 where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their
 manner. stay with him and find out how things are going, while i
 proceed to sparta and see your son, who is with menelaus at lacedaemon,
 where has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive.”125
 
“but why,” said ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all about
 it? did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship
 while others are eating up his estate?”
 
minerva answered, “never mind about him, i sent him that might be
 well spoken of for having gone. is in sort of difficulty, but is
 staying quite comfortably with menelaus, and is surrounded with
 abundance of every kind. the suitors have put out to and are lying
 in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before can get home. i do
 not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are
 now eating up your estate will first find grave themselves.”
 
as she spoke minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with
 wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over
 his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine
 ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of wrap about him,
 and tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave
 him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with
 staff and wallet all in holes, with twisted thong for him to
 sling it over his shoulder.
 
when the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess
 went straight to lacedaemon to fetch telemachus.
 



book xiv
 

ulysses in the hut with eumaeus.
 

ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
 wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till reached the
 place where minerva had said that would find the swineherd, who was
 the most thrifty servant had. found him sitting in front of his
 hut, which was by the yards that had built on site which could be
 seen from far. had made them spacious126 and fair to see, with a
 free run for the pigs all round them; had built them during his
 master’s absence, of stones which had gathered out of the ground,
 without saying anything to penelope or laertes, and had fenced them
 on top with thorn bushes. outside the yard had run strong fence of
 oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside had
 built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. there were
 fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the
 boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kept
 on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best had
 continually. there were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the
 herdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always
 with them. the swineherd was at that moment cutting out pair of
 sandals127 from good stout ox hide. three of his men were out herding
 the pigs in one place or another, and had sent the fourth to town
 with boar that had been forced to send the suitors that they might
 sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.
 
when the hounds saw ulysses they set up furious barking and flew at
 him, but ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of
 the stick that had in his hand: still, would have been torn by
 them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,
 rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off
 by shouting and throwing stones at them. then said to ulysses, “old
 man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you
 would have got into trouble. the gods have given quite enough
 worries without that, for i have lost the best of masters, and am in
 continual grief on his account. i have to attend swine for other people
 to eat, while he, if yet lives to see the light of day, is starving
 in some distant land. but come inside, and when you have had your fill
 of bread and wine, tell where you come from, and all about your
 misfortunes.”
 
on this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
 strewed good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of
 this threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he
 used to sleep by night. ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,
 and said “may jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your
 heart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have received
 me.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “stranger, though still
 poorer man should come here, it would not be right for to insult
 him, for all strangers and beggars are from jove. you must take what
 you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
 young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for
 heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good
 to and given something of my own—a house, piece of land, good
 looking wife, and all else that liberal master allows servant who
 has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as
 they have mine in the situation which i hold. if my master had grown
 old here would have done great things by me, but is gone, and i
 wish that helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been
 the death of many good man. it was this matter that took my master to
 ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the trojans in the cause of
 king agamemnon.”
 
as spoke bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
 the young sucking pigs were penned. picked out two which brought
 back with him and sacrificed. singed them, cut them up, and spitted
 them; when the meat was cooked brought it all in and set it before
 ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon ulysses sprinkled it over
 with white barley meal. the swineherd then mixed wine in bowl of
 ivy-wood, and taking seat opposite ulysses told him to begin.
 
“fall to, stranger,” said he, “on dish of servant’s pork. the fat
 pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or
 scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and
 respect those who do what is lawful and right. even the fierce
 freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and jove gives them
 their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got home
 again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but
 some god seems to have told these people that ulysses is dead and gone;
 they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their
 offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force,
 without fear or stint. not day or night comes out of heaven, but they
 sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his
 wine, for was exceedingly rich. other great man either in ithaca
 or on the mainland is as rich as was; had as much as twenty men
 put together. i will tell you what had. there are twelve herds of
 cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also
 twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him
 twelve widely spreading herds of goats. here in ithaca runs even
 large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the
 charge of excellent goat herds. each one of these sends the suitors the
 best goat in the flock every day. as for myself, i am in charge of the
 pigs that you see here, and i have to keep picking out the best i have
 and sending it to them.”
 
this was his story, but ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
 without word, brooding his revenge. when had eaten enough and was
 satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which usually drank,
 filled it with wine, and gave it to ulysses, who was pleased, and said
 as took it in his hands, “my friend, who was this master of yours
 that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
 me? you say perished in the cause of king agamemnon; tell who he
 was, in case i may have met with such person. jove and the other gods
 know, but i may be able to give you news of him, for i have travelled
 much.”
 
eumaeus answered, “old man, traveller who comes here with news will
 get ulysses’ wife and to believe his story. nevertheless, tramps in
 want of lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a
 word of truth; every one who finds his way to ithaca goes to my
 mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes
 much of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the
 time as women will when they have lost their husbands. and you too, old
 man, for shirt and cloak would doubtless make up very pretty
 story. but the wolves and birds of prey have long since torn ulysses to
 pieces, or the fishes of the have eaten him, and his bones are
 lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; is dead and gone,
 and bad business it is for all his friends—for especially; go
 where i may i shall never find so good master, not even if i were to
 go home to my mother and father where i was bred and born. i do not so
 much care, however, about my parents now, though i should dearly like
 to see them again in my own country; it is the loss of ulysses that
 grieves most; i cannot speak of him without reverence though is
 here longer, for was very fond of me, and took such care of me
 that wherever may be i shall always honour his memory.”
 
“my friend,” replied ulysses, “you are very positive, and very hard of
 belief about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless i will not
 merely say, but will swear, that is coming. do not give anything
 for my news till has actually come, you may then give shirt and
 cloak of good wear if you will. i am in great want, but i will not take
 anything at all till then, for i hate man, even as i hate hell fire,
 who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. i swear by king jove, by the
 rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of ulysses to which i have now
 come, that all will surely happen as i have said it will. ulysses will
 return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
 beginning of the next will be here to do vengeance on all those who
 are ill treating his wife and son.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “old man, you will neither
 get paid for bringing good news, nor will ulysses ever come home; drink
 your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. do not keep
 on reminding of all this; it always pains when any one speaks
 about my honoured master. as for your oath we will let it alone, but i
 only wish may come, as do penelope, his old father laertes, and his
 telemachus. i am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his;
 was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be worse man,
 face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has
 been unsettling his mind, so has gone off to pylos to try and get
 news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as is
 coming home, in the hope of leaving the house of arceisius without a
 name in ithaca. but let us say more about him, and leave him to be
 taken, or else to escape if the of saturn holds his hand over him
 to protect him. and now, old man, tell your own story; tell also,
 for i want to know, who you are and where you come from. tell of
 your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew
 brought you to ithaca, and from what country they professed to come—for
 you cannot have come by land.”
 
and ulysses answered, “i will tell you all about it. if there were meat
 and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do
 but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, i could easily
 talk on for whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of
 the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.
 
“i am by birth cretan; my father was well to do man, who had many
 sons born in marriage, whereas i was the of slave whom had
 purchased for concubine; nevertheless, my father castor of hylax
 (whose lineage i claim, and who was held in the highest honour among
 the cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put
 on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock.
 when, however, death took him to the house of hades, his sons divided
 his estate and cast lots for their shares, but to they gave a
 holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled to marry
 into rich family, for i was not given to bragging, or shirking on the
 field of battle. it is all over now; still, if you look at the straw
 you can see what the ear was, for i have had trouble enough and to
 spare. mars and minerva made doughty in war; when i had picked my
 men to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade i never gave death so much
 as thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear all whom i
 could overtake. such was i in battle, but i did not care about farm
 work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring up children. my
 delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows—things that most
 men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and another
 another, and this was what i was most naturally inclined to. before the
 achaeans went to troy, nine times was i in command of men and ships on
 foreign service, and i amassed much wealth. i had my pick of the spoil
 in the first instance, and much more was allotted to later on.
 
“my house grew apace and i became great man among the cretans, but
 when jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many
 perished, the people required and idomeneus to lead their ships to
 troy, and there was way out of it, for they insisted on our doing
 so. there we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked
 the city of priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. then it
 was that jove devised evil against me. i spent but one month happily
 with my children, wife, and property, and then i conceived the idea of
 making descent on egypt, so i fitted out fine fleet and manned it.
 i had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. for six days i
 and my men made feast, and i found them many victims both for sacrifice
 to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board
 and set sail from crete with fair north wind behind us though we were
 going down river. nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had
 sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the
 wind and steersmen took them. on the fifth day we reached the river
 aegyptus; there i stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay
 by them and keep guard over them while i sent out scouts to reconnoitre
 from every point of vantage.
 
“but the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and
 ravaged the land of the egyptians, killing the men, and taking their
 wives and children captive. the alarm was soon carried to the city, and
 when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the
 plain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of
 armour. then jove spread panic among my men, and they would longer
 face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. the egyptians
 killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for
 them. jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and i wish i had died
 then and there in egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for
 me—i took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand;
 then i went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his knees and
 kissed them, whereon spared my life, bade get into his chariot,
 and took weeping to his own home. many made at with their ashen
 spears and tried to kill in their fury, but the king protected me,
 for feared the wrath of jove the protector of strangers, who
 punishes those who do evil.
 
“i stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
 egyptians, for they all gave something; but when it was now going on
 for eight years there came certain phoenician, cunning rascal, who
 had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me
 over into going with him to phoenicia, where his house and his
 possessions lay. i stayed there for whole twelve months, but at the
 end of that time when months and days had gone by till the same season
 had come round again, set on board ship bound for libya, on a
 pretence that i was to take cargo along with him to that place, but
 really that might sell as slave and take the money i fetched. i
 suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for i could not
 help it.
 
“the ship ran before fresh north wind till we had reached the sea
 that lies between crete and libya; there, however, jove counselled
 their destruction, for as soon as we were well out from crete and could
 see nothing but and sky, raised black cloud over our ship and
 the grew dark beneath it. then jove let fly with his thunderbolts
 and the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and
 brimstone as the lightning struck it. the men fell all into the sea;
 they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so
 many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of
 getting home again. i was all dismayed. jove, however, sent the ship’s
 mast within my reach, which saved my life, for i clung to it, and
 drifted before the fury of the gale. nine days did i drift but in the
 darkness of the tenth night great wave bore on to the thesprotian
 coast. there pheidon king of the thesprotians entertained hospitably
 without charging anything at all—for his found when i was
 nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon raised by the hand,
 took to his father’s house and gave clothes to wear.
 
“there it was that i heard news of ulysses, for the king told had
 entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while was on his
 homeward journey. showed also the treasure of gold, and wrought
 iron that ulysses had got together. there was enough to keep his family
 for ten generations, so much had left in the house of king pheidon.
 but the king said ulysses had gone to dodona that might learn jove’s
 mind from the god’s high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
 absence should return to ithaca openly, or in secret. moreover the
 king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as
 did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,
 that should take him to his own country. sent off however before
 ulysses returned, for there happened to be thesprotian ship sailing
 for the wheat-growing island of dulichium, and told those in charge
 of her to be sure and take safely to king acastus.
 
“these men hatched plot against that would have reduced to the
 very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from
 land they resolved on selling as slave. they stripped of the
 shirt and cloak that i was wearing, and gave instead the tattered
 old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they
 reached the tilled lands of ithaca, and there they bound with a
 strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by
 the side. but the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn
 my rags over my head i slid down the rudder into the sea, where i
 struck out and swam till i was well clear of them, and came ashore near
 thick wood in which i lay concealed. they were very angry at my
 having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they
 thought it was further use and went back to their ship. the gods,
 having hidden thus easily, then took to good man’s door—for it
 seems that i am not to die yet awhile.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “poor unhappy stranger, i
 have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but
 that part about ulysses is not right; and you will never get to
 believe it. why should man like you go about telling lies in this
 way? i know all about the return of my master. the gods one and all of
 them detest him, or they would have taken him before troy, or let him
 die with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done;
 for then the achaeans would have built mound over his ashes and his
 would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have
 spirited him away we know not whither.
 
“as for i live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to
 the town unless when penelope sends for on the arrival of some news
 about ulysses. then they all sit round and ask questions, both those
 who grieve over the king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it because
 they can eat up his property without paying for it. for my own part i
 have never cared about asking anyone else since the time when i was
 taken in by an aetolian, who had killed man and come long way till
 at last reached my station, and i was very kind to him. said he
 had seen ulysses with idomeneus among the cretans, refitting his ships
 which had been damaged in gale. said ulysses would return in the
 following summer or autumn with his men, and that would bring back
 much wealth. and now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has
 brought you to my door, do not try to flatter in this way with vain
 hopes. it is not for any such reason that i shall treat you kindly, but
 only out of respect for jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and
 pitying you.”
 
ulysses answered, “i see that you are of an unbelieving mind; i have
 given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a
 bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. if your master
 comes home, give cloak and shirt of good wear, and send to
 dulichium where i want to go; but if does not come as i say will,
 set your men on to me, and tell them to throw from yonder precipice,
 as warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies.”
 
“and pretty figure i should cut then,” replied eumaeus, “both now and
 hereafter, if i were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and
 showing you hospitality. i should have to say my prayers in good
 earnest if i did; but it is just supper time and i hope my men will
 come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper.”
 
thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the
 pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a
 tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. but
 eumaeus called to his men and said, “bring in the best pig you have,
 that i may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of
 him ourselves. we have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs,
 while others reap the fruit of our labour.”
 
on this began chopping firewood, while the others brought in fine
 fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. eumaeus did not
 forget the gods, for was man of good principles, so the first
 thing did was to cut bristles from the pig’s face and throw them
 into the fire, praying to all the gods as did so that ulysses might
 return home again. then clubbed the pig with billet of oak which
 had kept back when was chopping the firewood, and stunned it,
 while the others slaughtered and singed it. then they cut it up, and
 eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the
 fat; these sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers;
 they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits
 and roasted them till they were done; when they had taken them off the
 spits they threw them on to the dresser in heap. the swineherd, who
 was most equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. he
 made seven portions; one of these set apart for mercury the of
 maia and the nymphs, praying to them as did so; the others dealt
 out to the men man by man. gave ulysses some slices cut lengthways
 down the loin as mark of especial honour, and ulysses was much
 pleased. “i hope, eumaeus,” said he, “that jove will be as well
 disposed towards you as i am, for the respect you are showing to an
 outcast like myself.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “eat, my good fellow, and
 enjoy your supper, such as it is. god grants this, and withholds that,
 just as thinks right, for can do whatever chooses.”
 
as spoke cut off the first piece and offered it as burnt
 sacrifice to the immortal gods; then made them drink-offering, put
 the cup in the hands of ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
 mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man
 on his own account from among the taphians during his master’s absence,
 and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
 to his mistress or laertes. they then laid their hands upon the good
 things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and
 drink, mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all
 went to bed after having made hearty supper.
 
now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was moon. it
 poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the west, which
 is wet quarter, so ulysses thought would see whether eumaeus, in
 the excellent care took of him, would take off his own cloak and
 give it him, or make one of his men give him one. “listen to me,” said
 he, “eumaeus and the rest of you; when i have said prayer i will tell
 you something. it is the wine that makes talk in this way; wine will
 make even wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and
 dance and say many word that had better leave unspoken; still, as
 i have begun, i will go on. would that i were still young and strong as
 when we got up an ambuscade before troy. menelaus and ulysses were the
 leaders, but i was in command also, for the other two would have it so.
 when we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath
 our armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood
 that grew about the swamp. it came on to freeze with north wind
 blowing; the snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields
 were coated thick with rime. the others had all got cloaks and shirts,
 and slept comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders,
 but i had carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that i
 should be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and
 shield. when the night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted
 their places, i nudged ulysses who was close to with my elbow, and
 at once gave his ear.
 
“‘ulysses,’ said i, ‘this cold will be the death of me, for i have no
 cloak; some god fooled into setting off with nothing on but my
 shirt, and i do not know what to do.’
 
“ulysses, who was as crafty as was valiant, hit upon the following
 plan:
 
“‘keep still,’ said in low voice, ‘or the others will hear you.’
 then raised his head on his elbow.
 
“‘my friends,’ said he, ‘i have had dream from heaven in my sleep. we
 are long way from the ships; i wish some one would go down and tell
 agamemnon to send us up more men at once.’
 
“on this thoas of andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
 to the ships, whereon i took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
 till morning. would that i were still young and strong as i was in
 those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give cloak
 both out of good will and for the respect due to brave soldier; but
 now people look down upon because my clothes are shabby.”
 
and eumaeus answered, “old man, you have told us an excellent story,
 and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
 present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
 that stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow
 morning you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for
 we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has
 only one. when ulysses’ comes home again will give you both
 cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go.”
 
with this got up and made bed for ulysses by throwing some
 goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. here
 ulysses lay down, and eumaeus covered him over with great heavy cloak
 that kept for change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.
 
thus did ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. but the
 swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so got ready to
 go outside, and ulysses was glad to see that looked after his
 property during his master’s absence. first slung his sword over his
 brawny shoulders and put on thick cloak to keep out the wind. also
 took the skin of large and well fed goat, and javelin in case of
 attack from men or dogs. thus equipped went to his rest where the
 pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
 the north wind.
 



book xv
 

minerva summons telemachus from lacedaemon—he meets with theoclymenus
 at pylos and brings him to ithaca—on landing goes to the hut of
 eumaeus.
 

but minerva went to the fair city of lacedaemon to tell ulysses’ son
 that was to return at once. she found him and pisistratus sleeping
 in the forecourt of menelaus’s house; pisistratus was fast asleep, but
 telemachus could get rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
 father, so minerva went close up to him and said:
 
“telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer,
 nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they
 will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a
 fool’s errand. ask menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to
 find your excellent mother still there when you get back. her father
 and brothers are already urging her to marry eurymachus, who has given
 her more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his
 wedding presents. i hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the
 house in spite of you, but you know what women are—they always want to
 do the best they can for the man who marries them, and never give
 another thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their
 father either when is dead and done with. go home, therefore, and
 put everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you
 have, until it shall please heaven to send you wife of your own. let
 tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. the
 chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the strait128
 between ithaca and samos, and they mean to kill you before you can
 reach home. i do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely
 that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a
 grave themselves. sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from
 the islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send
 you fair wind. as soon as you get to ithaca send your ship and men on
 to the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge
 of your pigs; is well disposed towards you, stay with him,
 therefore, for the night, and then send him to penelope to tell her
 that you have got back safe from pylos.”
 
then she went back to olympus; but telemachus stirred pisistratus with
 his heel to rouse him, and said, “wake up pisistratus, and yoke the
 horses to the chariot, for we must set off home.”129
 
but pisistratus said, “no matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
 in the dark. it will be morning soon; wait till menelaus has brought
 his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good
 bye to us in the usual way. so long as lives guest should never
 forget host who has shown him kindness.”
 
as spoke day began to break, and menelaus, who had already risen,
 leaving helen in bed, came towards them. when telemachus saw him put
 on his shirt as fast as could, threw great cloak over his
 shoulders, and went out to meet him. “menelaus,” said he, “let go
 back now to my own country, for i want to get home.”
 
and menelaus answered, “telemachus, if you insist on going i will not
 detain you. i do not like to see host either too fond of his guest or
 too rude to him. moderation is best in all things, and not letting a
 man go when wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he
 would like to stay. one should treat guest well as long as is in
 the house and speed him when wants to leave it. wait, then, till i
 can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have
 yourself seen them. i will tell the women to prepare sufficient
 dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
 more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out
 on such long journey. if, moreover, you have fancy for making a
 tour in hellas or in the peloponnese, i will yoke my horses, and will
 conduct you myself through all our principal cities. one will send
 us away empty handed; every one will give us something—a bronze tripod,
 couple of mules, or gold cup.”
 
“menelaus,” replied telemachus, “i want to go home at once, for when i
 came away i left my property without protection, and fear that while
 looking for my father i shall come to ruin myself, or find that
 something valuable has been stolen during my absence.”
 
when menelaus heard this immediately told his wife and servants to
 prepare sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. at
 this moment eteoneus joined him, for lived close by and had just got
 up; so menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he
 at once did. then menelaus went down into his fragrant store room,130
 not alone, but helen went too, with megapenthes. when reached the
 place where the treasures of his house were kept, selected double
 cup, and told his megapenthes to bring also silver mixing bowl.
 meanwhile helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses
 which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was
 largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered
 like star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. 131 then they all
 came back through the house again till they got to telemachus, and
 menelaus said, “telemachus, may jove, the mighty husband of juno, bring
 you safely home according to your desire. i will now present you with
 the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. it is a
 mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold,
 and it is the work of vulcan. phaedimus king of the sidonians made a
 present of it in the course of visit that i paid him while i was on
 my return home. i should like to give it to you.”
 
with these words placed the double cup in the hands of telemachus,
 while megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before
 him. hard by stood lovely helen with the robe ready in her hand.
 
“i too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as keepsake from
 the hand of helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
 till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go
 back rejoicing to your own country and to your home.”
 
so saying she gave the robe over to him and received it gladly. then
 pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as
 did so. presently menelaus took telemachus and pisistratus into the
 house, and they both of them sat down to table. maid servant brought
 them water in beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into silver
 basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew clean table beside
 them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good
 things of what there was in the house. eteoneus carved the meat and
 gave them each their portions, while megapenthes poured out the wine.
 then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them,
 but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink telemachus and
 pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot.
 they drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing
 gatehouse of the outer court, and menelaus came after them with a
 golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they might make a
 drink-offering before they set out. stood in front of the horses and
 pledged them, saying, “farewell to both of you; see that you tell
 nestor how i have treated you, for was as kind to as any father
 could be while we achaeans were fighting before troy.”
 
“we will be sure, sir,” answered telemachus, “to tell him everything as
 soon as we see him. i wish i were as certain of finding ulysses
 returned when i get back to ithaca, that i might tell him of the very
 great kindness you have shown and of the many beautiful presents i
 am taking with me.”
 
as was thus speaking bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with a
 great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm
 yard—and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. it
 came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front
 of the horses. when they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took
 comfort within them, whereon pisistratus said, “tell me, menelaus, has
 heaven sent this omen for us or for you?”
 
menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to
 make, but helen was too quick for him and said, “i will read this
 matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as i doubt not that it
 will come to pass. the eagle came from the mountain where it was bred
 and has its nest, and in like manner ulysses, after having travelled
 far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge—if indeed is
 not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors.”
 
“may jove so grant it,” replied telemachus, “if it should prove to be
 so, i will make vows to you as though you were god, even when i am at
 home.”
 
as spoke lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
 through the town towards the open country. they swayed the yoke upon
 their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
 darkness was over all the land. then they reached pherae, where diocles
 lived who was of ortilochus, the of alpheus. there they passed
 the night and were treated hospitably. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
 places in the chariot. they drove out through the inner gateway and
 under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. then pisistratus lashed
 his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came
 to pylos, and then telemachus said:
 
“pisistratus, i hope you will promise to do what i am going to ask you.
 you know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both
 of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely;
 do not, therefore, take past my ship, but leave there, for if i
 go to your father’s house will try to keep in the warmth of his
 good will towards me, and i must go home at once.”
 
pisistratus thought how should do as was asked, and in the end he
 deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put menelaus’s
 beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. then
 said, “go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before i
 can reach home to tell my father. i know how obstinate is, and am
 sure will not let you go; will come down here to fetch you, and
 will not go back without you. but will be very angry.”
 
with this drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the pylians
 and soon reached his home, but telemachus called the men together and
 gave his orders. “now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order on
 board the ship, and let us set out home.”
 
thus did speak, and they went on board even as had said. but as
 telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to minerva in
 the ship’s stern, there came to him man from distant country, a
 seer, who was flying from argos because had killed man. was
 descended from melampus, who used to live in pylos, the land of sheep;
 was rich and owned great house, but was driven into exile by
 the great and powerful king neleus. neleus seized his goods and held
 them for whole year, during which was close prisoner in the
 house of king phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of
 the daughter of neleus and because was haunted by great sorrow
 that dread erinys had laid upon him. in the end, however, escaped
 with his life, drove the cattle from phylace to pylos, avenged the
 wrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of neleus to his
 brother. then left the country and went to argos, where it was
 ordained that should reign over much people. there married,
 established himself, and had two famous sons antiphates and mantius.
 antiphates became father of oicleus, and oicleus of amphiaraus, who was
 dearly loved both by jove and by apollo, but did not live to old
 age, for was killed in thebes by reason of woman’s gifts. his sons
 were alcmaeon and amphilochus. mantius, the other of melampus, was
 father to polypheides and cleitus. aurora, throned in gold, carried off
 cleitus for his beauty’s sake, that might dwell among the immortals,
 but apollo made polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now
 that amphiaraus was dead. quarrelled with his father and went to
 live in hyperesia, where remained and prophesied for all men.
 
his son, theoclymenus, it was who now came up to telemachus as was
 making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. “friend,” said he, “now
 that i find you sacrificing in this place, i beseech you by your
 sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, i pray you
 also by your own head and by those of your followers tell the truth
 and nothing but the truth. who and whence are you? tell also of your
 town and parents.”
 
telemachus said, “i will answer you quite truly. i am from ithaca, and
 my father is ulysses, as surely as that ever lived. but has come
 to some miserable end. therefore i have taken this ship and got my crew
 together to see if i can hear any news of him, for has been away a
 long time.”
 
“i too,” answered theoclymenus, “am an exile, for i have killed man
 of my own race. has many brothers and kinsmen in argos, and they
 have great power among the argives. i am flying to escape death at
 their hands, and am thus doomed to be wanderer on the face of the
 earth. i am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that
 they may not kill me, for i know they are in pursuit.”
 
“i will not refuse you,” replied telemachus, “if you wish to join us.
 come, therefore, and in ithaca we will treat you hospitably according
 to what we have.”
 
on this received theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck of
 the ship. went on board and sat in the stern, bidding theoclymenus
 sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. telemachus told them
 to catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. they set
 the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast
 with the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of
 twisted ox hide. minerva sent them fair wind that blew fresh and
 strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible. thus then
 they passed by crouni and chalcis.
 
presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. the vessel
 made quick passage to pheae and thence on to elis, where the epeans
 rule. telemachus then headed her for the flying islands,132 wondering
 within himself whether should escape death or should be taken
 prisoner.
 
meanwhile ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the
 hut, and the men supped with them. as soon as they had had to eat and
 drink, ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he
 would continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the
 station or pack him off to the city; so said:
 
“eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow i want to go away and begin begging
 about the town, so as to be more trouble to you or to your men. give
 your advice therefore, and let have good guide to go with me
 and show the way. i will go the round of the city begging as i needs
 must, to see if any one will give drink and piece of bread. i
 should like also to go to the house of ulysses and bring news of her
 husband to queen penelope. i could then go about among the suitors and
 see if out of all their abundance they will give dinner. i should
 soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. listen and
 believe when i tell you that by the blessing of mercury who gives grace
 and good name to the works of all men, there is one living who would
 make more handy servant than i should—to put fresh wood on the fire,
 chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that
 poor men have to do for their betters.”
 
the swineherd was very much disturbed when heard this. “heaven help
 me,” exclaimed, “what ever can have put such notion as that into
 your head? if you go near the suitors you will be undone to a
 certainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. they
 would never think of taking man like you for servant. their
 servants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and
 shirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables
 are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. stay
 where you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; i do not mind your
 being here, more do any of the others, and when telemachus comes
 home will give you shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you
 want to go.”
 
ulysses answered, “i hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to
 me, for having saved from going about and getting into trouble;
 there is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men
 have once got low down in the world they will go through great deal
 on behalf of their miserable bellies. since, however, you press to
 stay here and await the return of telemachus, tell about ulysses’
 mother, and his father whom left on the threshold of old age when he
 set out for troy. are they still living or are they already dead and in
 the house of hades?”
 
“i will tell you all about them,” replied eumaeus, “laertes is still
 living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,
 for is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also
 about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him
 more than anything else did. she came to an unhappy end133 through
 sorrow for her son: may friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by
 come to such an end as she did. as long as she was still living,
 though she was always grieving, i used to like seeing her and asking
 her how she did, for she brought up along with her daughter ctimene,
 the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she
 made little difference between us. when, however, we both grew up, they
 sent ctimene to same and received splendid dowry for her. as for me,
 my mistress gave good shirt and cloak with pair of sandals for
 my feet, and sent off into the country, but she was just as fond of
 as ever. this is all over now. still it has pleased heaven to
 prosper my work in the situation which i now hold. i have enough to eat
 and drink, and can find something for any respectable stranger who
 comes here; but there is getting kind word or deed out of my
 mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked people.
 servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have talk with her;
 they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and
 something too to take back with them into the country. this is what
 will keep servants in good humour.”
 
ulysses answered, “then you must have been very little fellow,
 eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.
 tell me, and tell true, was the city in which your father and mother
 lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you
 were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for
 whatever your master gave them?”
 
“stranger,” replied eumaeus, “as regards your question: sit still, make
 yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. the nights are
 now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and
 sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time,
 too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes
 to go to bed let him leave us and do so; can then take my master’s
 pigs out when has done breakfast in the morning. we too will sit
 here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories
 about our misfortunes; for when man has suffered much, and been
 buffeted about in the world, takes pleasure in recalling the memory
 of sorrows that have long gone by. as regards your question, then, my
 tale is as follows:
 
“you may have heard of an island called syra that lies over above
 ortygia,134 where the land begins to turn round and look in another
 direction.135 it is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good,
 with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine
 and wheat. dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any
 sickness, but when they grow old apollo comes with diana and kills them
 with his painless shafts. it contains two communities, and the whole
 country is divided between these two. my father ctesius of ormenus,
 man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.
 
“now to this place there came some cunning traders from phoenicia (for
 the phoenicians are great mariners) in ship which they had freighted
 with gewgaws of all kinds. there happened to be phoenician woman in
 my father’s house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant;
 these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near
 their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that woman can
 resist, matter how good she may be by nature. the man who had
 seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on this
 she told him her father’s name. ‘i come from sidon,’ said she, ‘and am
 daughter to arybas, man rolling in wealth. one day as i was coming
 into the town from the country, some taphian pirates seized and took
 here over the sea, where they sold to the man who owns this
 house, and gave them their price for me.’
 
“the man who had seduced her then said, ‘would you like to come along
 with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
 they are both alive and are said to be well off.’
 
“‘i will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men will first swear a
 solemn oath that you will do harm by the way.’
 
“they all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their
 oath the woman said, ‘hush; and if any of your men meets in the
 street or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one
 should go and tell my master, in which case would suspect something.
 would put in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep
 your own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can,
 and send word when you have done loading. i will bring as much gold
 as i can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that i can
 do towards paying my fare. i am nurse to the of the good man of the
 house, funny little fellow just able to run about. i will carry him
 off in your ship, and you will get great deal of money for him if you
 take him and sell him in foreign parts.’
 
“on this she went back to the house. the phoenicians stayed whole
 year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,
 and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the
 woman. their messenger, very cunning fellow, came to my father’s
 house bringing necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and
 while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and
 bargaining about it, made sign quietly to the woman and then went
 back to the ship, whereon she took by the hand and led out of the
 house. in the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with the
 cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in
 attendance on him; these were now all gone to meeting of the public
 assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the
 bosom of her dress, while i followed her, for i knew better. the sun
 was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as
 fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the phoenician ship
 was lying. when they had got on board they sailed their ways over the
 sea, taking us with them, and jove sent then fair wind; six days did
 we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day diana struck the
 woman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as though she were
 gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the
 seals and fishes, and i was left all sorrowful and alone. presently the
 winds and waves took the ship to ithaca, where laertes gave sundry of
 his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever i came to set eyes upon
 this country.”
 
ulysses answered, “eumaeus, i have heard the story of your misfortunes
 with the most lively interest and pity, but jove has given you good as
 well as evil, for in spite of everything you have good master, who
 sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead good
 life, whereas i am still going about begging my way from city to city.”
 
thus did they converse, and they had only very little time left for
 sleep, for it was soon daybreak. in the mean time telemachus and his
 crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast,
 and rowed the ship into the harbour.136 they cast out their mooring
 stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the shore,
 mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. as soon as they had had enough
 to eat and drink telemachus said, “take the ship on to the town, but
 leave here, for i want to look after the herdsmen on one of my
 farms. in the evening, when i have seen all i want, i will come down to
 the city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble i will give
 you all good dinner with meat and wine.” 137
 
then theoclymenus said, “and what, my dear young friend, is to become
 of me? to whose house, among all your chief men, am i to repair? or
 shall i go straight to your own house and to your mother?”
 
“at any other time,” replied telemachus, “i should have bidden you go
 to my own house, for you would find want of hospitality; at the
 present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for i
 shall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show
 herself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper
 chamber, out of their way; but i can tell you man whose house you can
 go to—i mean eurymachus the of polybus, who is held in the highest
 estimation by every one in ithaca. is much the best man and the most
 persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and
 trying to take ulysses’ place. jove, however, in heaven alone knows
 whether or they will come to bad end before the marriage takes
 place.”
 
as was speaking bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk, apollo’s
 messenger. it held dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore
 them off,138 fell to the ground midway between telemachus and the ship.
 on this theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
 “telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not fly on your right hand
 without having been sent there by some god. as soon as i saw it i knew
 it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there
 will be house in ithaca more royal than your own.”
 
“i wish it may prove so,” answered telemachus. “if it does, i will show
 you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet
 you will congratulate you.”
 
then said to his friend piraeus, “piraeus, of clytius, you have
 throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve of all those who
 have accompanied to pylos; i wish you would take this stranger to
 your own house and entertain him hospitably till i can come for him.”
 
and piraeus answered, “telemachus, you may stay away as long as you
 please, but i will look after him for you, and shall find lack of
 hospitality.”
 
as spoke went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose
 the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. but telemachus
 bound on his sandals, and took long and doughty spear with head of
 sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. then they loosed the
 hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city as
 they had been told to do, while telemachus strode on as fast as he
 could, till reached the homestead where his countless herds of swine
 were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so
 devoted servant to his master.
 



book xvi
 

ulysses reveals himself to telemachus.
 

meanwhile ulysses and the swineherd had lit fire in the hut and were
 were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out
 with the pigs. when telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but
 fawned upon him, so ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing
 that the dogs did not bark, said to eumaeus:
 
“eumaeus, i hear footsteps; i suppose one of your men or some one of
 your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and
 not barking.”
 
the words were hardly out of his mouth before his stood at the
 door. eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which was mixing
 wine fell from his hands, as made towards his master. kissed his
 head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. father could not
 be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old
 age, after ten years’ absence in foreign country and after having
 gone through much hardship. embraced him, kissed him all over as
 though had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:
 
“so you are come, telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. when i
 heard you had gone to pylos i made sure i was never going to see you
 any more. come in, my dear child, and sit down, that i may have good
 look at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into
 the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town
 generally. i suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the
 suitors are doing.”
 
“so be it, old friend,” answered telemachus, “but i am come now because
 i want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her old
 home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of
 ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs.”
 
“she is still at the house,” replied eumaeus, “grieving and breaking
 her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually.”
 
as spoke took telemachus’ spear, whereon crossed the stone
 threshold and came inside. ulysses rose from his seat to give him place
 as entered, but telemachus checked him; “sit down, stranger,” said
 he, “i can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay
 it for me.”
 
ulysses went back to his own place, and eumaeus strewed some green
 brushwood on the floor and threw sheepskin on top of it for
 telemachus to sit upon. then the swineherd brought them platters of
 cold meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he
 filled the bread baskets with bread as fast as could. mixed wine
 also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing ulysses. then they
 laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon
 as they had had enough to eat and drink telemachus said to eumaeus,
 “old friend, where does this stranger come from? how did his crew bring
 him to ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly did not come here by
 land.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “my son, i will tell you the
 real truth. says is cretan, and that has been great
 traveller. at this moment is running away from thesprotian ship,
 and has taken refuge at my station, so i will put him into your hands.
 do whatever you like with him, only remember that is your
 suppliant.”
 
“i am very much distressed,” said telemachus, “by what you have just
 told me. how can i take this stranger into my house? i am as yet young,
 and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. my
 mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look
 after the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her
 husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man
 of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most
 advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station i
 will find him cloak and shirt of good wear, with sword and sandals,
 and will send him wherever wants to go. or if you like you can keep
 him here at the station, and i will send him clothes and food that he
 may be burden on you and on your men; but i will not have him go
 near the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat
 him in way that would greatly grieve me; matter how valiant man
 may be can do nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong
 for him.”
 
then ulysses said, “sir, it is right that i should say something
 myself. i am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent
 way in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such man as you
 are. tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god
 set your people against you? may you not complain of your brothers—for
 it is to these that man may look for support, however great his
 quarrel may be? i wish i were as young as you are and in my present
 mind; if i were to ulysses, or, indeed, ulysses himself, i would
 rather some one came and cut my head off, but i would go to the house
 and be the bane of every one of these men.139 if they were too many for
 me—i being single-handed—i would rather die fighting in my own house
 than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly
 maltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an
 unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to purpose
 for an end that shall never be accomplished.”
 
and telemachus answered, “i will tell you truly everything. there is no
 enmity between and my people, nor can i complain of brothers, to
 whom man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. jove
 has made us race of only sons. laertes was the only of arceisius,
 and ulysses only of laertes. i am myself the only of ulysses
 who left behind him when went away, so that i have never been of
 any use to him. hence it comes that my house is in the hands of
 numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands,
 dulichium, same, zacynthus, as also all the principal men of ithaca
 itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my
 mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor
 yet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and
 before long will do so with myself into the bargain. the issue,
 however, rests with heaven. but do you, old friend eumaeus, go at once
 and tell penelope that i am safe and have returned from pylos. tell it
 to herself alone, and then come back here without letting any one else
 know, for there are many who are plotting mischief against me.”
 
“i understand and heed you,” replied eumaeus; “you need instruct no
 further, only as i am going that way say whether i had not better let
 poor laertes know that you are returned. used to superintend the
 work on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about ulysses, and he
 would eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me
 that from the day on which you set out for pylos has neither eaten
 nor drunk as ought to do, nor does look after his farm, but sits
 weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones.”
 
“more’s the pity,” answered telemachus, “i am sorry for him, but we
 must leave him to himself just now. if people could have everything
 their own way, the first thing i should choose would be the return of
 my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again,
 and do not turn out of your way to tell laertes. tell my mother to send
 one of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it
 from her.”
 
thus did urge the swineherd; eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,
 bound them to his feet, and started for the town. minerva watched him
 well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a
 woman—fair, stately, and wise. she stood against the side of the entry,
 and revealed herself to ulysses, but telemachus could not see her, and
 knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen
 by everybody. ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not
 bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.
 she nodded her head and motioned to ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon
 left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the
 yards. then she said to him:
 
“ulysses, noble of laertes, it is now time for you to tell your
 son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the
 destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. i will not be
 long in joining you, for i too am eager for the fray.”
 
as she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. first she threw a
 fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him
 younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,
 filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. then she
 went away and ulysses came back inside the hut. his was astounded
 when saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear might be looking
 upon god.
 
“stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from what you were
 moment or two ago. you are dressed differently and your colour is not
 the same. are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? if
 so, be propitious to till i can make you due sacrifice and offerings
 of wrought gold. have mercy upon me.”
 
and ulysses said, “i am god, why should you take for one? i am
 your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the
 hands of lawless men.”
 
as spoke kissed his son, and tear fell from his cheek on to the
 ground, for had restrained all tears till now. but telemachus could
 not yet believe that it was his father, and said:
 
“you are not my father, but some god is flattering with vain hopes
 that i may grieve the more hereafter; mortal man could of himself
 contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young
 at moment’s notice, unless god were with him. second ago you were
 old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from
 heaven.”
 
ulysses answered, “telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably
 astonished at my being really here. there is other ulysses who will
 come hereafter. such as i am, it is i, who after long wandering and
 much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country.
 what you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess minerva, who
 does with whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. at one
 moment she makes like beggar, and the next i am young man with
 good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in
 heaven to make any man look either rich or poor.”
 
as spoke sat down, and telemachus threw his arms about his father
 and wept. they were both so much moved that they cried aloud like
 eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their
 half fledged young by peasants. thus piteously did they weep, and the
 sun would have gone down upon their mourning if telemachus had not
 suddenly said, “in what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you
 to ithaca? of what nation did they declare themselves to be—for you
 cannot have come by land?”
 
“i will tell you the truth, my son,” replied ulysses. “it was the
 phaeacians who brought here. they are great sailors, and are in the
 habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. they took
 over the while i was fast asleep, and landed in ithaca, after
 giving many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. these things by
 heaven’s mercy are lying concealed in cave, and i am now come here on
 the suggestion of minerva that we may consult about killing our
 enemies. first, therefore, give list of the suitors, with their
 number, that i may learn who, and how many, they are. i can then turn
 the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole
 body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us.”
 
to this telemachus answered, “father, i have always heard of your
 renown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a
 very great one: i am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot
 stand against many and brave ones. there are not ten suitors only, nor
 twice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at
 once. there are fifty-two chosen youths from dulichium, and they have
 six servants; from same there are twenty-four; twenty young achaeans
 from zacynthus, and twelve from ithaca itself, all of them well born.
 they have with them servant medon, bard, and two men who can carve
 at table. if we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to
 rue your coming, and your revenge. see whether you cannot think of some
 one who would be willing to come and help us.”
 
“listen to me,” replied ulysses, “and think whether minerva and her
 father jove may seem sufficient, or whether i am to try and find some
 one else as well.”
 
“those whom you have named,” answered telemachus, “are couple of good
 allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power
 over both gods and men.”
 
“these two,” continued ulysses, “will not keep long out of the fray,
 when the suitors and we join fight in my house. now, therefore, return
 home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.
 later on the swineherd will bring to the city disguised as a
 miserable old beggar. if you see them ill treating me, steel your heart
 against my sufferings; even though they drag feet foremost out of
 the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently
 trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to
 you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. furthermore i say, and
 lay my saying to your heart; when minerva shall put it in my mind, i
 will nod my head to you, and on seeing do this you must collect all
 the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.
 make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say
 that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as
 it is longer what it was when ulysses went away, but has become
 soiled and begrimed with soot. add to this more particularly that you
 are afraid jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that
 they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and
 wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. but
 leave sword and spear apiece for yourself and me, and couple of
 oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; jove and
 minerva will then soon quiet these people. there is also another
 matter; if you are indeed my and my blood runs in your veins, let
 one know that ulysses is within the house—neither laertes, nor yet
 the swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even penelope herself. let
 you and exploit the women alone, and let us also make trial of some
 other of the men servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is
 against us.”
 
“father,” replied telemachus, “you will come to know by and by, and
 when you do you will find that i can keep your counsel. i do not think,
 however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us.
 think it over. it will take us long time to go the round of the farms
 and exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your
 estate with impunity and without compunction. prove the women by all
 means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but i am not in
 favour of going round and trying the men. we can attend to that later
 on, if you really have some sign from jove that will support you.”
 
thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought
 telemachus and his crew from pylos had reached the town of ithaca. when
 they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land;
 their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all
 the presents at the house of clytius. then they sent servant to tell
 penelope that telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the
 ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
 this servant and eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the
 same errand of going to tell penelope. when they reached the house, the
 servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting
 women, “your son, madam, is now returned from pylos”; but eumaeus went
 close up to penelope, and said privately all that her had bidden
 him tell her. when had given his message left the house with its
 outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.
 
the suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went
 outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a
 council near the main entrance. eurymachus, of polybus, was the
 first to speak.
 
“my friends,” said he, “this voyage of telemachus’s is very serious
 matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. now, however,
 let us draw ship into the water, and get crew together to send
 after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can.”
 
had hardly done speaking when amphinomus turned in his place and saw
 the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and
 putting by their oars; so laughed, and said to the others, “we need
 not send them any message, for they are here. some god must have told
 them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her.”
 
on this they rose and went to the water side. the crew then drew the
 ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they
 went up in body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any
 one old or young sit along with them, and antinous, of eupeithes,
 spoke first.
 
“good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved this man from
 destruction. we kept succession of scouts upon the headlands all day
 long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but
 waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and
 killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. let us
 consider how we can make an end of him. must not escape us; our
 affair is never likely to come off while is alive, for is very
 shrewd, and public feeling is by means all on our side. we must make
 haste before can call the achaeans in assembly; will lose time
 in doing so, for will be furious with us, and will tell all the
 world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. the people
 will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they
 do us hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. let us try
 and lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the
 road hither. then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his
 mother and the man who marries her have the house. if this does not
 please you, and you wish telemachus to live on and hold his father’s
 property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this
 way, but must make our offers to penelope each from his own house, and
 she can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it
 is to win her.”
 
they all held their peace until amphinomus rose to speak. was the
 of nisus, who was to king aretias, and was foremost among
 all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of
 dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to penelope
 than that of any of the other suitors, for was man of good natural
 disposition. “my friends,” said he, speaking to them plainly and in all
 honestly, “i am not in favour of killing telemachus. it is heinous
 thing to kill one who is of noble blood. let us first take counsel of
 the gods, and if the oracles of jove advise it, i will both help to
 kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they
 dissuade us, i would have you hold your hands.”
 
thus did speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose
 forthwith and went to the house of ulysses, where they took their
 accustomed seats.
 
then penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. she
 knew of the plot against telemachus, for the servant medon had
 overheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to
 the court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
 stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister
 holding veil before her face, and rebuked antinous saying:
 
“antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best
 speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in ithaca, but you are
 nothing of the kind. madman, why should you try to compass the death of
 telemachus, and take heed of suppliants, whose witness is jove
 himself? it is not right for you to plot thus against one another. do
 you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the
 people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some taphian
 pirates and plundered the thesprotians who were at peace with us? they
 wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything had, but ulysses
 stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour
 his property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his
 wife and trying to kill his son. leave off doing so, and stop the
 others also.”
 
to this eurymachus of polybus answered, “take heart, queen penelope
 daughter of icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
 the man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon
 your telemachus, while i yet live to look upon the face of the
 earth. i say—and it shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddened
 with his blood; for many time has ulysses taken on his knees, held
 wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
 therefore telemachus is much the dearest friend i have, and has nothing
 to fear from the hands of us suitors. of course, if death comes to him
 from the gods, cannot escape it.” said this to quiet her, but in
 reality was plotting against telemachus.
 
then penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till minerva
 shed sleep over her eyes. in the evening eumaeus got back to ulysses
 and his son, who had just sacrificed young pig of year old and were
 helping one another to get supper ready; minerva therefore came up to
 ulysses, turned him into an old man with stroke of her wand, and clad
 him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might
 recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell penelope.
 
telemachus was the first to speak. “so you have got back, eumaeus,”
 said he. “what is the news of the town? have the suitors returned, or
 are they still waiting over yonder, to take on my way home?”
 
“i did not think of asking about that,” replied eumaeus, “when i was in
 the town. i thought i would give my message and come back as soon as i
 could. i met man sent by those who had gone with you to pylos, and he
 was the first to tell the news to your mother, but i can say what i saw
 with my own eyes; i had just got on to the crest of the hill of mercury
 above the town when i saw ship coming into harbour with number of
 men in her. they had many shields and spears, and i thought it was the
 suitors, but i cannot be sure.”
 
on hearing this telemachus smiled to his father, but so that eumaeus
 could not see him.
 
then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they
 ate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. as
 soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest
 and enjoyed the boon of sleep.
 



book xvii
 

telemachus and his mother meet—ulysses and eumaeus come down to the
 town, and ulysses is insulted by melanthius—he is recognised by the dog
 argos—he is insulted and presently struck by antinous with a
 stool—penelope desires that shall be sent to her.
 

when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, telemachus
 bound on his sandals and took strong spear that suited his hands, for
 wanted to go into the city. “old friend,” said to the swineherd,
 “i will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will
 never leave off grieving till she has seen me. as for this unfortunate
 stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who
 will give him drink and piece of bread. i have trouble enough of my
 own, and cannot be burdened with other people. if this makes him angry
 so much the worse for him, but i like to say what i mean.”
 
then ulysses said, “sir, i do not want to stay here; beggar can
 always do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give
 him something. i am too old to care about remaining here at the beck
 and call of master. therefore let this man do as you have just told
 him, and take to the town as soon as i have had warm by the fire,
 and the day has got little heat in it. my clothes are wretchedly
 thin, and this frosty morning i shall be perished with cold, for you
 say the city is some way off.”
 
on this telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge
 upon the suitors. when reached home stood his spear against a
 bearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister
 itself, and went inside.
 
nurse euryclea saw him long before any one else did. she was putting
 the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to
 him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and
 shoulders with their kisses. penelope came out of her room looking like
 diana or venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son. she
 kissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, “light of my eyes,”
 she cried as she spoke fondly to him, “so you are come home again; i
 made sure i was never going to see you any more. to think of your
 having gone off to pylos without saying anything about it or obtaining
 my consent. but come, tell what you saw.”
 
“do not scold me, mother,” answered telemachus, “nor vex me, seeing
 what narrow escape i have had, but wash your face, change your dress,
 go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs
 to all the gods if jove will only grant us our revenge upon the
 suitors. i must now go to the place of assembly to invite stranger
 who has come back with from pylos. i sent him on with my crew, and
 told piraeus to take him home and look after him till i could come for
 him myself.”
 
she heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, and
 vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only
 vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors.
 
telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—not
 alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. minerva endowed him with a
 presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as went
 by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths
 and malice in their hearts; but avoided them, and went to sit with
 mentor, antiphus, and halitherses, old friends of his father’s house,
 and they made him tell them all that had happened to him. then piraeus
 came up with theoclymenus, whom had escorted through the town to the
 place of assembly, whereon telemachus at once joined them. piraeus was
 first to speak: “telemachus,” said he, “i wish you would send some of
 your women to my house to take away the presents menelaus gave you.”
 
“we do not know, piraeus,” answered telemachus, “what may happen. if
 the suitors kill in my own house and divide my property among them,
 i would rather you had the presents than that any of those people
 should get hold of them. if on the other hand i managed to kill them, i
 shall be much obliged if you will kindly bring my presents.”
 
with these words took theoclymenus to his own house. when they got
 there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the
 baths, and washed themselves. when the maids had washed and anointed
 them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at
 table. maid servant then brought them water in beautiful golden
 ewer, and poured it into silver basin for them to wash their hands;
 and she drew clean table beside them. an upper servant brought them
 bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
 opposite them sat penelope, reclining on couch by one of the
 bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. then they laid their hands
 on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
 enough to eat and drink penelope said:
 
“telemachus, i shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which
 i have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day ulysses set out
 for troy with the sons of atreus. you failed, however, to make it clear
 to before the suitors came back to the house, whether or you had
 been able to hear anything about the return of your father.”
 
“i will tell you then truth,” replied her son. “we went to pylos and
 saw nestor, who took to his house and treated as hospitably as
 though i were of his own who had just returned after long
 absence; so also did his sons; but said had not heard word from
 any human being about ulysses, whether was alive or dead. sent
 me, therefore, with chariot and horses to menelaus. there i saw
 helen, for whose sake so many, both argives and trojans, were in
 heaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer. menelaus asked what it was that
 had brought to lacedaemon, and i told him the whole truth, whereon
 said, ‘so, then, these cowards would usurp brave man’s bed? hind
 might as well lay her new-born young in the lair of lion, and then go
 off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell. the lion, when he
 comes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair of them, and
 so will ulysses with these suitors. by father jove, minerva, and
 apollo, if ulysses is still the man that was when wrestled with
 philomeleides in lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the greeks
 cheered him—if is still such, and were to come near these suitors,
 they would have short shrift and sorry wedding. as regards your
 question, however, i will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the
 old man of the told me, so much will i tell you in full. said he
 could see ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the
 nymph calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and could not reach his
 home, for had ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ this
 was what menelaus told me, and when i had heard his story i came away;
 the gods then gave fair wind and soon brought safe home again.”
 
with these words moved the heart of penelope. then theoclymenus said
 to her:
 
“madam, wife of ulysses, telemachus does not understand these things;
 listen therefore to me, for i can divine them surely, and will hide
 nothing from you. may jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the
 rites of hospitality, with that hearth of ulysses to which i now come,
 that ulysses himself is even now in ithaca, and, either going about the
 country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds
 and preparing day of reckoning for the suitors. i saw an omen when i
 was on the ship which meant this, and i told telemachus about it.”
 
“may it be even so,” answered penelope; “if your words come true, you
 shall have such gifts and such good will from that all who see you
 shall congratulate you.”
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or
 aiming with spears at mark on the levelled ground in front of the
 house, and behaving with all their old insolence. but when it was now
 time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the
 town from all the country round, 140 with their shepherds as usual,
 then medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them
 at table, said, “now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport,
 so come inside that we may get dinner ready. dinner is not bad thing,
 at dinner time.”
 
they left their sports as told them, and when they were within the
 house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then
 sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and heifer, all of them fat and
 well grown.141 thus they made ready for their meal. in the meantime
 ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the
 swineherd said, “stranger, i suppose you still want to go to town
 to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part i should have
 liked you to stay here as station hand, but i must do as my master
 tells me, or will scold later on, and scolding from one’s
 master is very serious thing. let us then be off, for it is now broad
 day; it will be night again directly and then you will find it
 colder.”142
 
“i know, and understand you,” replied ulysses; “you need say more.
 let us be going, but if you have stick ready cut, let have it to
 walk with, for you say the road is very rough one.”
 
as spoke threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,
 by the cord from which it hung, and eumaeus gave him stick to his
 liking. the two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs
 and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his
 master followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as he
 leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. when they had
 got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached
 the fountain from which the citizens drew their water. this had been
 made by ithacus, neritus, and polyctor. there was grove of
 water-loving poplars planted in circle all round it, and the clear
 cold water came down to it from rock high up,143 while above the
 fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used
 to sacrifice. here melanthius of dolius overtook them as was
 driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors’
 dinner, and there were two shepherds with him. when saw eumaeus and
 ulysses reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, which
 made ulysses very angry.
 
“there you go,” cried he, “and precious pair you are. see how heaven
 brings birds of the same feather to one another. where, pray, master
 swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? it would make any
 one sick to see such creature at table. fellow like this never won
 prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his
 shoulders against every man’s door post, and begging, not for swords
 and cauldrons144 like man, but only for few scraps not worth
 begging for. if you would give him to for hand on my station, he
 might do to clean out the folds, or bring bit of sweet feed to the
 kids, and could fatten his thighs as much as pleased on whey; but
 has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he
 will do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his
 insatiable belly. i say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if goes
 near ulysses’ house will get his head broken by the stools they will
 fling at him, till they turn him out.”
 
on this, as passed, gave ulysses kick on the hip out of pure
 wantonness, but ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path.
 for moment doubted whether or to fly at melanthius and kill him
 with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he
 resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the
 swineherd looked straight at melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his
 hands and praying to heaven as did so.
 
“fountain nymphs,” cried, “children of jove, if ever ulysses burned
 you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my
 prayer that heaven may send him home. would soon put an end to the
 swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting
 people—gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin
 through bad shepherding.”
 
then melanthius the goatherd answered, “you ill conditioned cur, what
 are you talking about? some day or other i will put you on board ship
 and take you to foreign country, where i can sell you and pocket the
 money you will fetch. i wish i were as sure that apollo would strike
 telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as i
 am that ulysses will never come home again.”
 
with this left them to come on at their leisure, while went
 quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. when got
 there went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite
 eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. the servants
 brought him portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread
 before him that might eat. presently ulysses and the swineherd came
 up to the house and stood by it, amid sound of music, for phemius was
 just beginning to sing to the suitors. then ulysses took hold of the
 swineherd’s hand, and said:
 
“eumaeus, this house of ulysses is very fine place. matter how far
 you go, you will find few like it. one building keeps following on
 after another. the outer court has wall with battlements all round
 it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be
 hard matter to take it by force of arms. i perceive, too, that there
 are many people banqueting within it, for there is smell of roast
 meat, and i hear sound of music, which the gods have made to go along
 with feasting.”
 
then eumaeus said, “you have perceived aright, as indeed you generally
 do; but let us think what will be our best course. will you go inside
 first and join the suitors, leaving here behind you, or will you
 wait here and let go in first? but do not wait long, or some one may
 see you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. consider
 this matter i pray you.”
 
and ulysses answered, “i understand and heed. go in first and leave me
 here where i am. i am quite used to being beaten and having things
 thrown at me. i have been so much buffeted about in war and by that
 i am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. but man cannot
 hide away the cravings of hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives
 much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted
 out to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people.”
 
as they were thus talking, dog that had been lying asleep raised his
 head and pricked up his ears. this was argos, whom ulysses had bred
 before setting out for troy, but had never had any work out of him.
 in the old days used to be taken out by the young men when they went
 hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone
 was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in
 front of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away to
 manure the great close; and was full of fleas. as soon as saw
 ulysses standing there, dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but he
 could not get close up to his master. when ulysses saw the dog on the
 other side of the yard, dashed tear from his eyes without eumaeus
 seeing it, and said:
 
“eumaeus, what noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap:
 his build is splendid; is as fine fellow as looks, or is he
 only one of those dogs that come begging about table, and are kept
 merely for show?”
 
“this hound,” answered eumaeus, “belonged to him who has died in far
 country. if were what was when ulysses left for troy, would
 soon show you what could do. there was not wild beast in the
 forest that could get away from him when was once on its tracks. but
 now has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and
 the women take care of him. servants never do their work when their
 master’s hand is longer over them, for jove takes half the goodness
 out of man when makes slave of him.”
 
as spoke went inside the buildings to the cloister where the
 suitors were, but argos died as soon as had recognised his master.
 
telemachus saw eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him
 to come and sit beside him; so looked about and saw seat lying
 near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he
 picked it up, brought it to telemachus’s table, and sat down opposite
 him. then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from
 the bread-basket.
 
immediately afterwards ulysses came inside, looking like poor
 miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in
 rags. sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors
 leading from the outer to the inner court, and against bearing-post
 of cypress-wood which the carpenter had skilfully planed, and had made
 to join truly with rule and line. telemachus took whole loaf from the
 bread-basket, with as much meat as could hold in his two hands, and
 said to eumaeus, “take this to the stranger, and tell him to go the
 round of the suitors, and beg from them; beggar must not be
 shamefaced.”
 
so eumaeus went up to him and said, “stranger, telemachus sends you
 this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for
 beggars must not be shamefaced.”
 
ulysses answered, “may king jove grant all happiness to telemachus, and
 fulfil the desire of his heart.”
 
then with both hands took what telemachus had sent him, and laid it
 on the dirty old wallet at his feet. went on eating it while the
 bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as left off. the
 suitors applauded the bard, whereon minerva went up to ulysses and
 prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that
 might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the
 bad; but come what might she was not going to save single one of
 them. ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right,
 and stretched out his hands to beg as though were real beggar.
 some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another
 who was and where came from; whereon the goatherd melanthius
 said, “suitors of my noble mistress, i can tell you something about
 him, for i have seen him before. the swineherd brought him here, but i
 know nothing about the man himself, nor where comes from.”
 
on this antinous began to abuse the swineherd. “you precious idiot,” he
 cried, “what have you brought this man to town for? have we not tramps
 and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? do you think
 it small thing that such people gather here to waste your master’s
 property—and must you needs bring this man as well?”
 
and eumaeus answered, “antinous, your birth is good but your words
 evil. it was doing of mine that came here. who is likely to
 invite stranger from foreign country, unless it be one of those who
 can do public service as seer, healer of hurts, carpenter, or a
 bard who can charm us with his singing? such men are welcome all the
 world over, but one is likely to ask beggar who will only worry
 him. you are always harder on ulysses’ servants than any of the other
 suitors are, and above all on me, but i do not care so long as
 telemachus and penelope are alive and here.”
 
but telemachus said, “hush, do not answer him; antinous has the
 bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and makes the others worse.”
 
then turning to antinous said, “antinous, you take as much care of
 my interests as though i were your son. why should you want to see this
 stranger turned out of the house? heaven forbid; take something and
 give it him yourself; i do not grudge it; i bid you take it. never mind
 my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but i know you
 will not do what i say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself
 than of giving them to other people.”
 
“what do you mean, telemachus,” replied antinous, “by this swaggering
 talk? if all the suitors were to give him as much as i will, would
 not come here again for another three months.”
 
as spoke drew the stool on which rested his dainty feet from
 under the table, and made as though would throw it at ulysses, but
 the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet with
 bread and meat; was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold
 and eat what the suitors had given him, but first went up to
 antinous and said:
 
“sir, give something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you
 seem to be chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be
 the better giver, and i will tell far and wide of your bounty. i too
 was rich man once, and had fine house of my own; in those days i
 gave to many tramp such as i now am, matter who might be nor
 what wanted. i had any number of servants, and all the other things
 which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it
 pleased jove to take all away from me. sent with band of roving
 robbers to egypt; it was long voyage and i was undone by it. i
 stationed my ships in the river aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them
 and keep guard over them, while i sent out scouts to reconnoitre from
 every point of vantage.
 
“but the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and
 ravaged the land of the egyptians, killing the men, and taking their
 wives and children captives. the alarm was soon carried to the city,
 and when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till
 the plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam
 of armour. then jove spread panic among my men, and they would no
 longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. the
 egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced
 labour for them; as for myself, they gave to friend who met them,
 to take to cyprus, dmetor by name, of iasus, who was great man in
 cyprus. thence i am come hither in state of great misery.”
 
then antinous said, “what god can have sent such pestilence to plague
 us during our dinner? get out, into the open part of the court,145 or i
 will give you egypt and cyprus over again for your insolence and
 importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given you
 lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be free
 with other people’s property when there is plenty of it.”
 
on this ulysses began to move off, and said, “your looks, my fine sir,
 are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would
 not spare poor man so much as pinch of salt, for though you are in
 another man’s, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you
 to give him even piece of bread.”
 
this made antinous very angry, and scowled at him saying, “you shall
 pay for this before you get clear of the court.” with these words he
 threw footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near
 the top of his back. ulysses stood firm as rock and the blow did not
 even stagger him, but shook his head in silence as brooded on his
 revenge. then went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying
 his well filled wallet at his feet.
 
“listen to me,” cried, “you suitors of queen penelope, that i may
 speak even as i am minded. man knows neither ache nor pain if gets
 hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and
 even so antinous has hit while in the service of my miserable belly,
 which is always getting people into trouble. still, if the poor have
 gods and avenging deities at all, i pray them that antinous may come to
 bad end before his marriage.”
 
“sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off
 elsewhere,” shouted antinous. “if you say more i will have you dragged
 hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you
 alive.”
 
the other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young
 men said, “antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a
 tramp: it will be worse for you if should turn out to be some
 god—and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as
 people from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do
 amiss and who righteously.”146
 
thus said the suitors, but antinous paid them heed. meanwhile
 telemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to his
 father, and though tear fell from him, shook his head in silence
 and brooded on his revenge.
 
now when penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the
 banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “would that apollo
 would so strike you, antinous,” and her waiting woman eurynome
 answered, “if our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would
 ever again see the sun rise.” then penelope said, “nurse,147 i hate
 every single one of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but i
 hate antinous like the darkness of death itself. poor unfortunate
 tramp has come begging about the house for sheer want. every one else
 has given him something to put in his wallet, but antinous has hit him
 on the right shoulder-blade with footstool.”
 
thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in the
 meantime ulysses was getting his dinner. then she called for the
 swineherd and said, “eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, i
 want to see him and ask him some questions. seems to have travelled
 much, and may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “if these achaeans, madam,
 would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his
 adventures. i had him three days and three nights with in my hut,
 which was the first place reached after running away from his ship,
 and has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. if had
 been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips
 all hearers hang entranced, i could not have been more charmed as i sat
 in my hut and listened to him. says there is an old friendship
 between his house and that of ulysses, and that comes from crete
 where the descendants of minos live, after having been driven hither
 and thither by every kind of misfortune; also declares that has
 heard of ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the
 thesprotians, and that is bringing great wealth home with him.”
 
“call him here, then,” said penelope, “that i too may hear his story.
 as for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they
 will, for they have nothing to fret about. their corn and wine remain
 unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while
 they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen,
 sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a
 thought to the quantity of wine they drink. estate can stand such
 recklessness, for we have now ulysses to protect us. if were to
 come again, and his would soon have their revenge.”
 
as she spoke telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house
 resounded with it. penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to
 eumaeus, “go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my sneezed
 just as i was speaking? this can only mean that all the suitors are
 going to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape. furthermore
 i say, and lay my saying to your heart: if i am satisfied that the
 stranger is speaking the truth i shall give him shirt and cloak of
 good wear.”
 
when eumaeus heard this went straight to ulysses and said, “father
 stranger, my mistress penelope, mother of telemachus, has sent for you;
 she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her
 about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the
 truth, she will give you shirt and cloak, which are the very things
 that you are most in want of. as for bread, you can get enough of that
 to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those give
 that will.”
 
“i will tell penelope,” answered ulysses, “nothing but what is strictly
 true. i know all about her husband, and have been partner with him in
 affliction, but i am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel
 suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. just now,
 moreover, as i was going about the house without doing any harm, man
 gave blow that hurt very much, but neither telemachus nor any
 one else defended me. tell penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait
 till sundown. let her give seat close up to the fire, for my
 clothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for you have seen them
 ever since i first asked you to help me—she can then ask about the
 return of her husband.”
 
the swineherd went back when heard this, and penelope said as she
 saw him cross the threshold, “why do you not bring him here, eumaeus?
 is afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is shy of coming
 inside the house at all? beggars should not be shamefaced.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “the stranger is quite
 reasonable. is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one
 else would do. asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much
 better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can
 hear him and talk to him as you will.”
 
“the man is fool,” answered penelope, “it would very likely be as he
 says, for there are such abominable people in the whole world as
 these men are.”
 
when she had done speaking eumaeus went back to the suitors, for had
 explained everything. then went up to telemachus and said in his ear
 so that none could overhear him, “my dear sir, i will now go back to
 the pigs, to see after your property and my own business. you will look
 to what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of
 danger, for there are many who bear you ill will. may jove bring them
 to bad end before they do us mischief.”
 
“very well,” replied telemachus, “go home when you have had your
 dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are to
 sacrifice for the day. leave the rest to heaven and me.”
 
on this eumaeus took his seat again, and when had finished his
 dinner left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and
 went back to his pigs. as for the suitors, they presently began to
 amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on
 towards evening.
 



book xviii
 

the fight with irus—ulysses warns amphinomus—penelope gets presents
 from the suitors—the braziers—ulysses rebukes eurymachus.
 

now there came certain common tramp who used to go begging all over
 the city of ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and
 drunkard. this man had strength nor stay in him, but was great
 hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him,
 was arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him irus,148 because
 used to run errands for any one who would send him. as soon as he
 came began to insult ulysses, and to try and drive him out of his
 own house.
 
“be off, old man,” cried, “from the doorway, or you shall be dragged
 out neck and heels. do you not see that they are all giving the
 wink, and wanting to turn you out by force, only i do not like to do
 so? get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.”
 
ulysses frowned on him and said, “my friend, i do you manner of
 harm; people give you great deal, but i am not jealous. there is room
 enough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me
 things that are not yours to give. you seem to be just such another
 tramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by and
 by. do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will incense
 me, and old though i am, i shall cover your mouth and chest with blood.
 i shall have more peace tomorrow if i do, for you will not come to the
 house of ulysses any more.”
 
irus was very angry and answered, “you filthy glutton, you run on
 trippingly like an old fish-fag. i have good mind to lay both hands
 about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar’s
 tusks. get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and
 look on. you will never be able to fight one who is so much younger
 than yourself.”
 
thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front
 of the doorway,149 and when antinous saw what was going on laughed
 heartily and said to the others, “this is the finest sport that you
 ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house. the
 stranger and irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us set
 them on to do so at once.”
 
the suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged
 tramps. “listen to me,” said antinous, “there are some goats’ paunches
 down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set
 aside for supper; who is victorious and proves himself to be the
 better man shall have his pick of the lot; shall be free of our
 table and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all.”
 
the others all agreed, but ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,
 “sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his
 own against young one; but my irrepressible belly urges on, though
 i know it can only end in my getting drubbing. you must swear,
 however that none of you will give foul blow to favour irus and
 secure him the victory.”
 
they swore as told them, and when they had completed their oath
 telemachus put in word and said, “stranger, if you have mind to
 settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here.
 whoever strikes you will have to fight more than one. i am host, and
 the other chiefs, antinous and eurymachus, both of them men of
 understanding, are of the same mind as i am.”
 
every one assented, and ulysses girded his old rags about his loins,
 thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his
 mighty arms; but minerva came up to him and made his limbs even
 stronger still. the suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one
 would turn towards his neighbour saying, “the stranger has brought such
 thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left of
 irus.”
 
irus began to be very uneasy as heard them, but the servants girded
 him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such
 fright that his limbs were all of tremble. antinous scolded him and
 said, “you swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all
 if you are afraid of such an old broken down creature as this tramp is.
 i say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if beats you and proves
 himself the better man, i shall pack you off on board ship to the
 mainland and send you to king echetus, who kills every one that comes
 near him. will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your
 entrails for the dogs to eat.”
 
this frightened irus still more, but they brought him into the middle
 of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. then ulysses
 considered whether should let drive so hard at him as to make an end
 of him then and there, or whether should give him lighter blow
 that should only knock him down; in the end deemed it best to give
 the lighter blow for fear the achaeans should begin to suspect who he
 was. then they began to fight, and irus hit ulysses on the right
 shoulder; but ulysses gave irus blow on the neck under the ear that
 broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his
 mouth; fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on
 the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of
 laughter, as ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him
 into the outer court as far as the gate-house. there propped him up
 against the wall and put his staff in his hands. “sit here,” said he,
 “and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are pitiful creature, and if you
 try to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still
 worse.”
 
then threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his
 shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon
 the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and
 saluting him, “may jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant you
 whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this
 insatiable tramp. we will take him over to the mainland presently, to
 king echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.”
 
ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and antinous set great goat’s
 paunch before him filled with blood and fat. amphinomus took two loaves
 out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as did
 so in golden goblet of wine. “good luck to you,” said, “father
 stranger, you are very badly off at present, but i hope you will have
 better times by and by.”
 
to this ulysses answered, “amphinomus, you seem to be man of good
 understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose you are. i
 have heard your father well spoken of; is nisus of dulichium, man
 both brave and wealthy. they tell you are his son, and you appear to
 be considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what i am
 saying. man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon
 earth. as long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, thinks
 that shall come to harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods
 bring sorrow upon him, bears it as needs must, and makes the best
 of it; for god almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. i know
 all about it, for i was rich man once, and did much wrong in the
 stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my
 brothers would support me; therefore let man fear god in all things
 always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
 vain glory. consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see
 how they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of
 one who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence.
 nay, will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that
 you may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once is here
 the suitors and will not part bloodlessly.”
 
with these words made drink-offering, and when had drunk put
 the gold cup again into the hands of amphinomus, who walked away
 serious and bowing his head, for foreboded evil. but even so did
 not escape destruction, for minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand
 of telemachus. so took his seat again at the place from which had
 come.
 
then minerva put it into the mind of penelope to show herself to the
 suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win
 still further honour from her and husband. so she feigned mocking
 laugh and said, “eurynome, i have changed my mind, and have fancy to
 show myself to the suitors although i detest them. i should like also
 to give my hint that had better not have anything more to do
 with them. they speak fairly enough but they mean mischief.”
 
“my dear child,” answered eurynome, “all that you have said is true, go
 and tell your about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your
 face. do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is
 not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for telemachus, whom
 you always prayed that you might live to see with beard, is already
 grown up.”
 
“i know, eurynome,” replied penelope, “that you mean well, but do not
 try and persuade to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me
 of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
 autonoe and hippodamia that i want them. they must be with when i am
 in the cloister; i am not going among the men alone; it would not be
 proper for to do so.”
 
on this the old woman150 went out of the room to bid the maids go to
 their mistress. in the meantime minerva bethought her of another
 matter, and sent penelope off into sweet slumber; so she lay down on
 her couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. then the goddess shed
 grace and beauty over her that all the achaeans might admire her. she
 washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that venus wears when she
 goes dancing with the graces; she made her taller and of more
 commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn
 ivory. when minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids
 came in from the women’s room and woke penelope with the sound of their
 talking.
 
“what an exquisitely delicious sleep i have been having,” said she, as
 she passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. i wish
 diana would let die so sweetly now at this very moment, that i might
 longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who
 possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man
 among the achaeans.”
 
with these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
 attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
 stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
 holding veil before her face, and with staid maid servant on either
 side of her. as they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
 became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed might
 win her for his own bed fellow.
 
“telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “i fear you are longer
 so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. when you were younger
 you had greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown
 up, though stranger to look at you would take you for the of a
 well to do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by
 means what it should be. what is all this disturbance that has been
 going on, and how came you to allow stranger to be so disgracefully
 ill-treated? what would have happened if had suffered serious injury
 while suppliant in our house? surely this would have been very
 discreditable to you.”
 
“i am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” replied
 telemachus, “i understand all about it and know when things are not as
 they should be, which i could not do when i was younger; i cannot,
 however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. first one and then
 another of these wicked people here keeps driving out of my mind,
 and i have one to stand by me. after all, however, this fight
 between irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it
 to do, for the stranger got the best of it. i wish father jove,
 minerva, and apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers
 of yours, some inside the house and some out; and i wish they might all
 be as limp as irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. see
 how nods his head like drunken man; has had such thrashing
 that cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever
 that may be, for has strength left in him.”
 
thus did they converse. eurymachus then came up and said, “queen
 penelope, daughter of icarius, if all the achaeans in iasian argos
 could see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your
 house by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the
 whole world both as regards personal beauty and strength of
 understanding.”
 
to this penelope replied, “eurymachus, heaven robbed of all my
 beauty whether of face or figure when the argives set sail for troy and
 my dear husband with them. if were to return and look after my
 affairs, i should both be more respected and show better presence to
 the world. as it is, i am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
 which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. my husband foresaw it all,
 and when was leaving home took my right wrist in his hand—‘wife,’
 said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home from troy, for the
 trojans fight well both with bow and spear. they are excellent also at
 fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of fight sooner
 than this. i know not, therefore, whether heaven will send back to
 you, or whether i may not fall over there at troy. in the meantime do
 you look after things here. take care of my father and mother as at
 present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our son
 growing beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your present
 home.’ this is what said and now it is all coming true. night will
 come when i shall have to yield myself to marriage which i detest,
 for jove has taken from all hope of happiness. this further grief,
 moreover, cuts to the very heart. you suitors are not wooing me
 after the custom of my country. when men are courting woman who they
 think will be good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when
 they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen
 and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her
 magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people’s property
 without paying for it.”
 
this was what she said, and ulysses was glad when heard her trying
 to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words
 which knew she did not mean.
 
then antinous said, “queen penelope, daughter of icarius, take as many
 presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is
 not well to refuse present; but we will not go about our business nor
 stir from where we are, till you have married the best man among us
 whoever may be.”
 
the others applauded what antinous had said, and each one sent his
 servant to bring his present. antinous’s man returned with large and
 lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. it had twelve beautifully
 made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. eurymachus
 immediately brought her magnificent chain of gold and amber beads
 that gleamed like sunlight. eurydamas’s two men returned with some
 earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most
 beautifully; while king pisander of polyctor gave her necklace of
 the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her beautiful
 present of some kind.
 
then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought
 the presents after her. meanwhile the suitors took to singing and
 dancing, and stayed till evening came. they danced and sang till it
 grew dark; they then brought in three braziers151 to give light, and
 piled them up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit
 torches from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. then
 ulysses said:
 
“maids, servants of ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the
 queen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick
 wool. i will hold the light for all these people. they may stay till
 morning, but shall not beat me, for i can stand great deal.”
 
the maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty melantho
 began to gibe at him contemptuously. she was daughter to dolius, but
 had been brought up by penelope, who used to give her toys to play
 with, and looked after her when she was child; but in spite of all
 this she showed consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and
 used to misconduct herself with eurymachus, with whom she was in love.
 
“poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of your mind? go and
 sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering
 here. are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters—so
 many of them too? has the wine been getting into your head, or do you
 always babble in this way? you seem to have lost your wits because you
 beat the tramp irus; take care that better man than does not come
 and cudgel you about the head till pack you bleeding out of the
 house.”
 
“vixen,” replied ulysses, scowling at her, “i will go and tell
 telemachus what you have been saying, and will have you torn limb
 from limb.”
 
with these words scared the women, and they went off into the body
 of the house. they trembled all over, for they thought would do as
 said. but ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding
 up torches and looking at the people—brooding the while on things that
 should surely come to pass.
 
but minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their
 insolence, for she wanted ulysses to become even more bitter against
 them; she therefore set eurymachus of polybus on to gibe at him,
 which made the others laugh. “listen to me,” said he, “you suitors of
 queen penelope, that i may speak even as i am minded. it is not for
 nothing that this man has come to the house of ulysses; i believe the
 light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head—for
 his hair is all gone, every bit of it.”
 
then turning to ulysses said, “stranger, will you work as servant,
 if i send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? can you
 build stone fence, or plant trees? i will have you fed all the year
 round, and will find you in shoes and clothing. will you go, then? not
 you; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had
 rather fill your belly by going round the country begging.”
 
“eurymachus,” answered ulysses, “if you and i were to work one against
 the other in early summer when the days are at their longest—give a
 good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will last
 the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing
 grass is about. or if you will plough against me, let us each take a
 yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance:
 turn into four acre field, and see whether you or i can drive the
 straighter furrow. if, again, war were to break out this day, give a
 shield, couple of spears and helmet fitting well upon my
 temples—you would find foremost in the fray, and would cease your
 gibes about my belly. you are insolent and cruel, and think yourself a
 great man because you live in little world, and that bad one. if
 ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but
 you will find them narrow when you try to fly through them.”
 
eurymachus was furious at all this. scowled at him and cried, “you
 wretch, i will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me,
 and in public too. has the wine been getting into your head or do you
 always babble in this way? you seem to have lost your wits because you
 beat the tramp irus.” with this caught hold of footstool, but
 ulysses sought protection at the knees of amphinomus of dulichium, for
 was afraid. the stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and
 knocked him down: the man fell with cry flat on his back, and his
 wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. the suitors in the covered
 cloister were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his
 neighbour, saying, “i wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad
 luck to him, for all the trouble gives us. we cannot permit such
 disturbance about beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we
 shall have more pleasure at our banquet.”
 
on this telemachus came forward and said, “sirs, are you mad? can you
 not carry your meat and your liquor decently? some evil spirit has
 possessed you. i do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had
 your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better.”
 
the suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
 but amphinomus the of nisus, who was to aretias, said, “do not
 let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make answer.
 neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of ulysses’
 servants. let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we
 may make them and go home to our rest. as for the stranger, let us
 leave telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that has
 come.”
 
thus did speak, and his saying pleased them well, so mulius of
 dulichium, servant to amphinomus, mixed them bowl of wine and water
 and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their
 drink-offerings to the blessed gods: then, when they had made their
 drink-offerings and had drunk each one as was minded, they took
 their several ways each of them to his own abode.
 



book xix
 

telemachus and ulysses remove the armour—ulysses interviews
 penelope—euryclea washes his feet and recognises the scar on his
 leg—penelope tells her dream to ulysses.
 

ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with
 minerva’s help might be able to kill the suitors. presently said
 to telemachus, “telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it
 down inside. make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have
 removed it. say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the
 smoke, inasmuch as it is longer what it was when ulysses went away,
 but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. add to this more
 particularly that you are afraid jove may set them on to quarrel over
 their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may
 disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes
 tempts people to use them.”
 
telemachus approved of what his father had said, so called nurse
 euryclea and said, “nurse, shut the women up in their room, while i
 take the armour that my father left behind him down into the store
 room. one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all
 smirched with soot during my own boyhood. i want to take it down where
 the smoke cannot reach it.”
 
“i wish, child,” answered euryclea, “that you would take the management
 of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the
 property yourself. but who is to go with you and light you to the
 store-room? the maids would have done so, but you would not let them.”
 
“the stranger,” said telemachus, “shall show light; when people
 eat my bread they must earn it, matter where they come from.”
 
euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
 then ulysses and his made all haste to take the helmets, shields,
 and spears inside; and minerva went before them with gold lamp in her
 hand that shed soft and brilliant radiance, whereon telemachus said,
 “father, my eyes behold great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,
 crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with a
 flaming fire. surely there is some god here who has come down from
 heaven.”
 
“hush,” answered ulysses, “hold your peace and ask questions, for
 this is the manner of the gods. get you to your bed, and leave here
 to talk with your mother and the maids. your mother in her grief will
 ask all sorts of questions.”
 
on this telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner
 court, to the room in which always slept. there lay in his bed
 till morning, while ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the
 means whereby with minerva’s help might be able to kill the suitors.
 
then penelope came down from her room looking like venus or diana, and
 they set her seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the
 fire in her accustomed place. it had been made by icmalius and had a
 footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered
 with thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the
 women’s room to join her. they set about removing the tables at which
 the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was
 left, with the cups from which they had drunk. they emptied the embers
 out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light
 and heat; but melantho began to rail at ulysses second time and said,
 “stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all
 night and spying upon the women? be off, you wretch, outside, and eat
 your supper there, or you shall be driven out with firebrand.”
 
ulysses scowled at her and answered, “my good woman, why should you be
 so angry with me? is it because i am not clean, and my clothes are all
 in rags, and because i am obliged to go begging about after the manner
 of tramps and beggars generally? i too was rich man once, and had a
 fine house of my own; in those days i gave to many tramp such as i
 now am, matter who might be nor what wanted. i had any number
 of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well
 and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased jove to take all away from
 me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and
 place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have care lest you
 get out of favour with your mistress, and lest ulysses should come
 home, for there is still chance that may do so. moreover, though
 be dead as you think is, yet by apollo’s will has left son
 behind him, telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids
 in the house, for is now longer in his boyhood.”
 
penelope heard what was saying and scolded the maid, “impudent
 baggage,” said she, “i see how abominably you are behaving, and you
 shall smart for it. you knew perfectly well, for i told you myself,
 that i was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for
 whose sake i am in such continual sorrow.”
 
then she said to her head waiting woman eurynome, “bring seat with a
 fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while tells his story,
 and listens to what i have to say. i wish to ask him some questions.”
 
eurynome brought the seat at once and set fleece upon it, and as soon
 as ulysses had sat down penelope began by saying, “stranger, i shall
 first ask you who and whence are you? tell of your town and
 parents.”
 
“madam,” answered ulysses, “who on the face of the whole earth can dare
 to chide with you? your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself;
 you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the
 monarch over great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and
 barley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs,
 and the abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people
 do good deeds under him. nevertheless, as i sit here in your house, ask
 some other question and do not seek to know my race and family, or
 you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. i am
 full of heaviness, but i ought not to sit weeping and wailing in
 another person’s house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually.
 i shall have one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me,
 and saying that my eyes swim with tears because i am heavy with wine.”
 
then penelope answered, “stranger, heaven robbed of all beauty,
 whether of face or figure, when the argives set sail for troy and my
 dear husband with them. if were to return and look after my affairs
 i should be both more respected and should show better presence to
 the world. as it is, i am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
 which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. the chiefs from all our
 islands—dulichium, same, and zacynthus, as also from ithaca itself, are
 wooing against my will and are wasting my estate. i can therefore
 show attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say
 that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-hearted
 about ulysses. they want to marry again at once, and i have to
 invent stratagems in order to deceive them. in the first place heaven
 put it in my mind to set up great tambour-frame in my room, and to
 begin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. then i said to
 them, ‘sweethearts, ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press to
 marry again immediately; wait—for i would not have my skill in
 needlework perish unrecorded—till i have finished making pall for the
 hero laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him.
 is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if is laid out
 without pall.’ this was what i said, and they assented; whereon i
 used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night i would
 unpick the stitches again by torch light. i fooled them in this way for
 three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and i was
 now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been
 accomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed to
 the suitors, who broke in upon and caught me; they were very angry
 with me, so i was forced to finish my work whether i would or no. and
 now i do not see how i can find any further shift for getting out of
 this marriage. my parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my
 chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for
 is now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able
 to look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an
 excellent disposition. still, notwithstanding all this, tell who you
 are and where you come from—for you must have had father and mother of
 some sort; you cannot be the of an oak or of rock.”
 
then ulysses answered, “madam, wife of ulysses, since you persist in
 asking about my family, i will answer, matter what it costs me:
 people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as i
 have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. nevertheless, as
 regards your question i will tell you all you ask. there is fair and
 fruitful island in mid-ocean called crete; it is thickly peopled and
 there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many different
 languages which overlap one another, for there are achaeans, brave
 eteocretans, dorians of three-fold race, and noble pelasgi. there is a
 great town there, cnossus, where minos reigned who every nine years had
 conference with jove himself.152 minos was father to deucalion, whose
 i am, for deucalion had two sons idomeneus and myself. idomeneus
 sailed for troy, and i, who am the younger, am called aethon; my
 brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the
 two; hence it was in crete that i saw ulysses and showed him
 hospitality, for the winds took him there as was on his way to troy,
 carrying him out of his course from cape malea and leaving him in
 amnisus off the cave of ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to
 enter and could hardly find shelter from the winds that were then
 raging. as soon as got there went into the town and asked for
 idomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but idomeneus had
 already set sail for troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so i took
 him to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for i had
 abundance of everything. moreover, i fed the men who were with him with
 barley meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and
 oxen for them to sacrifice to their heart’s content. they stayed with
 twelve days, for there was gale blowing from the north so strong
 that one could hardly keep one’s feet on land. i suppose some
 unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the
 wind dropped, and they got away.”
 
many plausible tale did ulysses further tell her, and penelope wept
 as she listened, for her heart was melted. as the snow wastes upon the
 mountain tops when the winds from south east and west have breathed
 upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so
 did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time
 sitting by her side. ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but he
 kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much as
 quiver, so cunningly did restrain his tears. then, when she had
 relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: “now,
 stranger, i shall put you to the test and see whether or you really
 did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. tell me,
 then, how was dressed, what kind of man was to look at, and so
 also with his companions.”
 
“madam,” answered ulysses, “it is such long time ago that i can
 hardly say. twenty years are come and gone since left my home, and
 went elsewhither; but i will tell you as well as i can recollect.
 ulysses wore mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened
 by gold brooch with two catches for the pin. on the face of this
 there was device that shewed dog holding spotted fawn between his
 fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. every one
 marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the
 dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was
 struggling convulsively to escape.153 as for the shirt that wore
 next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an
 onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women
 who beheld it. furthermore i say, and lay my saying to your heart, that
 i do not know whether ulysses wore these clothes when left home, or
 whether one of his companions had given them to him while was on his
 voyage; or possibly some one at whose house was staying made him a
 present of them, for was man of many friends and had few equals
 among the achaeans. i myself gave him sword of bronze and beautiful
 purple mantle, double lined, with shirt that went down to his feet,
 and i sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. had a
 servant with him, little older than himself, and i can tell you what
 was like; his shoulders were hunched,154 was dark, and had
 thick curly hair. his name was eurybates, and ulysses treated him with
 greater familiarity than did any of the others, as being the most
 like-minded with himself.”
 
penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable
 proofs that ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found
 relief in tears she said to him, “stranger, i was already disposed to
 pity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my
 house. it was i who gave ulysses the clothes you speak of. i took them
 out of the store room and folded them up myself, and i gave him also
 the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. alas! i shall never welcome him
 home again. it was by an ill fate that ever set out for that
 detested city whose very name i cannot bring myself even to mention.”
 
then ulysses answered, “madam, wife of ulysses, do not disfigure
 yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though i can
 hardly blame you for doing so. woman who has loved her husband and
 borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even
 though were worse man than ulysses, who they say was like god.
 still, cease your tears and listen to what i can tell you. i will hide
 nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that i have lately
 heard of ulysses as being alive and on his way home; is among the
 thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that has
 begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were
 lost as they were leaving the thrinacian island, for jove and the
 sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the
 sun-god’s cattle, and they were all drowned to man. but ulysses stuck
 to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the
 phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him
 as though had been god, giving him many presents, and wishing to
 escort him home safe and sound. in fact ulysses would have been here
 long ago, had not thought better to go from land to land gathering
 wealth; for there is man living who is so wily as is; there is no
 one can compare with him. pheidon king of the thesprotians told all
 this, and swore to me—making drink-offerings in his house as did
 so—that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would
 take ulysses to his own country. sent off first, for there
 happened to be thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island
 of dulichium, but showed all the treasure ulysses had got
 together, and had enough lying in the house of king pheidon to keep
 his family for ten generations; but the king said ulysses had gone to
 dodona that might learn jove’s mind from the high oak tree, and know
 whether after so long an absence should return to ithaca openly or
 in secret. so you may know is safe and will be here shortly; is
 close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer;
 nevertheless i will confirm my words with an oath, and call jove who is
 the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of
 ulysses to which i have now come, that all i have spoken shall surely
 come to pass. ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end
 of this moon and the beginning of the next will be here.”
 
“may it be even so,” answered penelope; “if your words come true you
 shall have such gifts and such good will from that all who see you
 shall congratulate you; but i know very well how it will be. ulysses
 will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
 as that ulysses ever was, there are now longer any such masters in
 the house as was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them
 on their way home. and now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make
 him bed on couch with rugs and blankets, that may be warm and
 quiet till morning. then, at day break wash him and anoint him again,
 that may sit in the cloister and take his meals with telemachus. it
 shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil
 to him; like it or not, shall have more to do in this house. for
 how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or i am superior to
 others of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if i let
 you dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad? men live but for a
 little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill
 so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they
 are dead, but that is righteous and deals righteously, the people
 tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call him blessed.”
 
ulysses answered, “madam, i have foresworn rugs and blankets from the
 day that i left the snowy ranges of crete to go on shipboard. i will
 lie as i have lain on many sleepless night hitherto. night after
 night have i passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for
 morning. nor, again, do i like having my feet washed; i shall not let
 any of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you
 have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble
 as i have, i will allow her to wash them.”
 
to this penelope said, “my dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet
 came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such
 admirable propriety as you do. there happens to be in the house most
 respectable old woman—the same who received my poor dear husband in her
 arms the night was born, and nursed him in infancy. she is very
 feeble now, but she shall wash your feet.” “come here,” said she,
 “euryclea, and wash your master’s age-mate; i suppose ulysses’ hands
 and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of
 us dreadfully fast.”
 
on these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began
 to weep and made lamentation saying, “my dear child, i cannot think
 whatever i am to do with you. i am certain one was ever more
 god-fearing than yourself, and yet jove hates you. one in the whole
 world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs
 when you prayed you might come to green old age yourself and see your
 grow up to take after you: yet see how has prevented you alone
 from ever getting back to your own home. i have doubt the women in
 some foreign palace which ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all
 these sluts here have been gibing at you. i do not wonder at your not
 choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have
 insulted you; i will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as penelope
 has said that i am to do so; i will wash them both for penelope’s sake
 and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of
 compassion in my mind; and let say this moreover, which pray attend
 to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before
 now, but i make bold to say that one ever yet came who was so like
 ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.”
 
“those who have seen us both,” answered ulysses, “have always said we
 were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.”
 
then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his
 feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath
 was warm enough. ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long turned away
 from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold
 of his leg she would recognise certain scar which it bore, whereon
 the whole truth would come out. and indeed as soon as she began washing
 her master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by
 wild boar when was hunting on mt. parnassus with his excellent
 grandfather autolycus—who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer
 in the whole world—and with the sons of autolycus. mercury himself had
 endowed him with this gift, for used to burn the thigh bones of
 goats and kids to him, so took pleasure in his companionship. it
 happened once that autolycus had gone to ithaca and had found the child
 of his daughter just born. as soon as had done supper euryclea set
 the infant upon his knees and said, “autolycus, you must find name
 for your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.”
 
“son-in-law and daughter,” replied autolycus, “call the child thus: i
 am highly displeased with large number of people in one place and
 another, both men and women; so name the child ‘ulysses,’ or the child
 of anger. when grows up and comes to visit his mother’s family on
 mt. parnassus, where my possessions lie, i will make him present and
 will send him on his way rejoicing.”
 
ulysses, therefore, went to parnassus to get the presents from
 autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.
 his grandmother amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his
 head, and both his beautiful eyes, while autolycus desired his sons to
 get dinner ready, and they did as told them. they brought in five
 year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints;
 these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them;
 they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. thus
 through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and
 every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the
 sun set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of
 sleep.
 
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, the sons of
 autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and ulysses went too.
 they climbed the wooded slopes of parnassus and soon reached its breezy
 upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields,
 fresh-risen from the slow still currents of oceanus, they came to a
 mountain dell. the dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the
 beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of autolycus,
 among whom was ulysses, close behind the dogs, and had long spear
 in his hand. here was the lair of huge boar among some thick
 brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it,
 nor could the sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick
 with fallen leaves. the boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and the
 hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he
 rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay
 with fire flashing from his eyes. ulysses was the first to raise his
 spear and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick
 for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a
 gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone. as for the boar,
 ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went
 right through him, so that fell groaning in the dust until the life
 went out of him. the sons of autolycus busied themselves with the
 carcass of the boar, and bound ulysses’ wound; then, after saying a
 spell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. but
 when autolycus and his sons had thoroughly healed ulysses, they made
 him some splendid presents, and sent him back to ithaca with much
 mutual good will. when got back, his father and mother were rejoiced
 to see him, and asked him all about it, and how had hurt himself to
 get the scar; so told them how the boar had ripped him when was
 out hunting with autolycus and his sons on mt. parnassus.
 
as soon as euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well
 hold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. the leg
 fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the
 water was spilt on the ground; euryclea’s eyes between her joy and her
 grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught
 ulysses by the beard and said, “my dear child, i am sure you must be
 ulysses himself, only i did not know you till i had actually touched
 and handled you.”
 
as she spoke she looked towards penelope, as though wanting to tell her
 that her dear husband was in the house, but penelope was unable to look
 in that direction and observe what was going on, for minerva had
 diverted her attention; so ulysses caught euryclea by the throat with
 his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,
 “nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed at your own
 breast, now that after twenty years of wandering i am at last come to
 my own home again? since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to
 recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say word about it to any
 one else in the house, for if you do i tell you—and it shall surely
 be—that if heaven grants to take the lives of these suitors, i will
 not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when i am killing the other
 women.”
 
“my child,” answered euryclea, “what are you talking about? you know
 very well that nothing can either bend or break me. i will hold my
 tongue like stone or piece of iron; furthermore let say, and lay
 my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into
 your hand, i will give you list of the women in the house who have
 been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless.”
 
and ulysses answered, “nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; i am
 well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your
 tongue and leave everything to heaven.”
 
as said this euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water,
 for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and
 anointed him with oil, ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm
 himself, and hid the scar under his rags. then penelope began talking
 to him and said:
 
“stranger, i should like to speak with you briefly about another
 matter. it is indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep
 in spite of sorrow. as for myself, heaven has given life of such
 unmeasurable woe, that even by day when i am attending to my duties and
 looking after the servants, i am still weeping and lamenting during the
 whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, i lie
 awake thinking, and my heart becomes prey to the most incessant and
 cruel tortures. as the dun nightingale, daughter of pandareus, sings in
 the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many a
 plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own
 child itylus, of king zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in
 its uncertainty whether i ought to stay with my here, and safeguard
 my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard
 to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is
 not now time for to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing
 and making such magnificent presents. as long as my was still
 young, and unable to understand, would not hear of my leaving my
 husband’s house, but now that is full grown begs and prays to
 do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his
 property. listen, then, to dream that i have had and interpret it for
 if you can. i have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out of
 trough,155 and of which i am exceedingly fond. i dreamed that great
 eagle came swooping down from mountain, and dug his curved beak into
 the neck of each of them till had killed them all. presently he
 soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;
 whereon i wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so
 piteously was i grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. then he
 came back again, and perching on projecting rafter spoke to with
 human voice, and told to leave off crying. ‘be of good courage,’ he
 said, ‘daughter of icarius; this is dream, but vision of good omen
 that shall surely come to pass. the geese are the suitors, and i am no
 longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who
 will bring these suitors to disgraceful end.’ on this i woke, and
 when i looked out i saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as
 usual.”
 
“this dream, madam,” replied ulysses, “can admit but of one
 interpretation, for had not ulysses himself told you how it shall be
 fulfilled? the death of the suitors is portended, and not one single
 one of them will escape.”
 
and penelope answered, “stranger, dreams are very curious and
 unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come
 true. there are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies
 proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. those that come
 through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn
 mean something to those that see them. i do not think, however, that my
 own dream came through the gate of horn, though i and my should be
 most thankful if it proves to have done so. furthermore i say—and lay
 my saying to your heart—the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened
 day that is to sever from the house of ulysses, for i am about to
 hold tournament of axes. my husband used to set up twelve axes in the
 court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which ship is
 built; would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the
 whole twelve. i shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and
 whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow
 through all the twelve axes, him will i follow, and quit this house of
 my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. but even so, i
 doubt not that i shall remember it in my dreams.”
 
then ulysses answered, “madam, wife of ulysses, you need not defer your
 tournament, for ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow,
 handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron.”
 
to this penelope said, “as long, sir, as you will sit here and talk to
 me, i can have desire to go to bed. still, people cannot do
 permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on
 earth time for all things. i will therefore go upstairs and recline
 upon that couch which i have never ceased to flood with my tears from
 the day ulysses set out for the city with hateful name.”
 
she then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her
 maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till minerva
 shed sweet sleep over her eyelids.
 



book xx
 

ulysses cannot sleep—penelope’s prayer to diana—the two signs from
 heaven—eumaeus and philoetius arrive—the suitors dine—ctesippus throws
 an ox’s foot at ulysses—theoclymenus foretells disaster and leaves the
 house.
 

ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on the
 top of which threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten,
 and eurynome156 threw cloak over him after had laid himself down.
 there, then, ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which he
 should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the
 habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling
 and laughing with one another. this made ulysses very angry, and he
 doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and
 there, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors.
 his heart growled within him, and as bitch with puppies growls and
 shows her teeth when she sees stranger, so did his heart growl with
 anger at the evil deeds that were being done: but beat his breast
 and said, “heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day
 when the terrible cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in
 silence till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made
 sure of being killed.”
 
thus chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
 tossed about as one who turns paunch full of blood and fat in front
 of hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that
 may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did turn himself
 about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he
 was, should contrive to kill so large body of men as the wicked
 suitors. but by and by minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of
 woman, and hovered over his head saying, “my poor unhappy man, why do
 you lie awake in this way? this is your house: your wife is safe inside
 it, and so is your who is just such young man as any father may
 be proud of.”
 
“goddess,” answered ulysses, “all that you have said is true, but i am
 in some doubt as to how i shall be able to kill these wicked suitors
 single handed, seeing what number of them there always are. and there
 is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. supposing
 that with jove’s and your assistance i succeed in killing them, i must
 ask you to consider where i am to escape to from their avengers when it
 is all over.”
 
“for shame,” replied minerva, “why, any one else would trust worse
 ally than myself, even though that ally were only mortal and less
 wise than i am. am i not goddess, and have i not protected you
 throughout in all your troubles? i tell you plainly that even though
 there were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you
 should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you.
 but go to sleep; it is very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you
 shall be out of your troubles before long.”
 
as she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to
 olympus.
 
while ulysses was thus yielding himself to very deep slumber that
 eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
 up in her bed began to cry. when she had relieved herself by weeping
 she prayed to diana saying, “great goddess diana, daughter of jove,
 drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch
 up and bear through paths of darkness till it drop into the
 mouths of over-flowing oceanus, as it did the daughters of pandareus.
 the daughters of pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods
 killed them, so they were left orphans. but venus took care of them,
 and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. juno taught them to
 excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; diana gave them an
 imposing presence, and minerva endowed them with every kind of
 accomplishment; but one day when venus had gone up to olympus to see
 jove about getting them married (for well does know both what shall
 happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and
 spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread erinyes. even so i
 wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide from mortal sight,
 or that fair diana might strike me, for i would fain go even beneath
 the sad earth if i might do so still looking towards ulysses only, and
 without having to yield myself to worse man than was. besides, no
 matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so
 long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in
 slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me
 even in my dreams. this very night methought there was one lying by my
 side who was like ulysses as was when went away with his host,
 and i rejoiced, for i believed that it was dream, but the very truth
 itself.”
 
on this the day broke, but ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and
 it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by
 his side. then gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which had
 lain, and set them on seat in the cloister, but took the bullock’s
 hide out into the open. lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,
 saying “father jove, since you have seen fit to bring over land and
 to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me,
 give sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are
 now waking within the house, and let have another sign of some kind
 from outside.”
 
thus did pray. jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up
 among the clouds from the splendour of olympus, and ulysses was glad
 when heard it. at the same time within the house, miller-woman
 from hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another
 sign. there were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind
 wheat and barley which are the staff of life. the others had ground
 their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet
 finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard
 the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.
 “father jove,” said she, “you, who rule over heaven and earth, you have
 thundered from clear sky without so much as cloud in it, and this
 means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of your poor
 servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that the
 suitors dine in the house of ulysses. they have worn out with labour
 of grinding meal for them, and i hope they may never have another
 dinner anywhere at all.”
 
ulysses was glad when heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’s
 speech, and by the thunder, for knew they meant that should
 avenge himself on the suitors.
 
then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
 telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. girded his sword about
 his shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a
 doughty spear with point of sharpened bronze; then went to the
 threshold of the cloister and said to euryclea, “nurse, did you make
 the stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let
 him shift for himself?—for my mother, good woman though she is, has a
 way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting
 others who are in reality much better men.”
 
“do not find fault child,” said euryclea, “when there is one to find
 fault with. the stranger sat and drank his wine as long as liked:
 your mother did ask him if would take any more bread and said he
 would not. when wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make
 one for him, but said was such wretched outcast that would
 not sleep on bed and under blankets; insisted on having an
 undressed bullock’s hide and some sheepskins put for him in the
 cloister and i threw cloak over him myself.”157
 
then telemachus went out of the court to the place where the achaeans
 were meeting in assembly; had his spear in his hand, and was not
 alone, for his two dogs went with him. but euryclea called the maids
 and said, “come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and
 sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the
 seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with wet sponge; clean out
 the mixing-jugs and the cups, and go for water from the fountain at
 once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early, for
 it is feast day.”
 
thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
 went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to
 work about the house. the men who were in attendance on the suitors
 also came up and began chopping firewood. by and by the women returned
 from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three
 best pigs could pick out. these let feed about the premises, and
 then said good-humouredly to ulysses, “stranger, are the suitors
 treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?”
 
“may heaven,” answered ulysses, “requite to them the wickedness with
 which they deal high-handedly in another man’s house without any sense
 of shame.”
 
thus did they converse; meanwhile melanthius the goatherd came up, for
 too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he
 had two shepherds with him. they tied the goats up under the gatehouse,
 and then melanthius began gibing at ulysses. “are you still here,
 stranger,” said he, “to pester people by begging about the house? why
 can you not go elsewhere? you and i shall not come to an understanding
 before we have given each other taste of our fists. you beg without
 any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the
 achaeans, as well as here?”
 
ulysses made answer, but bowed his head and brooded. then third
 man, philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in barren heifer and
 some goats. these were brought over by the boatmen who are there to
 take people over when any one comes to them. so philoetius made his
 heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to
 the swineherd. “who, swineherd,” said he, “is this stranger that is
 lately come here? is one of your men? what is his family? where does
 come from? poor fellow, looks as if had been some great man,
 but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it so
 pleases them.”
 
as spoke went up to ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
 “good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be very
 poorly off now, but i hope you will have better times by and by. father
 jove, of all gods you are the most malicious. we are your own children,
 yet you show us mercy in all our misery and afflictions. sweat
 came over when i saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he
 reminds of ulysses, who i fear is going about in just such rags as
 this man’s are, if indeed is still among the living. if is
 already dead and in the house of hades, then, alas! for my good master,
 who made his stockman when i was quite young among the
 cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; one could have done
 better with them than i have, for they have bred like ears of corn;
 nevertheless i have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who
 take heed to his though is in the house, and fear not the
 wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide ulysses’ property
 among them because has been away so long. i have often thought—only
 it would not be right while his is living—of going off with the
 cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still
 harder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds. my
 position is intolerable, and i should long since have run away and put
 myself under the protection of some other chief, only that i believe my
 poor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of
 the house.”
 
“stockman,” answered ulysses, “you seem to be very well-disposed
 person, and i can see that you are man of sense. therefore i will
 tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath. by jove, the chief of
 all gods, and by that hearth of ulysses to which i am now come, ulysses
 shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
 shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here.”
 
“if jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you should
 see how i would do my very utmost to help him.”
 
and in like manner eumaeus prayed that ulysses might return home.
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile the suitors were hatching plot to
 murder telemachus: but bird flew near them on their left hand—an
 eagle with dove in its talons. on this amphinomus said, “my friends,
 this plot of ours to murder telemachus will not succeed; let us go to
 dinner instead.”
 
the others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the
 benches and seats. they sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
 heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
 they mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every
 man his cup, while philoetius handed round the bread in the bread
 baskets, and melanthius poured them out their wine. then they laid
 their hands upon the good things that were before them.
 
telemachus purposely made ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that
 was paved with stone;158 gave him shabby looking seat at little
 table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought to
 him, with his wine in gold cup. “sit there,” said he, “and drink your
 wine among the great people. i will put stop to the gibes and blows
 of the suitors, for this is public house, but belongs to ulysses,
 and has passed from him to me. therefore, suitors, keep your hands and
 your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief.”
 
the suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his
 speech; then antinous said, “we do not like such language but we will
 put up with it, for telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. if
 jove had let us we should have put stop to his brave talk ere now.”
 
thus spoke antinous, but telemachus heeded him not. meanwhile the
 heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the
 achaeans gathered under the shady grove of apollo.
 
then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man
 his portion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited at
 table gave ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for
 telemachus had told them to do so.
 
but minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their
 insolence, for she wanted ulysses to become still more bitter against
 them. now there happened to be among them ribald fellow, whose name
 was ctesippus, and who came from same. this man, confident in his great
 wealth, was paying court to the wife of ulysses, and said to the
 suitors, “hear what i have to say. the stranger has already had as
 large portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor
 reasonable to ill-treat any guest of telemachus who comes here. i will,
 however, make him present on my own account, that may have
 something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of ulysses’
 servants.”
 
as spoke picked up heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in which
 it lay, and threw it at ulysses, but ulysses turned his head little
 aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly sardinian fashion159 as did
 so, and it hit the wall, not him. on this telemachus spoke fiercely to
 ctesippus, “it is good thing for you,” said he, “that the stranger
 turned his head so that you missed him. if you had hit him i should
 have run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to
 see about getting you buried rather than married in this house. so let
 have more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for i am grown up
 now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,
 instead of being the child that i have been heretofore. i have long
 seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: i have
 put up with this, for one man is match for many, but do no
 further violence. still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; i would far
 rather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after day—guests
 insulted, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an
 unseemly way.”
 
they all held their peace till at last agelaus of damastor said,
 “no one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it,
 for it is quite reasonable. leave off, therefore, ill-treating the
 stranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house; i
 would say, however, friendly word to telemachus and his mother, which
 i trust may commend itself to both. ‘as long,’ i would say, ‘as you had
 ground for hoping that ulysses would one day come home, one could
 complain of your waiting and suffering160 the suitors to be in your
 house. it would have been better that should have returned, but it
 is now sufficiently clear that will never do so; therefore talk all
 this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,
 and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. thus you will
 yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink
 in peace, while your mother will look after some other man’s house, not
 yours.’”
 
to this telemachus answered, “by jove, agelaus, and by the sorrows of
 my unhappy father, who has either perished far from ithaca, or is
 wandering in some distant land, i throw obstacles in the way of my
 mother’s marriage; on the contrary i urge her to choose whomsoever she
 will, and i will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but i dare
 not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her own
 wishes. heaven forbid that i should do this.”
 
minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
 their wits wandering; but they were laughing with forced laughter.
 their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and
 their hearts were heavy with forebodings. theoclymenus saw this and
 said, “unhappy men, what is it that ails you? there is shroud of
 darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with
 tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
 drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are
 full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted
 out of heaven, and blighting gloom is over all the land.”
 
thus did speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. eurymachus
 then said, “this stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
 servants, turn him out into the streets, since finds it so dark
 here.”
 
but theoclymenus said, “eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
 i have eyes, ears, and pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an
 understanding mind. i will take these out of the house with me, for i
 see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are
 insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of ulysses will be
 able to escape.”
 
left the house as spoke, and went back to piraeus who gave him
 welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
 telemachus by laughing at the strangers. one insolent fellow said to
 him, “telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
 importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has skill
 for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here
 is another fellow who is setting himself up as prophet. let me
 persuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and
 send them off to the sicels to sell for what they will bring.”
 
telemachus gave him heed, but sat silently watching his father,
 expecting every moment that would begin his attack upon the suitors.
 
meanwhile the daughter of icarius, wise penelope, had had rich seat
 placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear
 what every one was saying. the dinner indeed had been prepared amid
 much merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had
 sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing
 can be conceived more gruesome than the meal which goddess and a
 brave man were soon to lay before them—for they had brought their doom
 upon themselves.
 



book xxi
 

the trial of the axes, during which ulysses reveals himself to eumaeus
 and philoetius
 

minerva now put it in penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their
 skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
 as means of bringing about their destruction. she went upstairs and
 got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had handle of
 ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of
 the house, where her husband’s treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought
 iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of
 deadly arrows that had been given him by friend whom had met in
 lacedaemon—iphitus the of eurytus. the two fell in with one another
 in messene at the house of ortilochus, where ulysses was staying in
 order to recover debt that was owing from the whole people; for the
 messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from ithaca, and had
 sailed away with them and with their shepherds. in quest of these
 ulysses took long journey while still quite young, for his father and
 the other chieftains sent him on mission to recover them. iphitus had
 gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that had
 lost, and the mule foals that were running with them. these mares were
 the death of him in the end, for when went to the house of jove’s
 son, mighty hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, hercules
 to his shame killed him, though was his guest, for feared not
 heaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which had set
 before iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the
 mares himself. it was when claiming these that iphitus met ulysses, and
 gave him the bow which mighty eurytus had been used to carry, and which
 on his death had been left by him to his son. ulysses gave him in
 return sword and spear, and this was the beginning of fast
 friendship, although they never visited at one another’s houses, for
 jove’s hercules killed iphitus ere they could do so. this bow,
 then, given him by iphitus, had not been taken with him by ulysses when
 sailed for troy; had used it so long as had been at home, but
 had left it behind as having been keepsake from valued friend.
 
penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the
 carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn line on it so as to get
 it quite straight; had then set the door posts into it and hung the
 doors. she loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the
 key, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the
 doors;161 these flew open with noise like bull bellowing in a
 meadow, and penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests
 stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with
 fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow
 case from the peg on which it hung. she sat down with it on her knees,
 weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her
 tears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where the suitors
 were, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that
 were inside it. along with her came her maidens, bearing chest that
 contained much iron and bronze which her husband had won as prizes.
 when she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts
 supporting the roof of the cloister, holding veil before her face,
 and with maid on either side of her. then she said:
 
“listen to you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of
 this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other
 pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize
 that you are contending for, i will bring out the mighty bow of
 ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his
 arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will i follow and quit this
 house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. but
 even so i doubt not that i shall remember it in my dreams.”
 
as she spoke, she told eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron
 before the suitors, and eumaeus wept as took them to do as she had
 bidden him. hard by, the stockman wept also when saw his master’s
 bow, but antinous scolded them. “you country louts,” said he, “silly
 simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by
 crying in this way? she has enough to grieve her in the loss of her
 husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go
 outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. we suitors
 shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it
 light matter to string such bow as this is. there is not man of
 us all who is such another as ulysses; for i have seen him and remember
 him, though i was then only child.”
 
this was what said, but all the time was expecting to be able to
 string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact was to be
 the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of ulysses,
 whom was dishonouring in his own house—egging the others on to do so
 also.
 
then telemachus spoke. “great heavens!” exclaimed, “jove must have
 robbed of my senses. here is my dear and excellent mother saying she
 will quit this house and marry again, yet i am laughing and enjoying
 myself as though there were nothing happening. but, suitors, as the
 contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. it is for woman
 whose peer is not to be found in pylos, argos, or mycene, nor yet in
 ithaca nor on the mainland. you know this as well as i do; what need
 have i to speak in praise of my mother? come on, then, make excuses
 for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. i too
 will make trial of it, for if i can string it and shoot through the
 iron, i shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with stranger,
 not if i can win the prizes which my father won before me.”
 
as spoke sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,
 and took his sword from his shoulder. first set the axes in row,
 in long groove which had dug for them, and had made straight by
 line.162 then stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was
 surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though had never
 seen anything of the kind before. this done, went on to the pavement
 to make trial of the bow; thrice did tug at it, trying with all his
 might to draw the string, and thrice had to leave off, though had
 hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. was trying for
 the fourth time, and would have strung it had not ulysses made sign
 to check him in spite of all his eagerness. so said:
 
“alas! i shall either be always feeble and of prowess, or i am too
 young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to
 hold my own if any one attacks me. you others, therefore, who are
 stronger than i, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled.”
 
on this put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led
 into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow.
 then sat down on the seat from which had risen, and antinous
 said:
 
“come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the
 place at which the cupbearer begins when is handing round the wine.”
 
the rest agreed, and leiodes of oenops was the first to rise. he
 was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the
 mixing-bowl. 163 was the only man who hated their evil deeds and was
 indignant with the others. was now the first to take the bow and
 arrow, so went on to the pavement to make his trial, but could
 not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work,
 they therefore soon grew tired, and said to the suitors, “my
 friends, i cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take
 the life and soul out of many chief among us, for it is better to die
 than to live after having missed the prize that we have so long striven
 for, and which has brought us so long together. some one of us is even
 now hoping and praying that may marry penelope, but when has seen
 this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some
 other woman, and let penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer
 and whose lot it is to win her.”
 
on this put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,164 with
 the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. then took his seat
 again on the seat from which had risen; and antinous rebuked him
 saying:
 
“leiodes, what are you talking about? your words are monstrous and
 intolerable; it makes angry to listen to you. shall, then, this bow
 take the life of many chief among us, merely because you cannot bend
 it yourself? true, you were not born to be an archer, but there are
 others who will soon string it.”
 
then said to melanthius the goatherd, “look sharp, light fire in
 the court, and set seat hard by with sheep skin on it; bring us
 also large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. let us
 warm the bow and grease it—we will then make trial of it again, and
 bring the contest to an end.”
 
melanthius lit the fire, and set seat covered with sheep skins beside
 it. also brought great ball of lard from what they had in the
 house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but
 they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. nevertheless
 there still remained antinous and eurymachus, who were the ringleaders
 among the suitors and much the foremost among them all.
 
then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and
 ulysses followed them. when they had got outside the gates and the
 outer yard, ulysses said to them quietly:
 
“stockman, and you swineherd, i have something in my mind which i am in
 doubt whether to say or no; but i think i will say it. what manner of
 men would you be to stand by ulysses, if some god should bring him back
 here all of sudden? say which you are disposed to do—to side with the
 suitors, or with ulysses?”
 
“father jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that you might so
 ordain it. if some god were but to bring ulysses back, you should see
 with what might and main i would fight for him.”
 
in like words eumaeus prayed to all the gods that ulysses might return;
 when, therefore, saw for certain what mind they were of, ulysses
 said, “it is i, ulysses, who am here. i have suffered much, but at
 last, in the twentieth year, i am come back to my own country. i find
 that you two alone of all my servants are glad that i should do so, for
 i have not heard any of the others praying for my return. to you two,
 therefore, will i unfold the truth as it shall be. if heaven shall
 deliver the suitors into my hands, i will find wives for both of you,
 will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me
 as though you were brothers and friends of telemachus. i will now give
 you convincing proofs that you may know and be assured. see, here is
 the scar from the boar’s tooth that ripped when i was out hunting on
 mt. parnassus with the sons of autolycus.”
 
as spoke drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they
 had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about ulysses, threw
 their arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while ulysses
 kissed their hands and faces in return. the sun would have gone down
 upon their mourning if ulysses had not checked them and said:
 
“cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and
 tell those who are within. when you go in, do so separately, not both
 together; i will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this
 moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to
 prevent from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore,
 eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and tell
 the women to close the doors of their apartment. if they hear any
 groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not
 come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.
 and i charge you, philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer
 court, and to bind them securely at once.”
 
when had thus spoken, went back to the house and took the seat
 that had left. presently, his two servants followed him inside.
 
at this moment the bow was in the hands of eurymachus, who was warming
 it by the fire, but even so could not string it, and was greatly
 grieved. heaved deep sigh and said, “i grieve for myself and for
 us all; i grieve that i shall have to forgo the marriage, but i do not
 care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in
 ithaca and elsewhere; what i feel most is the fact of our being so
 inferior to ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. this
 will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.”
 
“it shall not be so, eurymachus,” said antinous, “and you know it
 yourself. today is the feast of apollo throughout all the land; who can
 string bow on such day as this? put it on one side—as for the axes
 they can stay where they are, for one is likely to come to the house
 and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we
 may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will
 tell melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow—the best has; we
 can then offer thigh bones to apollo the mighty archer, and again make
 trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.”
 
the rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over
 the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine
 and water and handed it round after giving every man his
 drink-offering. then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk
 each as much as desired, ulysses craftily said:—
 
“suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that i may speak even as i am
 minded. i appeal more especially to eurymachus, and to antinous who has
 just spoken with so much reason. cease shooting for the present and
 leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give
 victory to whom it will. for the moment, however, give the bow that
 i may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether i
 still have as much strength as i used to have, or whether travel and
 neglect have made an end of it.”
 
this made them all very angry, for they feared might string the bow,
 antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “wretched creature, you
 have not so much as grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to
 think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
 betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
 have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. other
 beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among
 ourselves; the wine must have been doing you mischief, as it does
 with all those who drink immoderately. it was wine that inflamed the
 centaur eurytion when was staying with peirithous among the
 lapithae. when the wine had got into his head, went mad and did ill
 deeds about the house of peirithous; this angered the heroes who were
 there assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and
 nostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house,
 so went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of
 understanding. henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind and
 the centaurs, but brought it upon himself through his own
 drunkenness. in like manner i can tell you that it will go hardly with
 you if you string the bow: you will find mercy from any one here,
 for we shall at once ship you off to king echetus, who kills every one
 that comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep
 quiet without getting into quarrel with men younger than yourself.”
 
penelope then spoke to him. “antinous,” said she, “it is not right that
 you should ill-treat any guest of telemachus who comes to this house.
 if the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of
 ulysses, can you suppose that would take home with him and make
 his wife? even the man himself can have such idea in his mind:
 none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all
 reason.”
 
“queen penelope,” answered eurymachus, “we do not suppose that this man
 will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest
 some of the baser sort, men or women among the achaeans, should go
 gossiping about and say, ‘these suitors are feeble folk; they are
 paying court to the wife of brave man whose bow not one of them was
 able to string, and yet beggarly tramp who came to the house strung
 it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.’ this is what will be
 said, and it will be scandal against us.”
 
“eurymachus,” penelope answered, “people who persist in eating up the
 estate of great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect
 others to think well of them. why then should you mind if men talk as
 you think they will? this stranger is strong and well-built, says
 moreover that is of noble birth. give him the bow, and let us see
 whether can string it or no. i say—and it shall surely be—that if
 apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, i will give him a
 cloak and shirt of good wear, with javelin to keep off dogs and
 robbers, and sharp sword. i will also give him sandals, and will see
 him sent safely wherever wants to go.”
 
then telemachus said, “mother, i am the only man either in ithaca or in
 the islands that are over against elis who has the right to let any one
 have the bow or to refuse it. one shall force one way or the
 other, not even though i choose to make the stranger present of the
 bow outright, and let him take it away with him. go, then, within the
 house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your
 distaff, and the ordering of your servants. this bow is man’s matter,
 and mine above all others, for it is i who am master here.”
 
she went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in
 her heart. then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she
 mourned her dear husband till minerva sent sweet sleep over her
 eyelids.
 
the swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to ulysses, but
 the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one
 of them said, “you idiot, where are you taking the bow to? are you out
 of your wits? if apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your
 own boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry
 you to death.”
 
eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so put the bow
 down then and there, but telemachus shouted out at him from the other
 side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, “father eumaeus,
 bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as i am i will pelt you
 with stones back to the country, for i am the better man of the two. i
 wish i was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as
 i am than you, i would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for
 they mean mischief.”
 
thus did speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put
 them in better humour with telemachus; so eumaeus brought the bow on
 and placed it in the hands of ulysses. when had done this, called
 euryclea apart and said to her, “euryclea, telemachus says you are to
 close the doors of the women’s apartments. if they hear any groaning or
 uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out,
 but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work.”
 
euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’s
 apartments.
 
meanwhile philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the
 outer court. there was ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in the
 gatehouse, so made the gates fast with it and then came in again,
 resuming the seat that had left, and keeping an eye on ulysses, who
 had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about,
 and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into
 its two horns during his absence. then would one turn towards his
 neighbour saying, “this is some tricky old bow-fancier; either has
 got one like it at home, or wants to make one, in such workmanlike
 style does the old vagabond handle it.”
 
another said, “i hope may be more successful in other things than
 is likely to be in stringing this bow.”
 
but ulysses, when had taken it up and examined it all over, strung
 it as easily as skilled bard strings new peg of his lyre and makes
 the twisted gut fast at both ends. then took it in his right hand to
 prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the
 twittering of swallow. the suitors were dismayed, and turned colour
 as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, jove thundered loudly as a
 sign, and the heart of ulysses rejoiced as heard the omen that the
 of scheming saturn had sent him.
 
took an arrow that was lying upon the table165—for those which the
 achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—he
 laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow
 and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. when had taken
 aim let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes of
 the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through them,
 and into the outer courtyard. then said to telemachus:
 
“your guest has not disgraced you, telemachus. i did not miss what i
 aimed at, and i was not long in stringing my bow. i am still strong,
 and not as the suitors twit with being. now, however, it is time for
 the achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and then
 otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the
 crowning ornaments of banquet.”
 
as spoke made sign with his eyebrows, and telemachus girded on
 his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.
 



book xxii
 

the killing of the suitors—the maids who have misconducted themselves
 are made to cleanse the cloisters and are then hanged.
 

then ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement
 with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. shed the arrows on to
 the ground at his feet and said, “the mighty contest is at an end. i
 will now see whether apollo will vouchsafe it to to hit another mark
 which man has yet hit.”
 
on this aimed deadly arrow at antinous, who was about to take up a
 two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.
 had thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would think
 that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill
 him? the arrow struck antinous in the throat, and the point went clean
 through his neck, so that fell over and the cup dropped from his
 hand, while thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. kicked
 the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and
 roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground.166
 the suitors were in an uproar when they saw that man had been hit;
 they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked
 everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear,
 and they rebuked ulysses very angrily. “stranger,” said they, “you
 shall pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see other
 contest; you are doomed man; whom you have slain was the foremost
 youth in ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed
 him.”
 
thus they spoke, for they thought that had killed antinous by
 mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of
 every one of them. but ulysses glared at them and said:
 
“dogs, did you think that i should not come back from troy? you have
 wasted my substance,167 have forced my women servants to lie with you,
 and have wooed my wife while i was still living. you have feared
 neither god nor man, and now you shall die.”
 
they turned pale with fear as spoke, and every man looked round
 about to see whither might fly for safety, but eurymachus alone
 spoke.
 
“if you are ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said is just. we
 have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. but antinous who
 was the head and front of the offending lies low already. it was all
 his doing. it was not that wanted to marry penelope; did not so
 much care about that; what wanted was something quite different, and
 jove has not vouchsafed it to him; wanted to kill your and to be
 chief man in ithaca. now, therefore, that has met the death which
 was his due, spare the lives of your people. we will make everything
 good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten
 and drunk. each one of us shall pay you fine worth twenty oxen, and
 we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened.
 until we have done this one can complain of your being enraged
 against us.”
 
ulysses again glared at him and said, “though you should give all
 that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, i
 will not stay my hand till i have paid all of you in full. you must
 fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not man of you shall.”
 
their hearts sank as they heard him, but eurymachus again spoke saying:
 
“my friends, this man will give us quarter. will stand where he
 is and shoot us down till has killed every man among us. let us then
 show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from
 his arrows. let us have at him with rush, to drive him from the
 pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise
 such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting.”
 
as spoke drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,
 and with loud cry sprang towards ulysses, but ulysses instantly shot
 an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself
 in his liver. dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.
 the cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as smote the
 earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and kicked the
 stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.
 
then amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at ulysses to try and
 get him away from the door; but telemachus was too quick for him, and
 struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and
 went right through his chest, so that fell heavily to the ground and
 struck the earth with his forehead. then telemachus sprang away from
 him, leaving his spear still in the body, for feared that if he
 stayed to draw it out, some one of the achaeans might come up and hack
 at him with his sword, or knock him down, so set off at run, and
 immediately was at his father’s side. then said:
 
“father, let bring you shield, two spears, and brass helmet for
 your temples. i will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour
 for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.”
 
“run and fetch them,” answered ulysses, “while my arrows hold out, or
 when i am alone they may get away from the door.”
 
telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where
 the armour was kept. chose four shields, eight spears, and four
 brass helmets with horse-hair plumes. brought them with all speed to
 his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the
 swineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near ulysses.
 meanwhile ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the
 suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows
 gave out, set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by
 the door post, and hung shield four hides thick about his shoulders;
 on his comely head set his helmet, well wrought with crest of
 horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it,168 and grasped two
 redoubtable bronze-shod spears.
 
now there was trap door169 on the wall, while at one end of the
 pavement170 there was an exit leading to narrow passage, and this
 exit was closed by well-made door. ulysses told philoetius to stand
 by this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a
 time. but agelaus shouted out, “cannot some one go up to the trap door
 and tell the people what is going on? help would come at once, and we
 should soon make an end of this man and his shooting.”
 
“this may not be, agelaus,” answered melanthius, “the mouth of the
 narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. one
 brave man could prevent any number from getting in. but i know what i
 will do, i will bring you arms from the store-room, for i am sure it is
 there that ulysses and his have put them.”
 
on this the goatherd melanthius went by back passages to the store-room
 of ulysses’ house. there chose twelve shields, with as many helmets
 and spears, and brought them back as fast as could to give them to
 the suitors. ulysses’ heart began to fail him when saw the
 suitors171 putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. saw
 the greatness of the danger, and said to telemachus, “some one of the
 women inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be
 melanthius.”
 
telemachus answered, “the fault, father, is mine, and mine only; i left
 the store room door open, and they have kept sharper look out than i
 have. go, eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the
 women who is doing this, or whether, as i suspect, it is melanthius the
 of dolius.”
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile melanthius was again going to the
 store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to
 ulysses who was beside him, “ulysses, noble of laertes, it is that
 scoundrel melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store
 room. say, shall i kill him, if i can get the better of him, or shall i
 bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many
 wrongs that has done in your house?”
 
ulysses answered, “telemachus and i will hold these suitors in check,
 matter what they do; go back both of you and bind melanthius’ hands
 and feet behind him. throw him into the store room and make the door
 fast behind you; then fasten noose about his body, and string him
 close up to the rafters from high bearing-post,172 that may linger
 on in an agony.”
 
thus did speak, and they did even as had said; they went to the
 store room, which they entered before melanthius saw them, for was
 busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two
 took their stand on either side of the door and waited. by and by
 melanthius came out with helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted
 shield in the other, which had been borne by laertes when was young,
 but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become
 unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and
 threw him struggling to the ground. they bent his hands and feet well
 behind his back, and bound them tight with painful bond as ulysses
 had told them; then they fastened noose about his body and strung him
 up from high pillar till was close up to the rafters, and over him
 did you then vaunt, swineherd eumaeus saying, “melanthius, you will
 pass the night on soft bed as you deserve. you will know very well
 when morning comes from the streams of oceanus, and it is time for you
 to be driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on.”
 
there, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on
 their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take
 their places by the side of ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the
 cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the
 body of the court were still both brave and many. then jove’s daughter
 minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of mentor.
 ulysses was glad when saw her and said, “mentor, lend your help,
 and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns has done
 you. besides, you are my age-mate.”
 
but all the time felt sure it was minerva, and the suitors from the
 other side raised an uproar when they saw her. agelaus was the first to
 reproach her. “mentor,” cried, “do not let ulysses beguile you into
 siding with him and fighting the suitors. this is what we will do: when
 we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. you
 shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will
 take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with
 ulysses’ property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor
 your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of
 ithaca.”
 
this made minerva still more furious, so she scolded ulysses very
 angrily.173 “ulysses,” said she, “your strength and prowess are no
 longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the
 trojans about the noble lady helen. you killed many man in those
 days, and it was through your stratagem that priam’s city was taken.
 how comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are
 on your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house?
 come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how mentor, of
 alcimus shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred
 upon him.”
 
but she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still
 further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew
 up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in
 the form of swallow.
 
meanwhile agelaus of damastor, eurynomus, amphimedon, demoptolemus,
 pisander, and polybus of polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon
 the suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives
 they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen
 under the arrows of ulysses. agelaus shouted to them and said, “my
 friends, will soon have to leave off, for mentor has gone away after
 having done nothing for him but brag. they are standing at the doors
 unsupported. do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your
 spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by
 killing him. when has fallen we need not be uneasy about the
 others.”
 
they threw their spears as bade them, but minerva made them all of
 effect. one hit the door post; another went against the door; the
 pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had
 avoided all the spears of the suitors ulysses said to his own men, “my
 friends, i should say we too had better let drive into the middle of
 them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us
 outright.”
 
they therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
 ulysses killed demoptolemus, telemachus euryades, eumaeus elatus, while
 the stockman killed pisander. these all bit the dust, and as the others
 drew back into corner ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained
 their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.
 
the suitors now aimed second time, but again minerva made their
 weapons for the most part without effect. one hit bearing-post of the
 cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of
 another struck the wall. still, amphimedon just took piece of the top
 skin from off telemachus’s wrist, and ctesippus managed to graze
 eumaeus’s shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell to
 the ground. then ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of
 suitors. ulysses hit eurydamas, telemachus amphimedon, and eumaeus
 polybus. after this the stockman hit ctesippus in the breast, and
 taunted him saying, “foul-mouthed of polytherses, do not be so
 foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your
 speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. i make you present of
 this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave ulysses when he
 was begging about in his own house.”
 
thus spoke the stockman, and ulysses struck the of damastor with a
 spear in close fight, while telemachus hit leocritus of evenor in
 the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that fell forward
 full on his face upon the ground. then minerva from her seat on the
 rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.
 they fled to the other end of the court like herd of cattle maddened
 by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. as
 eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on
 the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them,
 for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the
 sport—even so did ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite
 them on every side. they made horrible groaning as their brains were
 being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.
 
leiodes then caught the knees of ulysses and said, “ulysses i beseech
 you have mercy upon and spare me. i never wronged any of the women
 in your house either in word or deed, and i tried to stop the others. i
 saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their
 folly. i was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, i shall die
 without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no
 thanks for all the good that i did.”
 
ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “if you were their
 sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many time that it might be
 long before i got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have
 children by her. therefore you shall die.”
 
with these words picked up the sword that agelaus had dropped when
 was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. then he
 struck leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling
 in the dust while was yet speaking.
 
the minstrel phemius of terpes—he who had been forced by the
 suitors to sing to them—now tried to save his life. was standing
 near towards the trap door,174 and held his lyre in his hand. did
 not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar
 of jove that was in the outer court, and on which both laertes and
 ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go
 straight up to ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end deemed
 it best to embrace ulysses’ knees. so laid his lyre on the ground
 between the mixing bowl 175 and the silver-studded seat; then going up
 to ulysses caught hold of his knees and said, “ulysses, i beseech
 you have mercy on and spare me. you will be sorry for it afterwards
 if you kill bard who can sing both for gods and men as i can. i make
 all my lays myself, and heaven visits with every kind of
 inspiration. i would sing to you as though you were god, do not
 therefore be in such hurry to cut my head off. your own son
 telemachus will tell you that i did not want to frequent your house and
 sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many and too
 strong for me, so they made me.”
 
telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. “hold!” he
 cried, “the man is guiltless, do him hurt; and we will spare medon
 too, who was always good to when i was boy, unless philoetius or
 eumaeus has already killed him, or has fallen in your way when you
 were raging about the court.”
 
medon caught these words of telemachus, for was crouching under a
 seat beneath which had hidden by covering himself up with freshly
 flayed heifer’s hide, so threw off the hide, went up to telemachus,
 and laid hold of his knees.
 
“here i am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore, and tell
 your father, or will kill in his rage against the suitors for
 having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to
 yourself.”
 
ulysses smiled at him and answered, “fear not; telemachus has saved
 your life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how
 greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. go, therefore,
 outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of
 the slaughter—you and the bard—while i finish my work here inside.”
 
the pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down
 by jove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting
 that they would be killed. then ulysses searched the whole court
 carefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was
 still living, but found them all lying in the dust and weltering in
 their blood. they were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of
 the sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the
 heat of the sun makes an end of them. even so were the suitors lying
 all huddled up one against the other.
 
then ulysses said to telemachus, “call nurse euryclea; i have something
 to say to her.”
 
telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room. “make
 haste,” said he, “you old woman who have been set over all the other
 women in the house. come outside; my father wishes to speak to you.”
 
when euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s room
 and came out, following telemachus. she found ulysses among the corpses
 bespattered with blood and filth like lion that has just been
 devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so
 that is fearful sight; even so was ulysses besmirched from head to
 foot with gore. when she saw all the corpses and such quantity of
 blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that great
 deed had been done; but ulysses checked her, “old woman,” said he,
 “rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about
 it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. heaven’s doom and
 their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they
 respected man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came
 near them, and they have come to bad end as punishment for their
 wickedness and folly. now, however, tell which of the women in the
 house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent.”176
 
“i will tell you the truth, my son,” answered euryclea. “there are
 fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding
 wool, and all kinds of household work. of these, twelve in all177 have
 misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to
 penelope. they showed disrespect to telemachus, for has only
 lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the
 female servants; but let go upstairs and tell your wife all that has
 happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep.”
 
“do not wake her yet,” answered ulysses, “but tell the women who have
 misconducted themselves to come to me.”
 
euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to
 ulysses; in the meantime called telemachus, the stockman, and the
 swineherd. “begin,” said he, “to remove the dead, and make the women
 help you. then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables
 and seats. when you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take
 the women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the
 outer court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite
 dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used
 to lie in secret with the suitors.”
 
on this the women came down in body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
 first they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one
 another in the gatehouse. ulysses ordered them about and made them do
 their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. when they had
 done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and
 water, while telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and
 dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out
 of doors. then when they had made the whole place quite clean and
 orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space
 between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they
 could not get away: and telemachus said to the other two, “i shall not
 let these women die clean death, for they were insolent to and my
 mother, and used to sleep with the suitors.”
 
so saying made ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that
 supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the
 building, at good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touch
 the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against net that has been
 set for them in thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and
 terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their
 heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.178 their
 feet moved convulsively for while, but not for very long.
 
as for melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
 court. there they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
 vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut
 off his hands and his feet.
 
when they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back
 into the house, for all was now over; and ulysses said to the dear old
 nurse euryclea, “bring sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and
 fetch fire also that i may burn it, and purify the cloisters. go,
 moreover, and tell penelope to come here with her attendants, and also
 all the maidservants that are in the house.”
 
“all that you have said is true,” answered euryclea, “but let bring
 you some clean clothes—a shirt and cloak. do not keep these rags on
 your back any longer. it is not right.”
 
“first light fire,” replied ulysses.
 
she brought the fire and sulphur, as had bidden her, and ulysses
 thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
 then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
 whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and
 pressed round ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders
 and taking hold of his hands. it made him feel as if should like to
 weep, for remembered every one of them.179
 



book xxiii
 

penelope eventually recognises her husband—early in the morning
 ulysses, telemachus, eumaeus, and philoetius leave the town.
 

euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear
 husband had come home. her aged knees became young again and her feet
 were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her
 head to speak to her. “wake up penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed,
 “and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this
 long time past. ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has
 killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating
 up his estate and ill treating his son.”
 
“my good nurse,” answered penelope, “you must be mad. the gods
 sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make
 foolish people become sensible. this is what they must have been doing
 to you; for you always used to be reasonable person. why should you
 thus mock when i have trouble enough already—talking such nonsense,
 and waking up out of sweet sleep that had taken possession of my
 eyes and closed them? i have never slept so soundly from the day my
 poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. go back again
 into the women’s room; if it had been any one else who had woke up
 to bring such absurd news i should have sent her away with severe
 scolding. as it is your age shall protect you.”
 
“my dear child,” answered euryclea, “i am not mocking you. it is quite
 true as i tell you that ulysses is come home again. was the stranger
 whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. telemachus
 knew all the time that was come back, but kept his father’s secret
 that might have his revenge on all these wicked people.”
 
then penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round euryclea,
 and wept for joy. “but my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me;
 if has really come home as you say, how did manage to overcome
 the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what number of them there
 always were?”
 
“i was not there,” answered euryclea, “and do not know; i only heard
 them groaning while they were being killed. we sat crouching and
 huddled up in corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, till
 your came to fetch because his father sent him. then i found
 ulysses standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all
 round him, one on top of the other. you would have enjoyed it if you
 could have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and
 filth, and looking just like lion. but the corpses are now all piled
 up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and ulysses has lit a
 great fire to purify the house with sulphur. has sent to call
 you, so come with that you may both be happy together after all; for
 now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband
 is come home to find both wife and alive and well, and to take his
 revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him.”
 
“my dear nurse,” said penelope, “do not exult too confidently over all
 this. you know how delighted every one would be to see ulysses come
 home—more particularly myself, and the who has been born to both of
 us; but what you tell cannot be really true. it is some god who is
 angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end
 of them; for they respected man in the whole world, neither rich nor
 poor, who came near them, and they have come to bad end in
 consequence of their iniquity; ulysses is dead far away from the
 achaean land; will never return home again.”
 
then nurse euryclea said, “my child, what are you talking about? but
 you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your
 husband is never coming, although is in the house and by his own
 fire side at this very moment. besides i can give you another proof;
 when i was washing him i perceived the scar which the wild boar gave
 him, and i wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom would not
 let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with and i will
 make this bargain with you—if i am deceiving you, you may have me
 killed by the most cruel death you can think of.”
 
“my dear nurse,” said penelope, “however wise you may be you can hardly
 fathom the counsels of the gods. nevertheless, we will go in search of
 my son, that i may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has
 killed them.”
 
on this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
 considered whether she should keep at distance from her husband and
 question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
 him. when, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister,
 she sat down opposite ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right
 angles180 [to that by which she had entered], while ulysses sat near
 one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see
 what his brave wife would say to him when she saw him. for long time
 she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. at one moment she looked
 him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his
 shabby clothes and failed to recognise him,181 till telemachus began to
 reproach her and said:
 
“mother—but you are so hard that i cannot call you by such name—why
 do you keep away from my father in this way? why do you not sit by his
 side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? other woman
 could bear to keep away from her husband when had come back to her
 after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;
 but your heart always was as hard as stone.”
 
penelope answered, “my son, i am so lost in astonishment that i can
 find words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. i
 cannot even look him straight in the face. still, if really is
 ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one
 another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are
 alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others.”
 
ulysses smiled at this, and said to telemachus, “let your mother put me
 to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
 she rejects for the moment and believes to be somebody else,
 because i am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
 however, consider what we had better do next. when one man has killed
 another—even though was not one who would leave many friends to take
 up his quarrel—the man who has killed him must still say good bye to
 his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay
 of whole town, and all the picked youth of ithaca. i would have you
 consider this matter.”
 
“look to it yourself, father,” answered telemachus, “for they say you
 are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is other
 mortal man who can compare with you. we will follow you with right good
 will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
 out.”
 
“i will say what i think will be best,” answered ulysses. “first wash
 and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and
 dress; phemius shall then strike up dance tune on his lyre, so that
 if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going
 along the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a
 wedding in the house, and rumours about the death of the suitors
 will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my
 own land. once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven
 vouchsafes us shall seem wisest.”
 
thus did speak, and they did even as had said. first they washed
 and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. then phemius took
 his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. the
 house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people
 outside said, “i suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
 she ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her
 husband’s property until comes home.”182
 
this was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had
 been happening. the upper servant eurynome washed and anointed ulysses
 in his own house and gave him shirt and cloak, while minerva made him
 look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick
 on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
 she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as skilful
 workman who has studied art of all kinds under vulcan or minerva—and
 his work is full of beauty—enriches piece of silver plate by gilding
 it. came from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat
 down opposite his wife on the seat had left. “my dear,” said he,
 “heaven has endowed you with heart more unyielding than woman ever
 yet had. other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when
 had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having
 gone through so much. but come, nurse, get bed ready for me; i will
 sleep alone, for this woman has heart as hard as iron.”
 
“my dear,” answered penelope, “i have wish to set myself up, nor to
 depreciate you; but i am not struck by your appearance, for i very well
 remember what kind of man you were when you set sail from ithaca.
 nevertheless, euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he
 himself built. bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it
 with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets.”
 
she said this to try him, but ulysses was very angry and said, “wife, i
 am much displeased at what you have just been saying. who has been
 taking my bed from the place in which i left it? must have found it
 hard task, matter how skilled workman was, unless some god
 came and helped him to shift it. there is man living, however strong
 and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a
 marvellous curiosity which i made with my very own hands. there was a
 young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour,
 and about as thick as bearing-post. i built my room round this with
 strong walls of stone and roof to cover them, and i made the doors
 strong and well-fitting. then i cut off the top boughs of the olive
 tree and left the stump standing. this i dressed roughly from the root
 upwards and then worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully,
 straightening my work by drawing line on the wood, and making it into
 bed-prop. i then bored hole down the middle, and made it the
 centre-post of my bed, at which i worked till i had finished it,
 inlaying it with gold and silver; after this i stretched hide of
 crimson leather from one side of it to the other. so you see i know all
 about it, and i desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether
 any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its
 roots.”
 
when she heard the sure proofs ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
 down. she flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and
 kissed him. “do not be angry with ulysses,” she cried, “you, who are
 the wisest of mankind. we have suffered, both of us. heaven has denied
 us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together;
 do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that i did not embrace you
 thus as soon as i saw you. i have been shuddering all the time through
 fear that someone might come here and deceive with lying story;
 for there are many very wicked people going about. jove’s daughter
 helen would never have yielded herself to man from foreign country,
 if she had known that the sons of achaeans would come after her and
 bring her back. heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no
 thought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. now,
 however, that you have convinced by showing that you know all about
 our bed (which human being has ever seen but you and i and single
 maidservant, the daughter of actor, who was given by my father on my
 marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though i
 have been i can mistrust longer.”
 
then ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as clasped his dear and
 faithful wife to his bosom. as the sight of land is welcome to men who
 are swimming towards the shore, when neptune has wrecked their ship
 with the fury of his winds and waves; few alone reach the land, and
 these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on
 firm ground and out of danger—even so was her husband welcome to her as
 she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from
 about his neck. indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow
 till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not minerva determined otherwise,
 and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer dawn to
 leave oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds lampus and phaethon that bear
 her onward to break the day upon mankind.
 
at last, however, ulysses said, “wife, we have not yet reached the end
 of our troubles. i have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. it
 is long and difficult, but i must go through with it, for thus the
 shade of teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when i went
 down into hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. but
 now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon
 of sleep.”
 
“you shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied penelope, “now
 that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your
 country. but as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me
 about the task that lies before you. i shall have to hear about it
 later, so it is better that i should be told at once.”
 
“my dear,” answered ulysses, “why should you press to tell you?
 still, i will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. i
 do not like it myself, for teiresias bade travel far and wide,
 carrying an oar, till i came to country where the people have never
 heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. they know
 nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of ship. gave
 this certain token which i will not hide from you. said that a
 wayfarer should meet and ask whether it was winnowing shovel
 that i had on my shoulder. on this, i was to fix my oar in the ground
 and sacrifice ram, bull, and boar to neptune; after which i was
 to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the
 other. as for myself, said that death should come to from the
 sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when i was full of
 years and peace of mind, and my people should bless me. all this, he
 said, should surely come to pass.”
 
and penelope said, “if the gods are going to vouchsafe you happier
 time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
 misfortune.”
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile eurynome and the nurse took torches
 and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
 them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
 bed chamber woman eurynome183 to show ulysses and penelope to bed by
 torch light. when she had conducted them to their room she went back,
 and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
 telemachus, philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
 made the women leave off also. they then laid themselves down to sleep
 in the cloisters.
 
when ulysses and penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
 with one another. she told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
 the house filled with crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
 sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
 ulysses in his turn told her what had suffered, and how much trouble
 had himself given to other people. told her everything, and she
 was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till had
 ended his whole story.
 
began with his victory over the cicons, and how thence reached
 the fertile land of the lotus-eaters. told her all about the cyclops
 and how had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
 comrades; how then went on to aeolus, who received him hospitably
 and furthered him on his way, but even so was not to reach home, for
 to his great grief hurricane carried him out to again; how he
 went on to the laestrygonian city telepylos, where the people destroyed
 all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
 then told of cunning circe and her craft, and how sailed to the
 chill house of hades, to consult the ghost of the theban prophet
 teiresias, and how saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who
 bore him and brought him up when was child; how then heard the
 wondrous singing of the sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and
 terrible charybdis and to scylla, whom man had ever yet passed in
 safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how jove
 therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men
 perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last he
 reached the ogygian island and the nymph calypso, who kept him there in
 cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she
 intended making him immortal so that should never grow old, but she
 could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering
 had found his way to the phaeacians, who had treated him as though
 had been god, and sent him back in ship to his own country after
 having given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. this was
 the last thing about which told her, for here deep sleep took hold
 upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows.
 
then minerva bethought her of another matter. when she deemed that
 ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
 dawn rise out of oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. on
 this, ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to penelope,
 “wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in
 lamenting my absence, and i in being prevented from getting home though
 i was longing all the time to do so. now, however, that we have at last
 come together, take care of the property that is in the house. as for
 the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, i will take
 many myself by force from other people, and will compel the achaeans to
 make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. i am now
 going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has
 so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself i will give these
 instructions, though you have little need of them. at sunrise it will
 at once get abroad that i have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,
 therefore,184 and stay there with your women. see nobody and ask no
 questions.”185
 
as spoke girded on his armour. then roused telemachus,
 philoetius, and eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
 this they did, and armed themselves. when they had done so, they opened
 the gates and sallied forth, ulysses leading the way. it was now
 daylight, but minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led
 them quickly out of the town.
 



book xxiv
 

the ghosts of the suitors in hades—ulysses and his men go to the house
 of laertes—the people of ithaca come out to attack ulysses, but minerva
 concludes peace.
 

then mercury of cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his
 hand held the fair golden wand with which seals men’s eyes in
 sleep or wakes them just as pleases; with this roused the ghosts
 and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. as
 bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them
 has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the
 ghosts whine and squeal as mercury the healer of sorrow led them down
 into the dark abode of death. when they had passed the waters of
 oceanus and the rock leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the
 land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell
 the souls and shadows of them that can labour more.
 
here they found the ghost of achilles of peleus, with those of
 patroclus, antilochus, and ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man
 of all the danaans after the of peleus himself.
 
they gathered round the ghost of the of peleus, and the ghost of
 agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. round him were gathered also
 the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of
 aegisthus; and the ghost of achilles spoke first.
 
“son of atreus,” it said, “we used to say that jove had loved you
 better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain
 over many and brave men, when we were all fighting together before
 troy; yet the hand of death, which mortal can escape, was laid upon
 you all too early. better for you had you fallen at troy in the hey-day
 of your renown, for the achaeans would have built mound over your
 ashes, and your would have been heir to your good name, whereas it
 has now been your lot to come to most miserable end.”
 
“happy of peleus,” answered the ghost of agamemnon, “for having
 died at troy far from argos, while the bravest of the trojans and the
 achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. there you lay in the
 whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your
 chivalry. we fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever
 have left off if jove had not sent hurricane to stay us. then, when
 we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed
 and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. the
 danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. your mother,
 when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and
 the sound of great wailing went forth over the waters so that the
 achaeans quaked for fear. they would have fled panic-stricken to their
 ships had not wise old nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked
 them saying, ‘hold, argives, fly not sons of the achaeans, this is his
 mother coming from the with her immortal nymphs to view the body of
 her son.’
 
“thus spoke, and the achaeans feared more. the daughters of the
 old man of the stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in
 immortal raiment. the nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet
 voices in lament—calling and answering one another; there was not an
 argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. days and nights
 seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the
 eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many fat sheep with
 many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. you were burnt in
 raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes,
 horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were
 burning, with the tramp as of great multitude. but when the flames of
 heaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak
 and laid them in ointments and in pure wine. your mother brought us a
 golden vase to hold them—gift of bacchus, and work of vulcan himself;
 in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of patroclus who had
 gone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of antilochus, who
 had been closer to you than any other of your comrades now that
 patroclus was more.
 
“over these the host of the argives built noble tomb, on point
 jutting out over the open hellespont, that it might be seen from far
 out upon the by those now living and by them that shall be born
 hereafter. your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them to
 be contended for by the noblest of the achaeans. you must have been
 present at the funeral of many hero, when the young men gird
 themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
 great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed thetis
 offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. thus even in death
 your fame, achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore
 among all mankind. but as for me, what solace had i when the days of my
 fighting were done? for jove willed my destruction on my return, by the
 hands of aegisthus and those of my wicked wife.”
 
thus did they converse, and presently mercury came up to them with the
 ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by ulysses. the ghosts of
 agamemnon and achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to
 them at once. the ghost of agamemnon recognised amphimedon of
 melaneus, who lived in ithaca and had been his host, so it began to
 talk to him.
 
“amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fine young men—all
 of an age too—that you are come down here under the ground? one could
 pick finer body of men from any city. did neptune raise his winds
 and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an
 end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or
 sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city?
 answer my question, for i have been your guest. do you not remember how
 i came to your house with menelaus, to persuade ulysses to join us with
 his ships against troy? it was whole month ere we could resume our
 voyage, for we had hard work to persuade ulysses to come with us.”
 
and the ghost of amphimedon answered, “agamemnon, of atreus, king
 of men, i remember everything that you have said, and will tell you
 fully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about.
 ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not
 say point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an
 end, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the
 trick she played us. she set up great tambour frame in her room and
 began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. ‘sweethearts,’
 said she, ‘ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press to marry
 again immediately; wait—for i would not have my skill in needlework
 perish unrecorded—till i have completed pall for the hero laertes,
 against the time when death shall take him. is very rich, and the
 women of the place will talk if is laid out without pall.’ this is
 what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon
 her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches
 again by torchlight. she fooled us in this way for three years without
 our finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth
 year, in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one
 of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in
 the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would
 or no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had
 it washed,186 its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.
 
“then some malicious god conveyed ulysses to the upland farm where his
 swineherd lives. thither presently came also his son, returning from a
 voyage to pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
 their plot for our destruction. telemachus came first, and then after
 him, accompanied by the swineherd, came ulysses, clad in rags and
 leaning on staff as though were some miserable old beggar. came
 so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among
 us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. endured both being
 struck and insulted without word, though was in his own house; but
 when the will of aegis-bearing jove inspired him, and telemachus
 took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors
 behind them. then cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a
 quantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this
 was the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the
 bow—nor nearly do so. when it was about to reach the hands of ulysses,
 we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him, matter
 what might say, but telemachus insisted on his having it. when he
 had got it in his hands strung it with ease and sent his arrow
 through the iron. then stood on the floor of the cloister and poured
 his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. first killed
 antinous, and then, aiming straight before him, let fly his deadly
 darts and they fell thick on one another. it was plain that some one of
 the gods was helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main
 throughout the cloisters, and there was hideous sound of groaning as
 our brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our
 blood. this, agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are
 lying still uncared for in the house of ulysses, for our friends at
 home do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out
 and wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according
 to the offices due to the departed.”
 
“happy ulysses, of laertes,” replied the ghost of agamemnon, “you
 are indeed blessed in the possession of wife endowed with such rare
 excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
 penelope the daughter of icarius. the fame, therefore, of her virtue
 shall never die, and the immortals shall compose song that shall be
 welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of penelope. how far
 otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of tyndareus who killed
 her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has
 brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones.”
 
thus did they converse in the house of hades deep down within the
 bowels of the earth. meanwhile ulysses and the others passed out of the
 town and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of laertes, which
 had reclaimed with infinite labour. here was his house, with a
 lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept
 and sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old sicel woman,
 who looked after him in this his country-farm. when ulysses got there,
 said to his and to the other two:
 
“go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
 meanwhile i want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
 recognise after so long an absence.”
 
then took off his armour and gave it to eumaeus and philoetius, who
 went straight on to the house, while turned off into the vineyard to
 make trial of his father. as went down into the great orchard, he
 did not see dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for
 they were all gathering thorns to make fence for the vineyard, at the
 place where the old man had told them; therefore found his father
 alone, hoeing vine. had on dirty old shirt, patched and very
 shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him
 from the brambles, and also wore sleeves of leather; had goat
 skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. when ulysses saw
 him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, stood still under tall
 pear tree and began to weep. doubted whether to embrace him, kiss
 him, and tell him all about his having come home, or whether should
 first question him and see what would say. in the end deemed it
 best to be crafty with him, so in this mind went up to his father,
 who was bending down and digging about plant.
 
“i see, sir,” said ulysses, “that you are an excellent gardener—what
 pains you take with it, to be sure. there is not single plant, not a
 fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of
 your attention. i trust, however, that you will not be offended if i
 say that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. you are
 old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. it cannot be because you are idle
 that your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and
 figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble
 birth. i should have said that you were one of those who should wash
 well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have right to do;
 but tell me, and tell true, whose bondman are you, and in whose
 garden are you working? tell also about another matter. is this
 place that i have come to really ithaca? i met man just now who said
 so, but was dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story
 out when i was asking him about an old friend of mine, whether was
 still living, or was already dead and in the house of hades. believe me
 when i tell you that this man came to my house once when i was in my
 own country and never yet did any stranger come to whom i liked
 better. said that his family came from ithaca and that his father
 was laertes, of arceisius. i received him hospitably, making him
 welcome to all the abundance of my house, and when went away i gave
 him all customary presents. i gave him seven talents of fine gold, and
 cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it. i gave him twelve
 light cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; i also gave him twelve
 cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal
 number of shirts. to all this i added four good looking women skilled
 in all useful arts, and i let him take his choice.”
 
his father shed tears and answered, “sir, you have indeed come to the
 country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked
 people. all this wealth of presents has been given to purpose. if
 you could have found your friend here alive in ithaca, would have
 entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply
 when you left him—as would have been only right considering what you
 had already given him. but tell me, and tell true, how many years is
 it since you entertained this guest—my unhappy son, as ever was? alas!
 has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the have
 eaten him, or has fallen prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
 continent. neither his mother, nor i his father, who were his parents,
 could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could
 his excellent and richly dowered wife penelope bewail her husband as
 was natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the
 offices due to the departed. but now, tell truly for i want to know.
 who and whence are you—tell of your town and parents? where is the
 ship lying that has brought you and your men to ithaca? or were you a
 passenger on some other man’s ship, and those who brought you here have
 gone on their way and left you?”
 
“i will tell you everything,” answered ulysses, “quite truly. i come
 from alybas, where i have fine house. i am of king apheidas, who
 is the of polypemon. my own name is eperitus; heaven drove off
 my course as i was leaving sicania, and i have been carried here
 against my will. as for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open
 country outside the town, and this is the fifth year since ulysses left
 my country. poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when left
 me. the birds all flew on our right hands, and both and i rejoiced
 to see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have
 another friendly meeting and exchange presents.”
 
dark cloud of sorrow fell upon laertes as listened. filled both
 hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey
 head, groaning heavily as did so. the heart of ulysses was touched,
 and his nostrils quivered as looked upon his father; then sprang
 towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, “i am he,
 father, about whom you are asking—i have returned after having been
 away for twenty years. but cease your sighing and lamentation—we have
 time to lose, for i should tell you that i have been killing the
 suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes.”
 
“if you really are my ulysses,” replied laertes, “and have come
 back again, you must give such manifest proof of your identity as
 shall convince me.”
 
“first observe this scar,” answered ulysses, “which i got from boar’s
 tusk when i was hunting on mt. parnassus. you and my mother had sent me
 to autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presents which when he
 was over here had promised to give me. furthermore i will point out
 to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and i asked you all
 about them as i followed you round the garden. we went over them all,
 and you told their names and what they all were. you gave me
 thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also
 said you would give fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted
 between each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of
 heaven has been laid heavy upon them.”
 
laertes’ strength failed him when heard the convincing proofs which
 his had given him. threw his arms about him, and ulysses had to
 support him, or would have gone off into swoon; but as soon as he
 came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, said, “o father
 jove, then you gods are still in olympus after all, if the suitors have
 really been punished for their insolence and folly. nevertheless, i am
 much afraid that i shall have all the townspeople of ithaca up here
 directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the
 cities of the cephallenians.”
 
ulysses answered, “take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
 but let us go into the house hard by your garden. i have already told
 telemachus, philoetius, and eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready
 as soon as possible.”
 
thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. when they got
 there they found telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting
 up meat and mixing wine with water. then the old sicel woman took
 laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. she put him on
 good cloak, and minerva came up to him and gave him more imposing
 presence, making him taller and stouter than before. when came back
 his was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said
 to him, “my dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much
 taller and better-looking.”
 
laertes answered, “would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
 were the man i was when i ruled among the cephallenians, and took
 nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. if i were still what i
 then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, i
 should have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors.
 i should have killed great many of them, and you would have rejoiced
 to see it.”
 
thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
 work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his
 proper place on the benches and seats. then they began eating; by and
 by old dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their
 mother, the sicel woman who looked after laertes now that was
 growing old, had been to fetch them. when they saw ulysses and were
 certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but ulysses
 scolded them good naturedly and said, “sit down to your dinner, old
 man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin
 for some time and have been waiting for you.”
 
then dolius put out both his hands and went up to ulysses. “sir,” said
 he, seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “we have
 long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after
 we had given up hoping. all hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper
 you.187 but tell me, does penelope already know of your return, or
 shall we send some one to tell her?”
 
“old man,” answered ulysses, “she knows already, so you need not
 trouble about that.” on this took his seat, and the sons of dolius
 gathered round ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after
 the other; then they took their seats in due order near dolius their
 father.
 
while they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, rumour went round
 the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the
 suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
 from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of ulysses.
 they took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
 of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the
 fishermen to take each of them to his own place. they then met angrily
 in the place of assembly, and when they were got together eupeithes
 rose to speak. was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son
 antinous, who had been the first man killed by ulysses, so said,
 weeping bitterly, “my friends, this man has done the achaeans great
 wrong. took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he
 has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return has been
 killing all the foremost men among the cephallenians. let us be up and
 doing before can get away to pylos or to elis where the epeans rule,
 or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. it will be an
 everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons
 and brothers. for my own part i should have more pleasure in life,
 but had rather die at once. let us be up, then, and after them, before
 they can cross over to the main land.”
 
wept as spoke and every one pitied him. but medon and the bard
 phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of ulysses.
 every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle
 of the assembly, and medon said, “hear me, men of ithaca. ulysses did
 not do these things against the will of heaven. i myself saw an
 immortal god take the form of mentor and stand beside him. this god
 appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously
 about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on
 one another.”
 
on this pale fear laid hold of them, and old halitherses, of
 mastor, rose to speak, for was the only man among them who knew both
 past and future; so spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,
 saying,
 
“men of ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as
 they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to mentor, when we bade
 you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the
 wantonness of their hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring the
 wife of chieftain who they thought would not return. now, however,
 let it be as i say, and do as i tell you. do not go out against
 ulysses, or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your
 own heads.”
 
this was what said, and more than half raised loud shout, and at
 once left the assembly. but the rest stayed where they were, for the
 speech of halitherses displeased them, and they sided with eupeithes;
 they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
 themselves, they met together in front of the city, and eupeithes led
 them on in their folly. thought was going to avenge the murder of
 his son, whereas in truth was never to return, but was himself to
 perish in his attempt.
 
then minerva said to jove, “father, of saturn, king of kings,
 answer this question—what do you propose to do? will you set them
 fighting still further, or will you make peace between them?”
 
and jove answered, “my child, why should you ask me? was it not by your
 own arrangement that ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the
 suitors? do whatever you like, but i will tell you what i think will be
 most reasonable arrangement. now that ulysses is revenged, let them
 swear to solemn covenant, in virtue of which shall continue to
 rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of
 their sons and brothers. let them then all become friends as
 heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.”
 
this was what minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
 darted from off the topmost summits of olympus.
 
now when laertes and the others had done dinner, ulysses began by
 saying, “some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up to
 us.” so one of dolius’s sons went as was bid. standing on the
 threshold could see them all quite near, and said to ulysses, “here
 they are, let us put on our armour at once.”
 
they put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say ulysses,
 his three men, and the six sons of dolius. laertes also and dolius did
 the same—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. when they
 had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,
 ulysses leading the way.
 
then jove’s daughter minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
 and voice of mentor. ulysses was glad when saw her, and said to his
 telemachus, “telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an
 engagement, which will show every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgrace
 your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the
 world over.”
 
“you say truly, my dear father,” answered telemachus, “and you shall
 see, if you will, that i am in mind to disgrace your family.”
 
laertes was delighted when heard this. “good heavens,” exclaimed,
 “what day i am enjoying: i do indeed rejoice at it. my and
 grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour.”
 
on this minerva came close up to him and said, “son of arceisius—-best
 friend i have in the world—pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to jove
 her father; then poise your spear and hurl it.”
 
as she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when had prayed
 to her poised his spear and hurled it. hit eupeithes’ helmet, and
 the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his
 armour rang rattling round him as fell heavily to the ground.
 meantime ulysses and his fell upon the front line of the foe and
 smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
 every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
 only minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. “men of
 ithaca,” she cried, “cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at
 once without further bloodshed.”
 
on this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
 arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of
 the goddess’ voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. but
 ulysses gave great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down
 like soaring eagle. then the of saturn sent thunderbolt of fire
 that fell just in front of minerva, so she said to ulysses, “ulysses,
 noble of laertes, stop this warful strife, or jove will be angry
 with you.”
 
thus spoke minerva, and ulysses obeyed her gladly. then minerva assumed
 the form and voice of mentor, and presently made covenant of peace
 between the two contending parties.
 



footnotes:
 
[1] [ black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching all
 across africa, one half looking west on to the atlantic, and the other
 east on to the indian ocean.]
 
[2] [ the original use of the footstool was probably less to rest the
 feet than to keep them (especially when bare) from floor which was
 often wet and dirty.]
 
[3] [ the θρόνος or seat, is occasionally called “high,” as being
 higher than the θρῆνυς or low footstool. it was probably higher than
 an ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had back.]
 
[4] [ temesa was on the west coast of the toe of italy, in what is now
 the gulf of sta eufemia. it was famous in remote times for its copper
 mines, which, however, were worked out when strabo wrote.]
 
[5] [ i.e. “with current in it”—see illustrations and map near the
 end of bks. v. and vi. respectively.]
 
[6] [ reading Νηρίτῳ for Νηίῳ, cf. “od.” iii. 81 where the same mistake
 is made, and xiii. 351 where the mountain is called neritum, the same
 place being intended both here and in book xiii.]
 
[7] [ it is never plausibly explained why penelope cannot do this, and
 from bk. ii. it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging the
 suitors, though we are asked to believe that she was only fooling
 them.]
 
[8] [ see note on “od.” i. 365.]
 
[9] [ middle argos means the peleponnese which, however, is never so
 called in the “iliad”. i presume “middle” means “middle between the two
 greek-speaking countries of asia minor and sicily, with south italy”;
 for that parts of sicily and also large parts, though not the whole of
 south italy, were inhabited by greek-speaking races centuries before
 the dorian colonisations can hardly be doubted. the sicians, and also
 the sicels, both of them probably spoke greek.]
 
[10] [ cf. “il.” vi. 490-495. in the “iliad” it is “war,” not “speech,”
 that is man’s matter. it argues certain hardness, or at any rate
 dislike of the “iliad” on the part of the writer of the “odyssey,” that
 she should have adopted hector’s farewell to andromache here, as
 elsewhere in the poem, for scene of such inferior pathos.]
 
[11] [ μέγαρα σκιοέντα the whole open court with the covered cloister
 running round it was called μέγαρον, or μέγαρα, but the covered part
 was distinguished by being called “shady” or “shadow-giving”. it was in
 this part that the tables for the suitors were laid. the fountain court
 at hampton court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the use
 of arches instead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangement
 is still common in sicily. the usual translation “shadowy” or “dusky”
 halls, gives false idea of the scene.]
 
[12] [ the reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes to
 make it clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep in
 ulysses’ house.]
 
[13] [ see appendix; g, in plan of ulysses’ house.]
 
[14] [ i imagine this passage to be rejoinder to “il.” xxiii. 702-705
 in which tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and good useful maid of
 all work at only four. the scrupulous regard of laertes for his wife’s
 feelings is of piece with the extreme jealousy for the honour of
 woman, which is manifest throughout the “odyssey”.]
 
[15] [ χιτῶνα “the χιτών, or _tunica_, was shirt or shift, and served
 as the chief under garment of the greeks and romans, whether men or
 women.” smith’s dictionary of greek and roman antiquities, under
 “tunica”.]
 
[16] [ doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described may
 be seen in the older houses at trapani. there is slot on the outer
 side of the door by means of which person who has left the room can
 shoot the bolt. my bedroom at the albergo centrale was fastened in this
 way.]
 
[17] [ πύματον δ’ ὡπλίσσατο δόρπον. so we vulgarly say “had cooked his
 goose,” or “had settled his hash.” Ægyptius cannot of course know of
 the fate antiphus had met with, for there had as yet been news of or
 from ulysses.]
 
[18] [ “il.” xxii. 416. σχέσθε φίλοι, καὶ μ’ οἷον ἐάσατε...... the
 authoress has bungled by borrowing these words verbatim from the
 “iliad”, without prefixing the necessary “do not,” which i have
 supplied.]
 
[19] [ i.e. you have money, and could pay when i got judgment, whereas
 the suitors are men of straw.]
 
[20] [ cf. “il.” ii. 76. ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’
 ἀνέστη
 Νέστωρ, ὄς ῥα.......................................
 ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.
 the odyssean passage runs—
 “ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ ἀνέστη
 Μεντορ ὄς ῥ’.......................................
 ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.
 is it possible not to suspect that the name mentor was coined upon that
 of nestor?]
 
[21] [ i.e. in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the inner
 house.]
 
[22] [ this would be fair from sicily, which was doing duty for ithaca
 in the mind of the writer, but north wind would have been preferable
 for voyage from the real ithaca to pylos.]
 
[23] [ κελάδοντ’ ἐπὶ οὶνοπα πόντον the wind does not whistle over
 waves. it only whistles through rigging or some other obstacle that
 cuts it.]
 
[24] [ cf. “il.” v.20. Ἰδαῖος δ’ ἀπόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα δίφρον, the
 odyssean line is ἠέλιος δ’ ἀνόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα λίμνην. there can
 be doubt that the odyssean line was suggested by the iliadic, but
 nothing can explain why idæus jumping from his chariot should suggest
 to the writer of the “odyssey” the sun jumping from the sea. the
 probability is that she never gave the matter thought, but took the
 line in question as an effect of saturation with the “iliad,” and of
 unconscious cerebration. the “odyssey” contains many such examples.]
 
[25] [ the heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc. were taken out from the
 inside and eaten first as being more readily cooked; the {greek}, or
 bone meat, was cooking while the {greek} or inward parts were being
 eaten. i imagine that the thigh bones made kind of gridiron, while at
 the same time the marrow inside them got cooked.]
 
[26] [ i.e. skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged. the
 meat would be pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes to
 grill—the two ends of the skewer being supported in whatever way
 convenient. meat so cooking may be seen in any eating house in smyrna,
 or any eastern town. when i rode across the troad from the dardanelles
 to hissarlik and mount ida, i noticed that my dragoman and his men did
 all our outdoor cooking exactly in the odyssean and iliadic fashion.]
 
[27] [ cf. “il.” xvii. 567. {greek} the odyssean lines are—{greek}]
 
[28] [ reading {greek} for {greek}, cf. “od.” i. 186.]
 
29[] [ the geography of the Ægean as above described is correct, but is
 probably taken from the lost poem, the nosti, the existence of which is
 referred to “od.” i. 326, 327 and 350, &c. glance at the map will
 show that heaven advised its supplicants quite correctly.]
 
[30] [ the writer—ever jealous for the honour of women—extenuates
 clytemnestra’s guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to her
 having been left unprotected, and fallen into the hands of wicked
 man.]
 
[31] [ the greek is {greek} cf. “iliad” ii. 408 {greek} surely the
 {greek} of the odyssean passage was due to the {greek} of the “iliad.”
 other reason suggests itself for the making menelaus return on the
 very day of the feast given by orestes. the fact that in the “iliad”
 menelaus came to banquet without waiting for an invitation,
 determines the writer of the “odyssey” to make him come to banquet,
 also uninvited, but as circumstances did not permit of his having been
 invited, his coming uninvited is shown to have been due to chance. i do
 not think the authoress thought all this out, but attribute the
 strangeness of the coincidence to unconscious cerebration and
 saturation.]
 
[32] [ cf. “il.” i. 458, ii. 421. the writer here interrupts an iliadic
 passage (to which she returns immediately) for the double purpose of
 dwelling upon the slaughter of the heifer, and of letting nestor’s wife
 and daughter enjoy it also. male writer, if was borrowing from the
 “iliad,” would have stuck to his borrowing.]
 
[33] [ cf. “il.” xxiv. 587, 588 where the lines refer to the washing
 the dead body of hector.]
 
[34] [ see illustration on opposite page. the yard is typical of many
 that may be seen in sicily. the existing ground-plan is probably
 unmodified from odyssean, and indeed long pre-odyssean times, but the
 earlier buildings would have arches, and would, one would suppose,
 be mainly timber. the odyssean {greek} were the sheds that ran round
 the yard as the arches do now. the {greek} was the one through which
 the main entrance passed, and which was hence “noisy,” or
 reverberating. it had an upper story in which visitors were often
 lodged.]
 
[35] [ this journey is an impossible one. telemachus and pisistratus
 would have been obliged to drive over the taygetus range, over which
 there has never yet been road for wheeled vehicles. it is plain
 therefore that the audience for whom the “odyssey” was written was one
 that would be unlikely to know anything about the topography of the
 peloponnese, so that the writer might take what liberties she chose.]
 
[36] [ the lines which i have enclosed in brackets are evidently an
 afterthought—added probably by the writer herself—for they evince the
 same instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern a
 woman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem. there is further
 sign of any special festivities nor of any other guests than telemachus
 and pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets)
 are abruptly introduced, probably with view of trying to carry off
 the introduction of the lines now in question.
 
the addition was, i imagine, suggested by desire to excuse and
 explain the non-appearance of hermione in bk. xv., as also of both
 hermione and megapenthes in the rest of bk. iv. megapenthes in bk. xv.
 seems to be still bachelor: the presumption therefore is that bk. xv.
 was written before the story of his marriage here given. i take it he
 is only married here because his sister is being married. she having
 been properly attended to, megapenthes might as well be married at the
 same time. hermione could not now be less than thirty.
 
i have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my “authoress of
 the odyssey”, p. 136-138. see also p. 256 of the same book.]
 
[37] [ sparta and lacedaemon are here treated as two different places,
 though in other parts of the poem it is clear that the writer
 understands them as one. the catalogue in the “iliad,” which the writer
 is here presumably following, makes the same mistake (“il.” ii. 581,
 582)]
 
[38] [ these last three lines are identical with “il.” vxiii. 604-606.]
 
[39] [ from the greek {greek} it is plain that menelaus took up the
 piece of meat with his fingers.]
 
[40] [ amber is never mentioned in the “iliad.” sicily, where i suppose
 the “odyssey” to have been written, has always been, and still is, one
 of the principal amber producing countries. it was probably the only
 one known in the odyssean age. see “the authoress of the odyssey,”
 longmans 1898, p. 186.]
 
[41] [ this doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of the
 cypria about paris and helen robbing menelaus of the greater part of
 his treasures, when they sailed together for troy.]
 
[42] [ it is inconceivable that helen should enter thus, in the middle
 of supper, intending to work with her distaff, if great festivities
 were going on. telemachus and pisistratus are evidently dining en
 famille.]
 
[43] [ in the italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who were
 being hotly pursued by the austrian police hid themselves inside
 donatello’s colossal wooden horse in the salone at padua, and remained
 there for week being fed by their confederates. in 1898 the last
 survivor was carried round padua in triumph.]
 
[44] [ the greek is {greek}. is it unfair to argue that the writer is a
 person of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom strong smell of fish
 is distasteful?]
 
[45] [ the greek is {greek}. i believe this to be hit at the writer’s
 own countrymen who were of phocaean descent, and the next following
 line to be rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk. vi.
 273-288, to the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry none
 of her own people. for that the writer of the “odyssey” was the person
 who has been introduced into the poem under the name of nausicaa, i
 cannot bring myself to question. i may remind english readers that
 {greek} (i.e. phoca) means “seal.” seals almost always appear on
 phocaean coins.]
 
[46] [ surely here again we are in the hands of writer of delicate
 sensibility. it is not as though the seals were stale; they had only
 just been killed. the writer, however is obviously laughing at her own
 countrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.]
 
[47] [ we were told above (lines 356, 357) that it was only one day’s
 sail.]
 
[48] [ i give the usual translation, but i do not believe the greek
 will warrant it. the greek reads {greek}.
 
this is usually held to mean that ithaca is an island fit for breeding
 goats, and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would
 have been if it were fit for breeding horses. i find little authority
 for such translation; the most equitable translation of the text as
 it stands is, “ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and
 delectable rather than fit for breeding horses; for not one of the
 islands is good driving ground, nor well meadowed.” surely the writer
 does not mean that pleasant or delectable island would not be fit for
 breeding horses? the most equitable translation, therefore, of the
 present text being thus halt and impotent, we may suspect corruption,
 and i hazard the following emendation, though i have not adopted it in
 my translation, as fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful. i
 would read:—{greek}.
 
as far as scanning goes the {greek} is not necessary; {greek} iv. 72,
 (footnote greek) iv. 233, to go further afield than earlier lines of
 the same book, give sufficient authority for {greek}, but the {greek}
 would not be redundant; it would emphasise the surprise of the
 contrast, and i should prefer to have it, though it is not very
 important either way. this reading of course should be translated
 “ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and (by your leave) itself
 horseman rather than fit for breeding horses—for not one of the
 islands is good and well meadowed ground.”
 
this would be sure to baffle the alexandrian editors. “how,” they would
 ask themselves, “could an island be horseman?” and they would cast
 about for an emendation. visit to the top of mt. eryx might perhaps
 make the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration of
 the text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.
 
i have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the “odyssey”
 was familiar with the old sican city at the top of mt. eryx, and that
 the aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence did duty
 with her for the ionian islands—marettimo, the highest and most
 westerly of the group, standing for ithaca. when seen from the top of
 mt. eryx marettimo shows as it should do according to “od.” ix. 25, 26,
 “on the horizon, all highest up in the towards the west,” while the
 other islands lie “some way off it to the east.” as we descend to
 trapani, marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island of
 levanzo, behind which it disappears. my friend, the late signor e.
 biaggini, pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top of
 levanzo, and said to “come cavalca bene” (“how well it rides”), and
 this immediately suggested my emendation to me. later on i found in the
 hymn to the pythian apollo (which abounds with tags taken from the
 “odyssey”) line ending {greek} which strengthened my suspicion that
 this was the original ending of the second of the two lines above under
 consideration.]
 
[49] [ see note on line 3 of this book. the reader will observe that
 the writer has been unable to keep the women out of an interpolation
 consisting only of four lines.]
 
[50] [ scheria means piece of land jutting out into the sea. in my
 “authoress of the odyssey” i thought “jutland” would be suitable
 translation, but it has been pointed out to that “jutland” only
 means the land of the jutes.]
 
[51] [ irrigation as here described is common in gardens near trapani.
 the water that supplies the ducts is drawn from wells by mule who
 turns wheel with buckets on it.]
 
[52] [ there is not word here about the cattle of the sun-god.]
 
[53] [ the writer evidently thought that green, growing wood might also
 be well seasoned.]
 
[54] [ the reader will note that the river was flowing with salt water
 i.e. that it was tidal.]
 
[55] [ then the ogygian island was not so far off, but that nausicaa
 might be assumed to know where it was.]
 
[56] [ greek {greek}]
 
[57] [ i suspect family joke, or sly allusion to some thing of which
 we know nothing, in this story of eurymedusa’s having been brought from
 apeira. the greek word “apeiros” means “inexperienced,” “ignorant.” is
 it possible that eurymedusa was notoriously incompetent?]
 
[58] [ polyphemus was also to neptune, see “od.” ix. 412, 529. he
 was therefore half brother to nausithous, half uncle to king alcinous,
 and half great uncle to nausicaa.]
 
[59] [ it would seem as though the writer thought that marathon was
 close to athens.]
 
[60] [ here the writer, knowing that she is drawing (with
 embellishments) from things actually existing, becomes impatient of
 past tenses and slides into the present.]
 
[61] [ this is hidden malice, implying that the phaeacian magnates were
 better than they should be. the final drink-offering should have
 been made to jove or neptune, not to the god of thievishness and
 rascality of all kinds. in line 164 we do indeed find echeneus
 proposing that drink-offering should be made to jove, but mercury is
 evidently, according to our authoress, the god who was most likely to
 be of use to them.]
 
[62] [ the fact of alcinous knowing anything about the cyclopes
 suggests that in the writer’s mind scheria and the country of the
 cyclopes were not very far from one another. i take the cyclopes and
 the giants to be one and the same people.]
 
[63] [ “my property, etc.” the authoress is here adopting an iliadic
 line (xix. 333), and this must account for the absence of all reference
 to penelope. if she had happened to remember “il.” v. 213, she would
 doubtless have appropriated it by preference, for that line reads “my
 country, _my wife_, and all the greatness of my house.”]
 
[64] [ the at first inexplicable sleep of ulysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc.)
 is here, as also in viii. 445, being obviously prepared. the writer
 evidently attached the utmost importance to it. those who know that the
 harbour which did duty with the writer of the “odyssey” for the one in
 which ulysses landed in ithaca, was only about 2 miles from the place
 in which ulysses is now talking with alcinous, will understand why the
 sleep was so necessary.]
 
[65] [ there were two classes—the lower who were found in provisions
 which they had to cook for themselves in the yards and outer precincts,
 where they would also eat—and the upper who would eat in the cloisters
 of the inner court, and have their cooking done for them.]
 
[66] [ translation very dubious. i suppose the {greek} here to be the
 covered sheds that ran round the outer courtyard. see illustrations at
 the end of bk. iii.]
 
[67] [ the writer apparently deems that the words “as compared with
 what oxen can plough in the same time” go without saying. not so the
 writer of the “iliad” from which the odyssean passage is probably
 taken. explains that mules can plough quicker than oxen (“il.” x.
 351-353)]
 
[68] [ it was very fortunate that such disc happened to be there,
 seeing that none like it were in common use.]
 
[69] [ “il.” xiii. 37. here, as so often elsewhere in the “odyssey,”
 the appropriation of an iliadic line which is not quite appropriate
 puzzles the reader. the “they” is not the chains, nor yet mars and
 venus. it is an overflow from the iliadic passage in which neptune
 hobbles his horses in bonds “which none could either unloose or break
 so that they might stay there in that place.” if the line would have
 scanned without the addition of the words “so that they might stay
 there in that place,” they would have been omitted in the “odyssey.”]
 
[70] [ the reader will note that alcinous never goes beyond saying that
 is going to give the goblet; never gives it. elsewhere in both
 “iliad” and “odyssey” the offer of present is immediately followed by
 the statement that it was given and received gladly—alcinous actually
 does give chest and cloak and shirt—probably also some of the corn
 and wine for the long two-mile voyage was provided by him—but it is
 quite plain that gave talent and cup.]
 
[71] [ “il.” xviii. 344-349. these lines in the “iliad” tell of the
 preparation for washing the body of patroclus, and i am not pleased
 that the writer of the “odyssey” should have adopted them here.]
 
[72] [ see note [64] : ]
 
[73] [ see note [43] : ]
 
[74] [ the reader will find this threat fulfilled in bk. xiii]
 
[75] [ if the other islands lay some distance away from ithaca (which
 the word {greek} suggests), what becomes of the πόρθμος or gut between
 ithaca and samos which we hear of in bks. iv. and xv.? i suspect that
 the authoress in her mind makes telemachus come back from pylos to the
 lilybaean promontory and thence to trapani through the strait between
 the _isola grande_ and the mainland—the island of asteria being the one
 on which motya afterwards stood.]
 
[76] [ “il.” xviii. 533-534. the sudden lapse into the third person
 here for couple of lines is due to the fact that the two iliadic
 lines taken are in the third person.]
 
[77] [ cf. “il.” ii. 776. the words in both “iliad” and “odyssey” are
 [footnote greek]. in the “iliad” they are used of the horses of
 achilles’ followers as they stood idle, “champing lotus.”]
 
[78] [ i take all this passage about the cyclopes having ships to be
 sarcastic—meaning, “you people of drepanum have excuse for not
 colonising the island of favognana, which you could easily do, for you
 have plenty of ships, and the island is very good one.” for that the
 island so fully described here is the aegadean or “goat” island of
 favognana, and that the cyclopes are the old sican inhabitants of mt.
 eryx should not be doubted.]
 
[79] [ for the reasons why it was necessary that the night should be so
 exceptionally dark see “the authoress of the odyssey” pp. 188-189.]
 
[80] [ none but such lambs as would suck if they were with their
 mothers would be left in the yard. the older lambs should have been out
 feeding. the authoress has got it all wrong, but it does not matter.
 see “the authoress of the odyssey” p. 148.]
 
[81] [ this line is enclosed in brackets in the received text, and is
 omitted (with note) by messrs. butcher & lang. but lines enclosed in
 brackets are almost always genuine; all that brackets mean is that the
 bracketed passage puzzled some early editor, who nevertheless found it
 too well established in the text to venture on omitting it. in the
 present case the line bracketed is the very last which full-grown
 male editor would be likely to interpolate. it is safer to infer that
 the writer, young woman, not knowing or caring at which end of the
 ship the rudder should be, determined to make sure by placing it at
 both ends, which we shall find she presently does by repeating it (line
 340) at the stern of the ship. as for the two rocks thrown, the first i
 take to be the asinelli, see map facing p. 80. the second i see as the
 two contiguous islands of the formiche, which are treated as one, see
 map facing p. 108. the asinelli is an island shaped like boat, and
 pointing to the island of favognana. i think the authoress’s
 compatriots, who probably did not like her much better that she did
 them, jeered at the absurdity of ulysses’ conduct, and saw the asinelli
 or “donkeys,” not as the rock thrown by polyphemus, but as the boat
 itself containing ulysses and his men.]
 
[82] [ this line exists in the text here but not in the corresponding
 passage xii. 141. i am inclined to think it is interpolated (probably
 by the poetess herself) from the first of lines xi. 115-137, which i
 can hardly doubt were added by the writer when the scheme of the work
 was enlarged and altered. see “the authoress of the odyssey” pp.
 254-255.]
 
[83] [ “floating” (πλωτῇ) is not to be taken literally. the island
 itself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal. there is no
 indication of its moving during the month that ulysses stayed with
 aeolus, and on his return from his unfortunate voyage, seems to have
 found it in the same place. the πλωτῇ in fact should more be pressed
 than θοῇσι as applied to islands, “odyssey” xv. 299—where they are
 called “flying” because the ship would fly past them. so also the
 “wanderers,” as explained by buttmann; see note on “odyssey” xii. 57.]
 
[84] [ literally “for the ways of the night and of the day are near.” i
 have seen what mr. andrew lang says (“homer and the epic,” p. 236, and
 “longman’s magazine” for january, 1898, p. 277) about the “amber route”
 and the “sacred way” in this connection; but until gives his grounds
 for holding that the mediterranean peoples in the odyssean age used to
 go far north for their amber instead of getting it in sicily, where it
 is still found in considerable quantities, i do not know what weight i
 ought to attach to his opinion. i have been unable to find grounds for
 asserting that b.c. 1000 there was any commerce between the
 mediterranean and the “far north,” but i shall be very ready to learn
 if mr. lang will enlighten me. see “the authoress of the odyssey” pp.
 185-186.]
 
[85] [ one would have thought that when the sun was driving the stag
 down to the water, ulysses might have observed its whereabouts.]
 
[86] [ see hobbes of malmesbury’s translation.]
 
[87] [ “il.” vxiii. 349. again the writer draws from the washing the
 body of patroclus—which offends.]
 
[88] [ this visit is wholly without topographical significance.]
 
[89] [ brides presented themselves instinctively to the imagination of
 the writer, as the phase of humanity which she found most interesting.]
 
[90] [ ulysses was, in fact, to become missionary and preach neptune
 to people who knew not his name. i was fortunate enough to meet in
 sicily woman carrying one of these winnowing shovels; it was not much
 shorter than an oar, and i was able at once to see what the writer of
 the “odyssey” intended.]
 
[91] [ i suppose the lines i have enclosed in brackets to have been
 added by the author when she enlarged her original scheme by the
 addition of books i.-iv. and xiii. (from line 187)-xxiv. the reader
 will observe that in the corresponding passage (xii. 137-141) the
 prophecy ends with “after losing all your comrades,” and that there is
 allusion to the suitors. for fuller explanation see “the authoress
 of the odyssey” pp. 254-255.]
 
[92] [ the reader will remember that we are in the first year of
 ulysses’ wanderings, telemachus therefore was only eleven years old.
 the same anachronism is made later on in this book. see “the authoress
 of the odyssey” pp. 132-133.]
 
[93] [ tradition says that she had hanged herself. cf. “odyssey” xv.
 355, etc.]
 
[94] [ not to be confounded with aeolus king of the winds.]
 
[95] [ melampus, vide book xv. 223, etc.]
 
[96] [ i have already said in note on bk. xi. 186 that at this point
 of ulysses’ voyage telemachus could only be between eleven and twelve
 years old.]
 
[97] [ is the writer man or woman?]
 
[98] [ cf. “il.” iv. 521, {greek}. the odyssean line reads, {greek}.
 the famous dactylism, therefore, of the odyssean line was probably
 suggested by that of the ileadic rather than by desire to accommodate
 sound to sense. at any rate the double coincidence of dactylic line,
 and an ending {greek}, seems conclusive as to the familiarity of the
 writer of the “odyssey” with the iliadic line.]
 
[99] [ off the coast of sicily and south italy, in the month of may, i
 have seen men fastened half way up boat’s mast with their feet
 resting on crosspiece, just large enough to support them. from this
 point of vantage they spear sword-fish. when i saw men thus employed i
 could hardly doubt that the writer of the “odyssey” had seen others
 like them, and had them in her mind when describing the binding of
 ulysses. i have therefore with some diffidence ventured to depart from
 the received translation of ἰστοπέδη (cf. alcaeus frag. 18, where,
 however, it is very hard to say what ἰστοπέδαν means). in sophocles’
 lexicon i find reference to chrysostom (l, 242, a. ed. benedictine
 paris 1834-1839) for the word ἰστοπόδη, which is probably the same as
 ἰστοπέδη, but i have looked for the passage in vain.]
 
[100] [ the writer is at fault here and tries to put it off on circe.
 when ulysses comes to take the route prescribed by circe, ought to
 pass either the wanderers or some other difficulty of which we are not
 told, but does not do so. the planctae, or wanderers, merge into
 scylla and charybdis, and the alternative between them and something
 untold merges into the alternative whether ulysses had better choose
 scylla or charybdis. yet from line 260, it seems we are to consider the
 wanderers as having been passed by ulysses; this appears even more
 plainly from xxiii. 327, in which ulysses expressly mentions the
 wandering rocks as having been between the sirens and scylla and
 charybdis. the writer, however, is evidently unaware that she does not
 quite understand her own story; her difficulty was perhaps due to the
 fact that though trapanese sailors had given her fair idea as to
 where all her other localities really were, one in those days more
 than in our own could localise the planctae, which in fact, as buttmann
 has argued, were derived not from any particular spot, but from
 sailors’ tales about the difficulties of navigating the group of the
 aeolian islands as whole (see note on “od.” x. 3). still the matter
 of the poor doves caught her fancy, so she would not forgo them. the
 whirlwinds of fire and the smoke that hangs on scylla suggests allusion
 to stromboli and perhaps even etna. scylla is on the italian side, and
 therefore may be said to look west. it is about 8 miles thence to the
 sicilian coast, so ulysses may be perfectly well told that after
 passing scylla will come to the thrinacian island or sicily.
 charybdis is transposed to site some few miles to the north of its
 actual position.]
 
[101] [ i suppose this line to have been intercalated by the author
 when lines 426-446 were added.]
 
[102] [ for the reasons which enable us to identify the island of the
 two sirens with the lipari island now salinas—the ancient didyme, or
 “twin” island—see the authoress of the odyssey, pp. 195, 196. the two
 sirens doubtless were, as their name suggests, the whistling gusts, or
 avalanches of air that at times descend without moment’s warning from
 the two lofty mountains of salinas—as also from all high points in the
 neighbourhood.]
 
[103] [ see admiral smyth on the currents in the straits of messina,
 quoted in “the authoress of the odyssey,” p. 197.]
 
[104] [ in the islands of favognana and marettimo off trapani i have
 seen men fish exactly as here described. they chew bread into paste
 and throw it into the to attract the fish, which they then spear.
 line is used.]
 
[105] [ the writer evidently regards ulysses as on coast that looked
 east at great distance south of the straits of messina somewhere,
 say, near tauromenium, now taormina.]
 
[106] [ surely there must be line missing here to tell us that the
 keel and mast were carried down into charybdis. besides, the aorist
 {greek} in its present surrounding is perplexing. i have translated it
 as though it were an imperfect; i see messrs. butcher and lang
 translate it as pluperfect, but surely charybdis was in the act of
 sucking down the water when ulysses arrived.]
 
[107] [ i suppose the passage within brackets to have been an
 afterthought but to have been written by the same hand as the rest of
 the poem. i suppose xii. 103 to have been also added by the writer when
 she decided on sending ulysses back to charybdis. the simile suggests
 the hand of the wife or daughter of magistrate who had often seen her
 father come in cross and tired.]
 
[108] [ gr. πολυδαίδαλος. this puts coined money out of the question,
 but nevertheless implies that the gold had been worked into ornaments
 of some kind.]
 
[109] [ i suppose teiresias’ prophecy of bk. xi. 114-120 had made no
 impression on ulysses. more probably the prophecy was an afterthought,
 intercalated, as i have already said, by the authoress when she changed
 her scheme.]
 
[110] [ male writer would have made ulysses say, not “may you give
 satisfaction to your wives,” but “may your wives give satisfaction to
 you.”]
 
[111] [ see note [64].]
 
[112] [ the land was in reality the shallow inlet, now the salt works
 of s. cusumano—the neighbourhood of trapani and mt. eryx being made to
 do double duty, both as scheria and ithaca. hence the necessity for
 making ulysses set out after dark, fall instantly into profound
 sleep, and wake up on morning so foggy that could not see anything
 till the interviews between neptune and jove and between ulysses and
 minerva should have given the audience time to accept the situation.
 see illustrations and map near the end of bks. v. and vi.
 respectively.]
 
[113] [ this cave, which is identifiable with singular completeness, is
 now called the “grotta toro,” probably corruption of “tesoro,”
 for it is held to contain treasure. see the authoress of the odyssey,
 pp. 167-170.]
 
[114] [ probably they would.]
 
[115] [ then it had shallow shelving bottom.]
 
[116] [ doubtless the road would pass the harbour in odyssean times as
 it passes the salt works now; indeed, if there is to be road at all
 there is other level ground which it could take. see map above
 referred to.]
 
[117] [ the rock at the end of the northern harbour of trapani, to
 which i suppose the writer of the “odyssey” to be here referring, still
 bears the name malconsiglio—“the rock of evil counsel.” there is a
 legend that it was ship of turkish pirates who were intending to
 attack trapani, but the “madonna di trapani” crushed them under this
 rock just as they were coming into port. my friend cavaliere
 giannitrapani of trapani told that his father used to tell him when
 was boy that if would drop exactly three drops of oil on to the
 water near the rock, would see the ship still at the bottom. the
 legend is evidently christianised version of the odyssean story,
 while the name supplies the additional detail that the disaster
 happened in consequence of an evil counsel.]
 
[118] [ it would seem then that the ship had got all the way back from
 ithaca in about quarter of an hour.]
 
[119] [ and may we not add “and also to prevent his recognising that he
 was only in the place where had met nausicaa two days earlier.”]
 
[120] [ all this is to excuse the entire absence of minerva from books
 ix.-xii., which i suppose had been written already, before the
 authoress had determined on making minerva so prominent character.]
 
[121] [ we have met with this somewhat lame attempt to cover the
 writer’s change of scheme at the end of bk. vi.]
 
[122] [ i take the following from the authoress of the odyssey, p. 167.
 “it is clear from the text that there were two [caves] not one, but
 some one has enclosed in brackets the two lines in which the second
 cave is mentioned, i presume because found himself puzzled by having
 second cave sprung upon him when up to this point had only been
 told of one.
 
“i venture to think that if had known the ground would not have
 been puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yards
 from one another.” the cave in which ulysses hid his treasure is, as i
 have already said, identifiable with singular completeness. the other
 cave presents special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.]
 
[123] [ there is attempt to disguise the fact that penelope had long
 given encouragement to the suitors. the only defence set up is that she
 did not really mean to encourage them. would it not have been wiser to
 have tried little discouragement?]
 
[124] [ see map near the end of bk. vi. _ruccazzù dei corvi_ of course
 means “the rock of the ravens.” both name and ravens still exist.]
 
[125] [ see the authoress of the odyssey, pp. 140, 141. the real reason
 for sending telemachus to pylos and lacedaemon was that the authoress
 might get helen of troy into her poem. was sent at the only point in
 the story at which could be sent, so must have gone then or not
 at all.]
 
[126] [ the site i assign to eumaeus’s hut, close to the _ruccazzù dei
 corvi_, is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensive
 view.]
 
[127] [ sandals such as eumaeus was making are still worn in the
 abruzzi and elsewhere. an oblong piece of leather forms the sole: holes
 are cut at the four corners, and through these holes leathern straps
 are passed, which are bound round the foot and cross-gartered up the
 calf.]
 
[128] [ see note [75] : ]
 
[129] [ telemachus like many another good young man seems to expect
 every one to fetch and carry for him.]
 
[130] [ “il.” vi. 288. the store room was fragrant because it was made
 of cedar wood. see “il.” xxiv. 192.]
 
[131] [ cf. “il.” vi. 289 and 293-296. the dress was kept at the bottom
 of the chest as one that would only be wanted on the greatest
 occasions; but surely the marriage of hermione and of megapenthes (bk,
 iv. _ad init_.) might have induced helen to wear it on the preceding
 evening, in which case it could hardly have got back. we find hint
 here of megapenthes’ recent marriage.]
 
[132] [ see note [83].]
 
[133] [ cf. “od.” xi. 196, etc.]
 
[134] [ the names syra and ortygia, on which island great part of the
 doric syracuse was originally built, suggest that even in odyssean
 times there was prehistoric syracuse, the existence of which was
 known to the writer of the poem.]
 
[135] [ literally “where are the turnings of the sun.” assuming, as we
 may safely do, that the syra and ortygia of the “odyssey” refer to
 syracuse, it is the fact that not far to the south of these places the
 land turns sharply round, so that mariners following the coast would
 find the sun upon the other side of their ship to that on which they’d
 had it hitherto.
 
mr. a. s. griffith has kindly called my attention to herod iv. 42,
 where, speaking of the circumnavigation of africa by phoenician
 mariners under necos, writes:
 
“on their return they declared—i for my part do not believe them, but
 perhaps others may—that in sailing round libya [i.e. africa] they had
 the sun upon their right hand. in this way was the extent of libya
 first discovered.
 
“i take it that eumaeus was made to have come from syracuse because the
 writer thought she rather ought to have made something happen at
 syracuse during her account of the voyages of ulysses. she could not,
 however, break his long drift from charybdis to the island of
 pantellaria; she therefore resolved to make it up to syracuse in
 another way.”
 
modern excavations establish the existence of two and only two
 pre-dorian communities at syracuse; they were, so dr. orsi informed me,
 at plemmirio and cozzo pantano. see the authoress of the odyssey, pp.
 211-213.]
 
[136] [ this harbour is again evidently the harbour in which ulysses
 had landed, i.e. the harbour that is now the salt works of s.
 cusumano.]
 
[137] [ this never can have been anything but very niggardly pay for
 some eight or nine days’ service. i suppose the crew were to consider
 the pleasure of having had trip to pylos as set off. there is no
 trace of the dinner as having been actually given, either on the
 following or any other morning.]
 
[138] [ hawk can tear its prey while it is on the wing.]
 
[139] [ the text is here apparently corrupt, and will not make sense as
 it stands. i follow messrs. butcher & lang in omitting line 101.]
 
[140] [ i.e. to be milked, as in south italian and sicilian towns at
 the present day.]
 
[141] [ the butchering and making ready the carcases took place partly
 in the outer yard and partly in the open part of the inner court.]
 
[142] [ these words cannot mean that it would be afternoon soon after
 they were spoken. ulysses and eumaeus reached the town which was “some
 way off” (xvii. 25) in time for the suitor’s early meal (xvii. 170 and
 176) say at ten or eleven o’ clock. the context of the rest of the book
 shows this. eumaeus and ulysses, therefore, cannot have started later
 than eight or nine, and eumaeus’s words must be taken as an
 exaggeration for the purpose of making ulysses bestir himself.]
 
[143] [ i imagine the fountain to have been somewhere about where the
 church of the _madonna di trapani_ now stands, and to have been fed
 with water from what is now called the fontana diffali on mt. eryx.]
 
[144] [ from this and other passages in the “odyssey” it appears that
 we are in an age anterior to the use of coined money—an age when
 cauldrons, tripods, swords, cattle, chattels of all kinds, measures of
 corn, wine, or oil, etc. etc., not to say pieces of gold, silver,
 bronze, or even iron, wrought more or less, but unstamped, were the
 nearest approach to currency that had as yet been reached.]
 
[145] [ gr. ἐς μέσσον.]
 
[146] [ i correct these proofs abroad and am not within reach of
 hesiod, but surely this passage suggests acquaintance with the works
 and ways, though it by means compels it.]
 
[147] [ it would seem as though eurynome and euryclea were the same
 person. see note 156]
 
[148] [ it is plain, therefore, that iris was commonly accepted as the
 messenger of the gods, though our authoress will never permit her to
 fetch or carry for any one.]
 
[149] [ i.e. the doorway leading from the inner to the outer court.]
 
[150] [see note 156]
 
[151] [ these, i imagine, must have been in the open part of the inner
 courtyard, where the maids also stood, and threw the light of their
 torches into the covered cloister that ran all round it. the smoke
 would otherwise have been intolerable.]
 
[152] [ translation very uncertain; vide liddell and scott, under
 {greek}]
 
[153] [ see photo on opposite page.]
 
[154] [ cf. “il.” ii. 184, and 217, 218. an additional and well-marked
 feature being wanted to convince penelope, the writer has taken the
 hunched shoulders of thersites (who is mentioned immediately after
 eurybates in the “iliad”) and put them on to eurybates’ back.]
 
[155] [ this is how geese are now fed in sicily, at any rate in summer,
 when the grass is all burnt up. i have never seen them grazing.]
 
[156] [ lower down (line 143) euryclea says it was herself that had
 thrown the cloak over ulysses—for the plural should not be taken as
 implying more than one person. the writer is evidently still
 fluctuating between euryclea and eurynome as the name for the old
 nurse. she probably originally meant to call her euryclea, but finding
 it not immediately easy to make euryclea scan in xvii. 495, she hastily
 called her eurynome, intending either to alter this name later or to
 change the earlier euryclea’s into eurynome. she then drifted in to
 eurynome as convenience further directed, still nevertheless hankering
 after euryclea, till at last she found that the path of least
 resistance would lie in the direction of making eurynome and euryclea
 two persons. therefore in xxiii. 289-292 both eurynome and “the nurse”
 (who can be none other than euryclea) come on together. i do not say
 that this is feminine, but it is not unfeminine.]
 
[157] [ see note [156]]
 
[158] [ this, i take it, was immediately in front of the main entrance
 of the inner courtyard into the body of the house.]
 
[159] [ this is the only allusion to sardinia in either “iliad” or
 “odyssey.”]
 
[160] [ the normal translation of the greek word would be “holding
 back,” “curbing,” “restraining,” but i cannot think that the writer
 meant this—she must have been using the word in its other sense of
 “having,” “holding,” “keeping,” “maintaining.”]
 
[161] [ i have vainly tried to realise the construction of the
 fastening here described.]
 
[162] [ see plan of ulysses’ house in the appendix. it is evident that
 the open part of the court had flooring but the natural soil.]
 
[163] [ see plan of ulysses’ house, and note [175].]
 
[164] [ i.e. the door that led into the body of the house.]
 
[165] [ this was, doubt, the little table that was set for ulysses,
 “od.” xx. 259.
 
surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated. i suppose the
 iron part of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or bound
 securely to it—the handle being half buried in the ground. the axe
 would be placed edgeways towards the archer, and would have to shoot
 his arrow through the hole into which the handle was fitted when the
 axe was in use. twelve axes were placed in row all at the same
 height, all exactly in front of one another, all edgeways to ulysses
 whose arrow passed through all the holes from the first onward. i
 cannot see how the greek can bear any other interpretation, the words
 being, {greek}
 
“he did not miss single hole from the first onwards.” {greek}
 according to liddell and scott being “the hole for the handle of an
 axe, etc.,” while {greek} (“od.” v. 236) is, according to the same
 authorities, the handle itself. the feat is absurdly impossible, but
 our authoress sometimes has soul above impossibilities.]
 
[166] [ the reader will note how the spoiling of good food distresses
 the writer even in such supreme moment as this.]
 
[167] [ here we have it again. waste of substance comes first.]
 
[168] [ cf. “il.” iii. 337 and three other places. it is strange that
 the author of the “iliad” should find little horse-hair so alarming.
 possibly enough she was merely borrowing common form line from some
 earlier poet—or poetess—for this is woman’s line rather than a
 man’s.]
 
[169] [ or perhaps simply “window.” see plan in the appendix.]
 
[170] [ i.e. the pavement on which ulysses was standing.]
 
[171] [ the interpretation of lines 126-143 is most dubious, and at
 best we are in region of melodrama: cf., however, i. 425, etc. from
 which it appears that there was tower in the outer court, and that
 telemachus used to sleep in it. the ὀρσοθύρα i take to be door, or
 trap door, leading on to the roof above telemachus’s bed room, which we
 are told was in place that could be seen from all round—or it might
 be simply window in telemachus’s room looking out into the street.
 from the top of the tower the outer world was to be told what was going
 on, but people could not get in by the ὀρσοθύρα: they would have to
 come in by the main entrance, and melanthius explains that the mouth of
 the narrow passage (which was in the lands of ulysses and his friends)
 commanded the only entrance by which help could come, so that there
 would be nothing gained by raising an alarm.
 as for the ῥῶγες of line 143, commentator ancient or modern has
 been able to say what was intended—but whatever they were,
 melanthius could never carry twelve shields, twelve helmets, and
 twelve spears. moreover, where could go the others could go
 also. if dozen suitors had followed melanthius into the house
 they could have attacked ulysses in the rear, in which case, unless
 minerva had intervened promptly, the “odyssey” would have had a
 different ending. but throughout the scene we are in region of
 extravagance rather than of true fiction—it cannot be taken
 seriously by any but the very serious, until we come to the episode
 of phemius and medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.]
 
[172] [ i presume it was intended that there should be hook driven
 into the bearing-post.]
 
[173] [ what for?]
 
[174] [ gr: {greek}. this is not {greek}.]
 
[175] [ from lines 333 and 341 of this book, and lines 145 and 146 of
 bk. xxi we can locate the approach to the {greek} with some certainty.]
 
[176] [ but in xix. 500-502 ulysses scolded euryclea for offering
 information on this very point, and declared himself quite able to
 settle it for himself.]
 
[177] [ there were hundred and eight suitors.]
 
[178] [ lord grimthorpe, whose understanding does not lend itself to
 easy imposition, has been good enough to write to about my
 conviction that the “odyssey” was written by woman, and to send me
 remarks upon the gross absurdity of the incident here recorded. it is
 plain that all the authoress cared about was that the women should be
 hanged: as for attempting to realise, or to make her readers realise,
 how the hanging was done, this was of consequence. the reader must
 take her word for it and ask questions. lord grimthorpe wrote:
 
“i had better send you my ideas about nausicaa’s hanging of the maids
 (not ‘maidens,’ of whom froude wrote so well in his ‘science of
 history’) before i forget it all. luckily for liddell & scott have
 specially translated most of the doubtful words, referring to this very
 place.
 
“a ship’s cable. i don’t know how big ship she meant, but it must
 have been very small one indeed if its ‘cable’ could be used to tie
 tightly round woman’s neck, and still more round dozen of them ‘in
 row,’ besides being strong enough to hold them and pull them all up.
 
“a dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more than
 dozen strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roof
 over them; and the idea of pulling them up by rope hung anyhow round
 pillar {greek} is absurdly impossible; and how dozen of them could
 be hung dangling round one post is problem which senior wrangler
 would be puzzled to answer... she had better have let telemachus use
 his sword as had intended till she changed his mind for him.”]
 
[179] [ then they had all been in ulysses’ service over twenty years;
 perhaps the twelve guilty ones had been engaged more recently.]
 
[180] [ translation very doubtful—cf. “it.” xxiv. 598.]
 
[181] [ but why could she not at once ask to see the scar, of which
 euryclea had told her, or why could not ulysses have shown it to her?]
 
[182] [ the people of ithaca seem to have been as fond of carping as
 the phaeacians were in vi. 273, etc.]
 
[183] [ see note [156]. ulysses’s bed room does not appear to have been
 upstairs, nor yet quite within the house. is it possible that it was
 “the domed room” round the outside of which the erring maids were, for
 aught we have heard to the contrary, still hanging?]
 
[184] [ ulysses bedroom in the mind of the writer is here too
 apparently down stairs.]
 
[185] [ penelope having been now sufficiently whitewashed, disappears
 from the poem.]
 
[186] [ so practised washerwoman as our authoress doubtless knew that
 by this time the web must have become such wreck that it would have
 gone to pieces in the wash.]
 
lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands,
 that really good needlewoman—no one, indeed, whose work or character
 was worth consideration—could have endured, matter for what reason,
 the unpicking of her day’s work, day after day for between three and
 four years.]
 
[187] [ we must suppose dolius not yet to know that his melanthius
 had been tortured, mutilated, and left to die by ulysses’ orders on the
 preceding day, and that his daughter melantho had been hanged. dolius
 was probably exceptionally simple-minded, and his name was ironical. so
 on mt. eryx i was shown man who was always called sonza malizia or
 “guileless”—he being held exceptionally cunning.]
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the odyssey ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 


the project gutenberg ebook of the odyssey
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: the odyssey
 
author: homer
 
translator: samuel butler
 
release date: april 1, 1999 [ebook #1727]
 most recently updated: december 2, 2023
 
language: english
 
credits: jim tinsley and david widger
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the odyssey ***
 



[illustration]
 



the odyssey
 
by homer
 
rendered into english prose for the use of those who cannot read the
 original
 
contents
 
preface to first edition
 preface to second edition
 the odyssey
 book i.
 book ii.
 book iii.
 book iv.
 book v.
 book vi.
 book vii.
 book viii.
 book ix.
 book x.
 book xi.
 book xii.
 book xiii.
 book xiv.
 book xv.
 book xvi.
 book xvii.
 book xviii.
 book xix.
 book xx.
 book xxi.
 book xxii.
 book xxiii.
 book xxiv.
 footnotes:
 

professore
 cav. biagio ingroia,
 prezioso alleato
 l’autore riconoscente.
 



preface to first edition
 

this translation is intended to supplement work entitled “the
 authoress of the odyssey”, which i published in 1897. i could not give
 the whole “odyssey” in that book without making it unwieldy, i
 therefore epitomised my translation, which was already completed and
 which i now publish in full.
 
i shall not here argue the two main points dealt with in the work just
 mentioned; i have nothing either to add to, or to withdraw from, what i
 have there written. the points in question are:
 
(1) that the “odyssey” was written entirely at, and drawn entirely
 from, the place now called trapani on the west coast of sicily, alike
 as regards the phaeacian and the ithaca scenes; while the voyages of
 ulysses, when once is within easy reach of sicily, solve themselves
 into periplus of the island, practically from trapani back to
 trapani, via the lipari islands, the straits of messina, and the island
 of pantellaria.
 
(2) that the poem was entirely written by very young woman, who lived
 at the place now called trapani, and introduced herself into her work
 under the name of nausicaa.
 
the main arguments on which i base the first of these somewhat
 startling contentions, have been prominently and repeatedly before the
 english and italian public ever since they appeared (without rejoinder)
 in the “athenaeum” for january 30 and february 20, 1892. both
 contentions were urged (also without rejoinder) in the johnian “eagle”
 for the lent and october terms of the same year. nothing to which i
 should reply has reached from any quarter, and knowing how anxiously
 i have endeavoured to learn the existence of any flaws in my argument,
 i begin to feel some confidence that, did such flaws exist, i should
 have heard, at any rate about some of them, before now. without,
 therefore, for moment pretending to think that scholars generally
 acquiesce in my conclusions, i shall act as thinking them little likely
 so to gainsay as that it will be incumbent upon to reply, and
 shall confine myself to translating the “odyssey” for english readers,
 with such notes as i think will be found useful. among these i would
 especially call attention to one on xxii. 465-473 which lord grimthorpe
 has kindly allowed to make public.
 
i have repeated several of the illustrations used in “the authoress of
 the odyssey”, and have added two which i hope may bring the outer court
 of ulysses’ house more vividly before the reader. i should like to
 explain that the presence of man and dog in one illustration is
 accidental, and was not observed by till i developed the negative.
 in an appendix i have also reprinted the paragraphs explanatory of the
 plan of ulysses’ house, together with the plan itself. the reader is
 recommended to study this plan with some attention.
 
in the preface to my translation of the “iliad” i have given my views
 as to the main principles by which translator should be guided, and
 need not repeat them here, beyond pointing out that the initial liberty
 of translating poetry into prose involves the continual taking of more
 or less liberty throughout the translation; for much that is right in
 poetry is wrong in prose, and the exigencies of readable prose are the
 first things to be considered in prose translation. that the reader,
 however, may see how far i have departed from strict construe, i will
 print here messrs. butcher and lang’s translation of the sixty lines or
 so of the “odyssey.” their translation runs:
 
tell me, muse, of that man, so ready at need, who wandered far and
 wide, after had sacked the sacred citadel of troy, and many were the
 men whose towns saw and whose mind learnt, yea, and many the woes
 suffered in his heart on the deep, striving to win his own life and
 the return of his company. nay, but even so saved not his company,
 though desired it sore. for through the blindness of their own
 hearts they perished, fools, who devoured the oxen of helios hyperion:
 but the god took from them their day of returning. of these things,
 goddess, daughter of zeus, whencesoever thou hast heard thereof,
 declare thou even unto us.
 
now all the rest, as many as fled from sheer destruction, were at
 home, and had escaped both war and sea, but odysseus only, craving
 for his wife and for his homeward path, the lady nymph calypso
 held, that fair goddess, in her hollow caves, longing to have him
 for her lord. but when now the year had come in the courses of the
 seasons, wherein the gods had ordained that should return home
 to ithaca, not even there was quit of labours, not even among
 his own; but all the gods had pity on him save poseidon, who raged
 continually against godlike odysseus, till came to his own
 country. howbeit poseidon had now departed for the distant
 ethiopians, the ethiopians that are sundered in twain, the
 uttermost of men, abiding some where hyperion sinks and some where
 rises. there looked to receive his hecatomb of bulls and
 rams, there made merry sitting at the feast, but the other gods
 were gathered in the halls of olympian zeus. then among them the
 father of men and gods began to speak, for bethought him in his
 heart of noble aegisthus, whom the of agamemnon, far-famed
 orestes, slew. thinking upon him spake out among the immortals:
 ‘lo you now, how vainly mortal men do blame the gods! for of us
 they say comes evil, whereas they even of themselves, through the
 blindness of their own hearts, have sorrows beyond that which is
 ordained. even as of late aegisthus, beyond that which was
 ordained, took to him the wedded wife of the of atreus, and
 killed her lord on his return, and that with sheer doom before his
 eyes, since we had warned him by the embassy of hermes the
 keen-sighted, the slayer of argos, that should neither kill the
 man, nor woo his wife. for the of atreus shall be avenged at
 the hand of orestes, so soon as shall come to man’s estate and
 long for his own country. so spake hermes, yet prevailed not on
 the heart of aegisthus, for all his good will; but now hath paid
 one price for all.’
 
and the goddess, grey-eyed athene, answered him, saying: ‘o father,
 our father cronides, throned in the highest; that man assuredly
 lies in death that is his due; so perish likewise all who work
 such deeds! but my heart is rent for wise odysseus, the hapless
 one, who far from his friends this long while suffereth affliction
 in sea-girt isle, where is the navel of the sea, woodland isle,
 and therein goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of the
 wizard atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and himself
 upholds the tall pillars which keep earth and sky asunder. his
 daughter it is that holds the hapless man in sorrow: and ever with
 soft and guileful tales she is wooing him to forgetfulness of
 ithaca. but odysseus yearning to see if it were but the smoke leap
 upwards from his own land, hath desire to die. as for thee, thine
 heart regardeth it not at all, olympian! what! did not odysseus by
 the ships of the argives make thee free offering of sacrifice in
 the wide trojan land? wherefore wast thou then so wroth with him, o
 zeus?’
 

the “odyssey” (as every one knows) abounds in passages borrowed from
 the “iliad”; i had wished to print these in slightly different type,
 with marginal references to the “iliad,” and had marked them to this
 end in my ms. i found, however, that the translation would be thus
 hopelessly scholasticised, and abandoned my intention. i would
 nevertheless urge on those who have the management of our university
 presses, that they would render great service to students if they
 would publish greek text of the “odyssey” with the iliadic passages
 printed in different type, and with marginal references. i have given
 the british museum copy of the “odyssey” with the iliadic passages
 underlined and referred to in ms.; i have also given an “iliad” marked
 with all the odyssean passages, and their references; but copies of
 both the “iliad” and “odyssey” so marked ought to be within easy reach
 of all students.
 
any one who at the present day discusses the questions that have arisen
 round the “iliad” since wolf’s time, without keeping it well before his
 reader’s mind that the “odyssey” was demonstrably written from one
 single neighbourhood, and hence (even though nothing else pointed to
 this conclusion) presumably by one person only—that it was written
 certainly before 750, and in all probability before 1000 b.c.—that the
 writer of this very early poem was demonstrably familiar with the
 “iliad” as we now have it, borrowing as freely from those books whose
 genuineness has been most impugned, as from those which are admitted to
 be by homer—any one who fails to keep these points before his readers,
 is hardly dealing equitably by them. any one on the other hand, who
 will mark his “iliad” and his “odyssey” from the copies in the british
 museum above referred to, and who will draw the only inference that
 common sense can draw from the presence of so many identical passages
 in both poems, will, i believe, find difficulty in assigning their
 proper value to large number of books here and on the continent that
 at present enjoy considerable reputations. furthermore, and this
 perhaps is an advantage better worth securing, will find that many
 puzzles of the “odyssey” cease to puzzle him on the discovery that they
 arise from over-saturation with the “iliad.”
 
other difficulties will also disappear as soon as the development of
 the poem in the writer’s mind is understood. i have dealt with this at
 some length in pp. 251-261 of “the authoress of the odyssey”. briefly,
 the “odyssey” consists of two distinct poems: (1) the return of
 ulysses, which alone the muse is asked to sing in the opening lines of
 the poem. this poem includes the phaeacian episode, and the account of
 ulysses’ adventures as told by himself in books ix.-xii. it consists of
 lines 1-79 (roughly) of book i., of line 28 of book v., and thence
 without intermission to the middle of line 187 of book xiii., at which
 point the original scheme was abandoned.
 
(2) the story of penelope and the suitors, with the episode of
 telemachus’ voyage to pylos. this poem begins with line 80 (roughly) of
 book i., is continued to the end of book iv., and not resumed till
 ulysses wakes in the middle of line 187, book xiii., from whence it
 continues to the end of book xxiv.
 
in “the authoress of the odyssey”, i wrote:
 
the introduction of lines xi., 115-137 and of line ix., 535, with the
 writing new council of the gods at the beginning of book v., to take
 the place of the one that was removed to book i., 1-79, were the only
 things that were done to give even semblance of unity to the old
 scheme and the new, and to conceal the fact that the muse, after being
 asked to sing of one subject, spend two-thirds of her time in singing a
 very different one, with climax for which no-one has asked her. for
 roughly the return occupies eight books, and penelope and the suitors
 sixteen.
 

i believe this to be substantially correct.
 
lastly, to deal with very unimportant point, i observe that the
 leipsic teubner edition of 894 makes books ii. and iii. end with a
 comma. stops are things of such far more recent date than the
 “odyssey,” that there does not seem much use in adhering to the text in
 so small matter; still, from spirit of mere conservatism, i have
 preferred to do so. why [greek] at the beginnings of books ii. and
 viii., and [greek], at the beginning of book vii. should have initial
 capitals in an edition far too careful to admit supposition of
 inadvertence, when [greek] at the beginning of books vi. and xiii., and
 [greek] at the beginning of book xvii. have initial capitals, i
 cannot determine. other books of the “odyssey” have initial capitals
 except the three mentioned unless the first word of the book is a
 proper name.
 
s. butler.
 

_july_ 25, 1900.
 



preface to second edition
 

butler’s translation of the “odyssey” appeared originally in 1900, and
 the authoress of the odyssey in 1897. in the preface to the new edition
 of “the authoress”, which is published simultaneously with this new
 edition of the translation, i have given some account of the genesis of
 the two books.
 
the size of the original page has been reduced so as to make both books
 uniform with butler’s other works; and, fortunately, it has been
 possible, by using smaller type, to get the same number of words into
 each page, so that the references remain good, and, with the exception
 of few minor alterations and rearrangements now to be enumerated so
 far as they affect the translation, the new editions are faithful
 reprints of the original editions, with misprints and obvious errors
 corrected—no attempt having been made to edit them or to bring them up
 to date.
 
(a) the index has been revised.
 
(b) owing to the reduction in the size of the page it has been
 necessary to shorten some of the headlines, and here advantage has been
 taken of various corrections of and additions to the headlines and
 shoulder-notes made by butler in his own copies of the two books.
 
(c) for the most part each of the illustrations now occupies page,
 whereas in the original editions they generally appeared two on the
 page. it has been necessary to reduce the plan of the house of ulysses.
 
on page 153 of “the authoress” butler says: “no great poet would
 compare his hero to paunch full of blood and fat, cooking before the
 fire (xx, 24-28).” this passage is not given in the abridged story of
 the “odyssey” at the beginning of the book, but in the translation it
 occurs in these words:
 
“thus chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
 tossed about as one who turns paunch full of blood and fat in front
 of hot fire, doing it first on one side then on the other, that he
 may get it cooked as soon as possible; even so did turn himself
 about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single-handed as he
 was, should contrive to kill so large body of men as the wicked
 suitors.”
 
it looks as though in the interval between the publication of “the
 authoress” (1897) and of the translation (1900) butler had changed his
 mind; for in the first case the comparison is between ulysses and a
 paunch full, etc., and in the second it is between ulysses and man
 who turns paunch full, etc. the second comparison is perhaps one
 which great poet might make.
 
in seeing the works through the press i have had the invaluable
 assistance of mr. a. t. bartholomew of the university library,
 cambridge, and of mr. donald s. robertson, fellow of trinity college,
 cambridge. to both these friends i give my most cordial thanks for the
 care and skill exercised by them. mr. robertson has found time for the
 labour of checking and correcting all the quotations from and
 references to the “iliad” and “odyssey,” and i believe that it could
 not have been better performed. it was, i know, pleasure for him; and
 it would have been pleasure also for butler if could have known
 that his work was being shepherded by the of his old friend, mr. h.
 r. robertson, who more than half century ago was fellow-student
 with him at cary’s school of art in streatham street, bloomsbury.
 
henry festing jones.
 
120 maida vale, w.9.
 4th _december_, 1921.
 
the odyssey
 



book i
 

the gods in council—minerva’s visit to ithaca—the challenge from
 telemachus to the suitors.
 

tell me, muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide
 after had sacked the famous town of troy. many cities did visit,
 and many were the nations with whose manners and customs was
 acquainted; moreover suffered much by while trying to save his
 own life and bring his men safely home; but do what might could
 not save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in
 eating the cattle of the sun-god hyperion; so the god prevented them
 from ever reaching home. tell me, too, about all these things, oh
 daughter of jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.
 
so now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely
 home except ulysses, and he, though was longing to return to his
 wife and country, was detained by the goddess calypso, who had got him
 into large cave and wanted to marry him. but as years went by, there
 came time when the gods settled that should go back to ithaca;
 even then, however, when was among his own people, his troubles were
 not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun to pity him
 except neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would not
 let him get home.
 
now neptune had gone off to the ethiopians, who are at the world’s end,
 and lie in two halves, the one looking west and the other east.1 had
 gone there to accept hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying
 himself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house of
 olympian jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. at that moment
 was thinking of aegisthus, who had been killed by agamemnon’s son
 orestes; so said to the other gods:
 
“see now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing
 but their own folly. look at aegisthus; must needs make love to
 agamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill agamemnon, though knew
 it would be the death of him; for i sent mercury to warn him not to do
 either of these things, inasmuch as orestes would be sure to take his
 revenge when grew up and wanted to return home. mercury told him
 this in all good will but would not listen, and now has paid for
 everything in full.”
 
then minerva said, “father, of saturn, king of kings, it served
 aegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as did; but
 aegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for ulysses that my heart
 bleeds, when i think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island,
 far away, poor man, from all his friends. it is an island covered with
 forest, in the very middle of the sea, and goddess lives there,
 daughter of the magician atlas, who looks after the bottom of the
 ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth
 asunder. this daughter of atlas has got hold of poor unhappy ulysses,
 and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his
 home, so that is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how may
 once more see the smoke of his own chimneys. you, sir, take heed of
 this, and yet when ulysses was before troy did not propitiate you
 with many burnt sacrifice? why then should you keep on being so angry
 with him?”
 
and jove said, “my child, what are you talking about? how can i forget
 ulysses than whom there is more capable man on earth, nor more
 liberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? bear
 in mind, however, that neptune is still furious with ulysses for having
 blinded an eye of polyphemus king of the cyclopes. polyphemus is to
 neptune by the nymph thoosa, daughter to the sea-king phorcys;
 therefore though will not kill ulysses outright, torments him by
 preventing him from getting home. still, let us lay our heads together
 and see how we can help him to return; neptune will then be pacified,
 for if we are all of mind can hardly stand out against us.”
 
and minerva said, “father, of saturn, king of kings, if, then, the
 gods now mean that ulysses should get home, we should first send
 mercury to the ogygian island to tell calypso that we have made up our
 minds and that is to return. in the meantime i will go to ithaca, to
 put heart into ulysses’ telemachus; i will embolden him to call the
 achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his mother
 penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep and oxen; i
 will also conduct him to sparta and to pylos, to see if can hear
 anything about the return of his dear father—for this will make people
 speak well of him.”
 
so saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable,
 with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the
 redoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong,
 wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her, and
 down she darted from the topmost summits of olympus, whereon forthwith
 she was in ithaca, at the gateway of ulysses’ house, disguised as a
 visitor, mentes, chief of the taphians, and she held bronze spear in
 her hand. there she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of the
 oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in front of
 the house. men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait upon
 them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaning
 down the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some
 cutting up great quantities of meat.
 
telemachus saw her long before any one else did. was sitting moodily
 among the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how would
 send them flying out of the house, if were to come to his own again
 and be honoured as in days gone by. thus brooding as sat among them,
 caught sight of minerva and went straight to the gate, for was
 vexed that stranger should be kept waiting for admittance. took
 her right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear. “welcome,”
 said he, “to our house, and when you have partaken of food you shall
 tell us what you have come for.”
 
led the way as spoke, and minerva followed him. when they were
 within took her spear and set it in the spear-stand against strong
 bearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy father,
 and conducted her to richly decorated seat under which threw a
 cloth of damask. there was footstool also for her feet,2 and set
 another seat near her for himself, away from the suitors, that she
 might not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence, and
 that might ask her more freely about his father.
 
maid servant then brought them water in beautiful golden ewer and
 poured it into silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she
 drew clean table beside them. an upper servant brought them bread,
 and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, the
 carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold
 by their side, and manservant brought them wine and poured it out for
 them.
 

then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and
 seats.3 forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maids
 went round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with
 wine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things that
 were before them. as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink they
 wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments of a
 banquet, so servant brought lyre to phemius, whom they compelled
 perforce to sing to them. as soon as touched his lyre and began to
 sing telemachus spoke low to minerva, with his head close to hers that
 man might hear.
 
“i hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended with what i am
 going to say. singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, and
 all this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some
 wilderness or grinding to powder in the surf. if these men were to see
 my father come back to ithaca they would pray for longer legs rather
 than longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he, alas, has
 fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes say that is
 coming, we longer heed them; we shall never see him again. and now,
 sir, tell and tell true, who you are and where you come from.
 tell of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how
 your crew brought you to ithaca, and of what nation they declared
 themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land. tell also truly,
 for i want to know, are you stranger to this house, or have you been
 here in my father’s time? in the old days we had many visitors for my
 father went about much himself.”
 
and minerva answered, “i will tell you truly and particularly all about
 it. i am mentes, of anchialus, and i am king of the taphians. i
 have come here with my ship and crew, on voyage to men of foreign
 tongue being bound for temesa4 with cargo of iron, and i shall bring
 back copper. as for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open country
 away from the town, in the harbour rheithron5 under the wooded mountain
 neritum.6 our fathers were friends before us, as old laertes will tell
 you, if you will go and ask him. they say, however, that never comes
 to town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly, with
 an old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when he
 comes in tired from pottering about his vineyard. they told your
 father was at home again, and that was why i came, but it seems the
 gods are still keeping him back, for is not dead yet not on the
 mainland. it is more likely is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean,
 or prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will. i
 am prophet, and know very little about omens, but i speak as it is
 borne in upon from heaven, and assure you that will not be away
 much longer; for is man of such resource that even though were
 in chains of iron would find some means of getting home again. but
 tell me, and tell true, can ulysses really have such fine looking
 fellow for son? you are indeed wonderfully like him about the head
 and eyes, for we were close friends before set sail for troy where
 the flower of all the argives went also. since that time we have never
 either of us seen the other.”
 
“my mother,” answered telemachus, “tells i am to ulysses, but it
 is wise child that knows his own father. would that i were to one
 who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there is
 more ill-starred man under heaven than who they tell is my
 father.”
 
and minerva said, “there is fear of your race dying out yet, while
 penelope has such fine as you are. but tell me, and tell true,
 what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people?
 what is it all about? have you some banquet, or is there wedding in
 the family—for one seems to be bringing any provisions of his own?
 and the guests—how atrociously they are behaving; what riot they make
 over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable person
 who comes near them.”
 
“sir,” said telemachus, “as regards your question, so long as my father
 was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their
 displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more
 closely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. i could have borne it
 better even though were dead, if had fallen with his men before
 troy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fighting
 were done; for then the achaeans would have built mound over his
 ashes, and i should myself have been heir to his renown; but now the
 storm-winds have spirited him away we know not whither; is gone
 without leaving so much as trace behind him, and i inherit nothing
 but dismay. nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss of
 my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon of yet another kind; for the
 chiefs from all our islands, dulichium, same, and the woodland island
 of zacynthus, as also all the principal men of ithaca itself, are
 eating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to my
 mother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry,7 nor
 yet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, and
 before long will do so also with myself.”
 
“is that so?” exclaimed minerva, “then you do indeed want ulysses home
 again. give him his helmet, shield, and couple of lances, and if he
 is the man was when i first knew him in our house, drinking and
 making merry, would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors,
 were to stand once more upon his own threshold. was then coming
 from ephyra, where had been to beg poison for his arrows from ilus,
 of mermerus. ilus feared the ever-living gods and would not give
 him any, but my father let him have some, for was very fond of him.
 if ulysses is the man then was these suitors will have short
 shrift and sorry wedding.
 
“but there! it rests with heaven to determine whether is to return,
 and take his revenge in his own house or no; i would, however, urge you
 to set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once. take my
 advice, call the achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay your
 case before them, and call heaven to bear you witness. bid the suitors
 take themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother’s mind
 is set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will find
 her husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that so dear
 daughter may expect. as for yourself, let prevail upon you to take
 the best ship you can get, with crew of twenty men, and go in quest
 of your father who has so long been missing. some one may tell you
 something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some
 heaven-sent message may direct you. first go to pylos and ask nestor;
 thence go on to sparta and visit menelaus, for got home last of all
 the achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive and on his way
 home, you can put up with the waste these suitors will make for yet
 another twelve months. if on the other hand you hear of his death, come
 home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
 barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again. then, having
 done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means or
 foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. you are too old to
 plead infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing
 orestes’ praises for having killed his father’s murderer aegisthus? you
 are fine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make
 yourself name in story. now, however, i must go back to my ship and
 to my crew, who will be impatient if i keep them waiting longer; think
 the matter over for yourself, and remember what i have said to you.”
 
“sir,” answered telemachus, “it has been very kind of you to talk to me
 in this way, as though i were your own son, and i will do all you tell
 me; i know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a
 little longer till you have taken bath and refreshed yourself. i will
 then give you present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; i will
 give you one of great beauty and value—a keepsake such as only dear
 friends give to one another.”
 
minerva answered, “do not try to keep me, for i would be on my way at
 once. as for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till i
 come again, and i will take it home with me. you shall give very
 good one, and i will give you one of less value in return.”
 
with these words she flew away like bird into the air, but she had
 given telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about
 his father. felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the
 stranger had been god, so went straight to where the suitors were
 sitting.
 
phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he
 told the sad tale of the return from troy, and the ills minerva had
 laid upon the achaeans. penelope, daughter of icarius, heard his song
 from her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase, not
 alone, but attended by two of her handmaids. when she reached the
 suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the roof
 of the cloisters8 with staid maiden on either side of her. she held a
 veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.
 
“phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods and heroes,
 such as poets love to celebrate. sing the suitors some one of these,
 and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for
 it breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds of my lost husband whom i
 mourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all hellas
 and middle argos.”9
 
“mother,” answered telemachus, “let the bard sing what has mind
 to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is jove, not they, who
 makes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own
 good pleasure. this fellow means harm by singing the ill-fated
 return of the danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs most
 warmly. make up your mind to it and bear it; ulysses is not the only
 man who never came back from troy, but many another went down as well
 as he. go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily
 duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for
 speech is man’s matter, and mine above all others 10—for it is i who am
 master here.”
 
she went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in
 her heart. then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she
 mourned her dear husband till minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes.
 but the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters11, and
 prayed each one that might be her bed fellow.
 
then telemachus spoke, “shameless,” cried, “and insolent suitors,
 let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be brawling, for it
 is rare thing to hear man with such divine voice as phemius has;
 but in the morning meet in full assembly that i may give you formal
 notice to depart, and feast at one another’s houses, turn and turn
 about, at your own cost. if on the other hand you choose to persist in
 spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but jove shall reckon with you
 in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be man
 to avenge you.”
 
the suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the
 boldness of his speech. then, antinous, of eupeithes, said, “the
 gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may
 jove never grant you to be chief in ithaca as your father was before
 you.”
 
telemachus answered, “antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing,
 i will be chief too if i can. is this the worst fate you can think of
 for me? it is bad thing to be chief, for it brings both riches and
 honour. still, now that ulysses is dead there are many great men in
 ithaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among them;
 nevertheless i will be chief in my own house, and will rule those whom
 ulysses has won for me.”
 
then eurymachus, of polybus, answered, “it rests with heaven to
 decide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own
 house and over your own possessions; one while there is man in
 ithaca shall do you violence nor rob you. and now, my good fellow, i
 want to know about this stranger. what country does come from? of
 what family is he, and where is his estate? has brought you news
 about the return of your father, or was on business of his own? he
 seemed well to do man, but hurried off so suddenly that was
 gone in moment before we could get to know him.”
 
“my father is dead and gone,” answered telemachus, “and even if some
 rumour reaches i put more faith in it now. my mother does indeed
 sometimes send for soothsayer and question him, but i give his
 prophecyings heed. as for the stranger, was mentes, of
 anchialus, chief of the taphians, an old friend of my father’s.” but in
 his heart knew that it had been the goddess.
 
the suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the
 evening; but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to
 bed each in his own abode.12 telemachus’s room was high up in tower13
 that looked on to the outer court; hither, then, hied, brooding and
 full of thought. good old woman, euryclea, daughter of ops, the son
 of pisenor, went before him with couple of blazing torches. laertes
 had bought her with his own money when she was quite young; gave the
 worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in his
 household as did to his own wedded wife, but did not take her to
 his bed for feared his wife’s resentment.14 she it was who now
 lighted telemachus to his room, and she loved him better than any of
 the other women in the house did, for she had nursed him when was a
 baby. opened the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; as
 took off his shirt15 gave it to the good old woman, who folded it
 tidily up, and hung it for him over peg by his bed side, after which
 she went out, pulled the door to by silver catch, and drew the bolt
 home by means of the strap.16 but telemachus as lay covered with a
 woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage
 and of the counsel that minerva had given him.
 



book ii
 

assembly of the people of ithaca—speeches of telemachus and of the
 suitors—telemachus makes his preparations and starts for pylos with
 minerva disguised as mentor.
 

now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared telemachus
 rose and dressed himself. bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
 girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like an
 immortal god. at once sent the criers round to call the people in
 assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then,
 when they were got together, went to the place of assembly spear in
 hand—not alone, for his two hounds went with him. minerva endowed him
 with presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as
 went by, and when took his place in his father’s seat even the
 oldest councillors made way for him.
 
aegyptius, man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, was
 the first to speak. his antiphus had gone with ulysses to ilius,
 land of noble steeds, but the savage cyclops had killed him when they
 were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him.17
 had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father’s
 land, while the third, eurynomus, was one of the suitors; nevertheless
 their father could not get over the loss of antiphus, and was still
 weeping for him when began his speech.
 
“men of ithaca,” said, “hear my words. from the day ulysses left us
 there has been meeting of our councillors until now; who then can it
 be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? has
 got wind of some host approaching, and does wish to warn us, or
 would speak upon some other matter of public moment? i am sure is
 an excellent person, and i hope jove will grant him his heart’s
 desire.”
 
telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he
 was bursting with what had to say. stood in the middle of the
 assembly and the good herald pisenor brought him his staff. then,
 turning to aegyptius, “sir,” said he, “it is i, as you will shortly
 learn, who have convened you, for it is i who am the most aggrieved. i
 have not got wind of any host approaching about which i would warn you,
 nor is there any matter of public moment on which i would speak. my
 grievance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes which
 have fallen upon my house. the first of these is the loss of my
 excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and was
 like father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, and
 ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. the sons of all the chief
 men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.
 they are afraid to go to her father icarius, asking him to choose the
 one likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but
 day by day they keep hanging about my father’s house, sacrificing our
 oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much
 as thought to the quantity of wine they drink. estate can stand
 such recklessness; we have now ulysses to ward off harm from our
 doors, and i cannot hold my own against them. i shall never all my days
 be as good man as was, still i would indeed defend myself if i had
 power to do so, for i cannot stand such treatment any longer; my house
 is being disgraced and ruined. have respect, therefore, to your own
 consciences and to public opinion. fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest
 the gods should be displeased and turn upon you. i pray you by jove and
 themis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold
 back, my friends, and leave singlehanded18—unless it be that my
 brave father ulysses did some wrong to the achaeans which you would now
 avenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors. moreover, if i am
 to be eaten out of house and home at all, i had rather you did the
 eating yourselves, for i could then take action against you to some
 purpose, and serve you with notices from house to house till i got paid
 in full, whereas now i have remedy.”19
 
with this telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into
 tears. every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no
 one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only antinous, who spoke
 thus:
 
“telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw
 the blame upon us suitors? it is your mother’s fault not ours, for she
 is very artful woman. this three years past, and close on four, she
 had been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us,
 and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she says. and
 then there was that other trick she played us. she set up great
 tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous piece of
 fine needlework. ‘sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘ulysses is indeed dead,
 still do not press to marry again immediately, wait—for i would not
 have skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till i have completed pall
 for the hero laertes, to be in readiness against the time when death
 shall take him. is very rich, and the women of the place will talk
 if is laid out without pall.’
 
“this was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her
 working on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick
 the stitches again by torchlight. she fooled us in this way for three
 years and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was now
 in her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told
 us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to
 finish it whether she would or no. the suitors, therefore, make you
 this answer, that both you and the achaeans may understand—‘send your
 mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her father’s
 choice’; for i do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us
 much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the
 accomplishments minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever.
 we never yet heard of such woman; we know all about tyro, alcmena,
 mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to your
 mother any one of them. it was not fair of her to treat us in that way,
 and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven has now
 endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate; and i do not
 see why she should change, for she gets all the honour and glory, and
 it is you who pay for it, not she. understand, then, that we will not
 go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made her
 choice and married some one or other of us.”
 
telemachus answered, “antinous, how can i drive the mother who bore me
 from my father’s house? my father is abroad and we do not know whether
 is alive or dead. it will be hard on if i have to pay icarius the
 large sum which i must give him if i insist on sending his daughter
 back to him. not only will deal rigorously with me, but heaven will
 also punish me; for my mother when she leaves the house will call on
 the erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not be creditable thing
 to do, and i will have nothing to say to it. if you choose to take
 offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one another’s
 houses at your own cost turn and turn about. if, on the other hand, you
 elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but jove
 shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house
 there shall be man to avenge you.”
 
as spoke jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they
 flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly
 flight. when they were right over the middle of the assembly they
 wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaring
 death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercely
 and tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over the
 town. the people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other what
 all this might be; whereon halitherses, who was the best prophet and
 reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,
 saying:
 
“hear me, men of ithaca, and i speak more particularly to the suitors,
 for i see mischief brewing for them. ulysses is not going to be away
 much longer; indeed is close at hand to deal out death and
 destruction, not on them alone, but on many another of us who live in
 ithaca. let us then be wise in time, and put stop to this wickedness
 before comes. let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will be
 better for them, for i am not prophesying without due knowledge;
 everything has happened to ulysses as i foretold when the argives set
 out for troy, and with them. i said that after going through much
 hardship and losing all his men should come home again in the
 twentieth year and that one would know him; and now all this is
 coming true.”
 
eurymachus of polybus then said, “go home, old man, and prophesy to
 your own children, or it may be worse for them. i can read these omens
 myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about in the
 sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. ulysses has
 died in far country, and it is pity you are not dead along with
 him, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the anger
 of telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. i suppose you think he
 will give you something for your family, but i tell you—and it shall
 surely be—when an old man like you, who should know better, talks a
 young one over till becomes troublesome, in the first place his
 young friend will only fare so much the worse—he will take nothing by
 it, for the suitors will prevent this—and in the next, we will lay a
 heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all like paying, for
 it will bear hardly upon you. as for telemachus, i warn him in the
 presence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who will
 find her husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so dear
 daughter may expect. till then we shall go on harassing him with our
 suit; for we fear man, and care neither for him, with all his fine
 speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. you may preach as much
 as you please, but we shall only hate you the more. we shall go back
 and continue to eat up telemachus’s estate without paying him, till
 such time as his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day
 after day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the other in
 his suit for prize of such rare perfection. besides we cannot go
 after the other women whom we should marry in due course, but for the
 way in which she treats us.”
 
then telemachus said, “eurymachus, and you other suitors, i shall say
 more, and entreat you further, for the gods and the people of
 ithaca now know my story. give me, then, ship and crew of twenty
 men to take hither and thither, and i will go to sparta and to pylos
 in quest of my father who has so long been missing. some one may tell
 something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some
 heaven-sent message may direct me. if i can hear of him as alive and on
 his way home i will put up with the waste you suitors will make for yet
 another twelve months. if on the other hand i hear of his death, i will
 return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
 barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.”
 
with these words sat down, and mentor20 who had been friend of
 ulysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authority
 over the servants, rose to speak. he, then, plainly and in all honesty
 addressed them thus:
 
“hear me, men of ithaca, i hope that you may never have kind and
 well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; i
 hope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for
 there is not one of you but has forgotten ulysses, who ruled you as
 though were your father. i am not half so angry with the suitors,
 for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts,
 and wager their heads that ulysses will not return, they can take the
 high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others i am shocked at
 the way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop such
 scandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, for you are many
 and they are few.”
 
leiocritus, of evenor, answered him saying, “mentor, what folly is
 all this, that you should set the people to stay us? it is hard thing
 for one man to fight with many about his victuals. even though ulysses
 himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do
 his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, would
 have small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his own
 head if fought against such great odds. there is sense in what
 you have been saying. now, therefore, do you people go about your
 business, and let his father’s old friends, mentor and halitherses,
 speed this boy on his journey, if goes at all—which i do not think
 will, for is more likely to stay where is till some one comes
 and tells him something.”
 
on this broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
 abode, while the suitors returned to the house of ulysses.
 
then telemachus went all alone by the side, washed his hands in the
 grey waves, and prayed to minerva.
 
“hear me,” cried, “you god who visited yesterday, and bade me
 sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. i
 would obey you, but the achaeans, and more particularly the wicked
 suitors, are hindering that i cannot do so.”
 
as thus prayed, minerva came close up to him in the likeness and
 with the voice of mentor. “telemachus,” said she, “if you are made of
 the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward
 henceforward, for ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half
 done. if, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless,
 but unless you have the blood of ulysses and of penelope in your veins
 i see likelihood of your succeeding. sons are seldom as good men as
 their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as you are
 not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are not
 entirely without some share of your father’s wise discernment, i look
 with hope upon your undertaking. but mind you never make common cause
 with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense nor
 virtue, and give thought to death and to the doom that will shortly
 fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.
 as for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such
 an old friend of mine that i will find you ship, and will come with
 you myself. now, however, return home, and go about among the suitors;
 begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see everything well
 stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the staff of
 life, in leathern bags, while i go round the town and beat up
 volunteers at once. there are many ships in ithaca both old and new; i
 will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get
 her ready and will put out to without delay.”
 
thus spoke minerva daughter of jove, and telemachus lost time in
 doing as the goddess told him. went moodily home, and found the
 suitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. antinous
 came up to him at once and laughed as took his hand in his own,
 saying, “telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear more ill blood neither
 in word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. the
 achaeans will find you in everything—a ship and picked crew to
 boot—so that you can set sail for pylos at once and get news of your
 noble father.”
 
“antinous,” answered telemachus, “i cannot eat in peace, nor take
 pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. was it not enough that
 you should waste so much good property of mine while i was yet boy?
 now that i am older and know more about it, i am also stronger, and
 whether here among this people, or by going to pylos, i will do you all
 the harm i can. i shall go, and my going will not be in vain—though,
 thanks to you suitors, i have neither ship nor crew of my own, and must
 be passenger not captain.”
 
as spoke snatched his hand from that of antinous. meanwhile the
 others went on getting dinner ready about the buildings,21 jeering at
 him tauntingly as they did so.
 
“telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death of us; i
 suppose thinks can bring friends to help him from pylos, or again
 from sparta, where seems bent on going. or will go to ephyra as
 well, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?”
 
another said, “perhaps if telemachus goes on board ship, will be
 like his father and perish far from his friends. in this case we should
 have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us:
 as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her have
 that.”
 
this was how they talked. but telemachus went down into the lofty and
 spacious store-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze lay
 heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were
 kept in open chests. here, too, there was store of fragrant olive
 oil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for god
 to drink, were ranged against the wall in case ulysses should come home
 again after all. the room was closed with well-made doors opening in
 the middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper euryclea, daughter
 of ops the of pisenor, was in charge of everything both night and
 day. telemachus called her to the store-room and said:
 
“nurse, draw off some of the best wine you have, after what you are
 keeping for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, should
 escape death, and find his way home again after all. let have twelve
 jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill some well-sewn
 leathern bags with barley meal—about twenty measures in all. get these
 things put together at once, and say nothing about it. i will take
 everything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs for
 the night. i am going to sparta and to pylos to see if i can hear
 anything about the return of my dear father.”
 
when euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him,
 saying, “my dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into
 your head? where in the world do you want to go to—you, who are the one
 hope of the house? your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign
 country nobody knows where, and as soon as your back is turned these
 wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out of the way, and
 will share all your possessions among themselves; stay where you are
 among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your life
 out on the barren ocean.”
 
“fear not, nurse,” answered telemachus, “my scheme is not without
 heaven’s sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this
 to my mother, till i have been away some ten or twelve days, unless she
 hears of my having gone, and asks you; for i do not want her to spoil
 her beauty by crying.”
 
the old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she had
 completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and
 getting the barley meal into the bags, while telemachus went back to
 the suitors.
 
then minerva bethought her of another matter. she took his shape, and
 went round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at
 the ship by sundown. she went also to noemon of phronius, and asked
 him to let her have ship—which was very ready to do. when the sun
 had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into the
 water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, and
 stationed her at the end of the harbour. presently the crew came up,
 and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.
 
furthermore she went to the house of ulysses, and threw the suitors
 into deep slumber. she caused their drink to fuddle them, and made
 them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting over
 their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyes
 heavy and full of drowsiness. then she took the form and voice of
 mentor, and called telemachus to come outside.
 
“telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at their oars,
 waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off.”
 
on this she led the way, while telemachus followed in her steps. when
 they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and
 telemachus said, “now my men, help to get the stores on board; they
 are all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not know
 anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one.”
 
with these words led the way and the others followed after. when
 they had brought the things as told them, telemachus went on board,
 minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the
 vessel, while telemachus sat beside her. then the men loosed the
 hawsers and took their places on the benches. minerva sent them fair
 wind from the west,22 that whistled over the deep blue waves23 whereon
 telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and
 they did as told them. they set the mast in its socket in the cross
 plank, raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they
 hoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. as the
 sail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue
 water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. then
 they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing bowls to the
 brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from
 everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of jove.
 
thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night
 from dark till dawn.
 



book iii
 

telemachus visits nestor at pylos.
 

but as the sun was rising from the fair sea24 into the firmament of
 heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached pylos the
 city of neleus. now the people of pylos were gathered on the shore
 to offer sacrifice of black bulls to neptune lord of the earthquake.
 there were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were
 nine bulls to each guild. as they were eating the inward meats25 and
 burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of neptune,
 telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship
 to anchor, and went ashore.
 
minerva led the way and telemachus followed her. presently she said,
 “telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have
 taken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and
 how came by his end; so go straight up to nestor that we may see
 what has got to tell us. beg of him to speak the truth, and will
 tell lies, for is an excellent person.”
 
“but how, mentor,” replied telemachus, “dare i go up to nestor, and how
 am i to address him? i have never yet been used to holding long
 conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who
 is so much older than myself.”
 
“some things, telemachus,” answered minerva, “will be suggested to you
 by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for i am
 assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth
 until now.”
 
she then went quickly on, and telemachus followed in her steps till
 they reached the place where the guilds of the pylian people were
 assembled. there they found nestor sitting with his sons, while his
 company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of
 meat on to the spits26 while other pieces were cooking. when they saw
 the strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade
 them take their places. nestor’s pisistratus at once offered his
 hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were
 lying on the sands near his father and his brother thrasymedes. then he
 gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them
 into golden cup, handing it to minerva first, and saluting her at the
 same time.
 
“offer prayer, sir,” said he, “to king neptune, for it is his feast
 that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink
 offering, pass the cup to your friend that may do so also. i doubt
 not that too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without
 god in the world. still is younger than you are, and is much of an
 age with myself, so i will give you the precedence.”
 
as spoke handed her the cup. minerva thought it very right and
 proper of him to have given it to herself first;27 she accordingly
 began praying heartily to neptune. “o thou,” she cried, “that
 encirclest the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants
 that call upon thee. more especially we pray thee send down thy grace
 on nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the pylian
 people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering
 you. lastly, grant telemachus and myself happy issue, in respect of
 the matter that has brought us in our ship to pylos.”
 
when she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to
 telemachus and prayed likewise. by and by, when the outer meats were
 roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man
 his portion and they all made an excellent dinner. as soon as they had
 had enough to eat and drink, nestor, knight of gerene, began to speak.
 
“now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, it will be
 best to ask them who they are. who, then, sir strangers, are you, and
 from what port have you sailed? are you traders? or do you sail the
 seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man’s hand
 against you?”
 
telemachus answered boldly, for minerva had given him courage to ask
 about his father and get himself good name.
 
“nestor,” said he, “son of neleus, honour to the achaean name, you ask
 whence we come, and i will tell you. we come from ithaca under
 neritum,28 and the matter about which i would speak is of private not
 public import. i seek news of my unhappy father ulysses, who is said to
 have sacked the town of troy in company with yourself. we know what
 fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at troy, but as
 regards ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that is
 dead at all, for one can certify us in what place perished, nor
 say whether fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at amid
 the waves of amphitrite. therefore i am suppliant at your knees, if
 haply you may be pleased to tell of his melancholy end, whether you
 saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for
 was man born to trouble. do not soften things out of any pity for
 me, but tell in all plainness exactly what you saw. if my brave
 father ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when
 you achaeans were harassed among the trojans, bear it in mind now as in
 my favour and tell truly all.”
 
“my friend,” answered nestor, “you recall time of much sorrow to my
 mind, for the brave achaeans suffered much both at sea, while
 privateering under achilles, and when fighting before the great city of
 king priam. our best men all of them fell there—ajax, achilles,
 patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear antilochus, a
 man singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. but we suffered much
 more than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story?
 though you were to stay here and question for five years, or even
 six, i could not tell you all that the achaeans suffered, and you would
 turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. nine long years did we
 try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us;
 during all this time there was one who could compare with your
 father in subtlety—if indeed you are his son—i can hardly believe my
 eyes—and you talk just like him too—no one would say that people of
 such different ages could speak so much alike. and i never had any
 kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, but
 in singleness of heart and purpose we advised the argives how all might
 be ordered for the best.
 
“when, however, we had sacked the city of priam, and were setting sail
 in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then jove saw fit to vex the
 argives on their homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wise
 or understanding, and hence many came to bad end through the
 displeasure of jove’s daughter minerva, who brought about quarrel
 between the two sons of atreus.
 
“the sons of atreus called meeting which was not as it should be, for
 it was sunset and the achaeans were heavy with wine. when they
 explained why they had called the people together, it seemed that
 menelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased
 agamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we had offered
 hecatombs to appease the anger of minerva. fool that was, might
 have known that would not prevail with her, for when the gods have
 made up their minds they do not change them lightly. so the two stood
 bandying hard words, whereon the achaeans sprang to their feet with a
 cry that rent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.
 
“that night we rested and nursed our anger, for jove was hatching
 mischief against us. but in the morning some of us drew our ships into
 the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest,
 about half in number, stayed behind with agamemnon. we—the other
 half—embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had
 smoothed the sea. when we reached tenedos we offered sacrifices to the
 gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel jove, however, did not yet
 mean that we should do so, and raised second quarrel in the course of
 which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away
 under ulysses to make their peace with agamemnon; but i, and all the
 ships that were with pressed forward, for i saw that mischief was
 brewing. the of tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with
 him. later on menelaus joined us at lesbos, and found us making up our
 minds about our course—for we did not know whether to go outside chios
 by the island of psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside chios, over
 against the stormy headland of mimas. so we asked heaven for sign,
 and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out of
 danger if we headed our ships across the open to euboea. this we
 therefore did, and fair wind sprang up which gave us quick passage
 during the night to geraestus,29 where we offered many sacrifices to
 neptune for having helped us so far on our way. four days later diomed
 and his men stationed their ships in argos, but i held on for pylos,
 and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven first made it
 fair for me.
 
“therefore, my dear young friend, i returned without hearing anything
 about the others. i know neither who got home safely nor who were lost
 but, as in duty bound, i will give you without reserve the reports that
 have reached since i have been here in my own house. they say the
 myrmidons returned home safely under achilles’ neoptolemus; so also
 did the valiant of poias, philoctetes. idomeneus, again, lost no
 men at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field got
 safe home with him to crete. matter how far out of the world you
 live, you will have heard of agamemnon and the bad end came to at
 the hands of aegisthus—and fearful reckoning did aegisthus presently
 pay. see what good thing it is for man to leave behind him to
 do as orestes did, who killed false aegisthus the murderer of his noble
 father. you too, then—for you are tall smart-looking fellow—show your
 mettle and make yourself name in story.”
 
“nestor of neleus,” answered telemachus, “honour to the achaean
 name, the achaeans applaud orestes and his name will live through all
 time for has avenged his father nobly. would that heaven might grant
 to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are
 ill treating and plotting my ruin; but the gods have such
 happiness in store for and for my father, so we must bear it as best
 we may.”
 
“my friend,” said nestor, “now that you remind me, i remember to have
 heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards
 you and are making havoc of your estate. do you submit to this tamely,
 or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? who knows
 but what ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in
 full, either single-handed or with force of achaeans behind him? if
 minerva were to take as great liking to you as she did to ulysses
 when we were fighting before troy (for i never yet saw the gods so
 openly fond of any one as minerva then was of your father), if she
 would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would
 soon some of them forget their wooing.”
 
telemachus answered, “i can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far
 too much to hope for. i dare not let myself think of it. even though
 the gods themselves willed it such good fortune could befall me.”
 
on this minerva said, “telemachus, what are you talking about? heaven
 has long arm if it is minded to save man; and if it were me, i
 should not care how much i suffered before getting home, provided i
 could be safe when i was once there. i would rather this, than get home
 quickly, and then be killed in my own house as agamemnon was by the
 treachery of aegisthus and his wife. still, death is certain, and when
 man’s hour is come, not even the gods can save him, matter how
 fond they are of him.”
 
“mentor,” answered telemachus, “do not let us talk about it any more.
 there is chance of my father’s ever coming back; the gods have long
 since counselled his destruction. there is something else, however,
 about which i should like to ask nestor, for knows much more than
 any one else does. they say has reigned for three generations so
 that it is like talking to an immortal. tell me, therefore, nestor, and
 tell true; how did agamemnon come to die in that way? what was
 menelaus doing? and how came false aegisthus to kill so far better a
 man than himself? was menelaus away from achaean argos, voyaging
 elsewhither among mankind, that aegisthus took heart and killed
 agamemnon?”
 
“i will tell you truly,” answered nestor, “and indeed you have yourself
 divined how it all happened. if menelaus when got back from troy had
 found aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been no
 barrow heaped up for him, not even when was dead, but would have
 been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not woman
 would have mourned him, for had done deed of great wickedness; but
 we were over there, fighting hard at troy, and aegisthus, who was
 taking his ease quietly in the heart of argos, cajoled agamemnon’s wife
 clytemnestra with incessant flattery.
 
“at first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she
 was of good natural disposition;30 moreover there was bard with
 her, to whom agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for troy,
 that was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled
 her destruction, aegisthus carried this bard off to desert island and
 left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon—after which she
 went willingly enough to the house of aegisthus. then offered many
 burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples with
 tapestries and gilding, for had succeeded far beyond his
 expectations.
 
“meanwhile menelaus and i were on our way home from troy, on good terms
 with one another. when we got to sunium, which is the point of athens,
 apollo with his painless shafts killed phrontis the steersman of
 menelaus’ ship (and never man knew better how to handle vessel in
 rough weather) so that died then and there with the helm in his
 hand, and menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to wait
 in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites.
 presently, when too could put to again, and had sailed on as far
 as the malean heads, jove counselled evil against him and made it blow
 hard till the waves ran mountains high. here divided his fleet and
 took the one half towards crete where the cydonians dwell round about
 the waters of the river iardanus. there is high headland hereabouts
 stretching out into the from place called gortyn, and all along
 this part of the coast as far as phaestus the runs high when there
 is south wind blowing, but after phaestus the coast is more
 protected, for small headland can make great shelter. here this
 part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews
 just managed to save themselves. as for the other five ships, they were
 taken by winds and seas to egypt, where menelaus gathered much gold and
 substance among people of an alien speech. meanwhile aegisthus here at
 home plotted his evil deed. for seven years after had killed
 agamemnon ruled in mycene, and the people were obedient under him,
 but in the eighth year orestes came back from athens to be his bane,
 and killed the murderer of his father. then celebrated the funeral
 rites of his mother and of false aegisthus by banquet to the people
 of argos, and on that very day menelaus came home,31 with as much
 treasure as his ships could carry.
 
“take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far
 from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your
 house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will
 have been on fool’s errand. still, i should advise you by all means
 to go and visit menelaus, who has lately come off voyage among such
 distant peoples as man could ever hope to get back from, when the
 winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds
 cannot fly the distance in twelve-month, so vast and terrible are the
 seas that they must cross. go to him, therefore, by sea, and take your
 own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have a
 chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you
 to lacedaemon where menelaus lives. beg of him to speak the truth, and
 will tell you lies, for is an excellent person.”
 
as spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon minerva said,
 “sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues
 of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings
 to neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed
 time. people should go away early and not keep late hours at a
 religious festival.”
 
thus spoke the daughter of jove, and they obeyed her saying. men
 servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled
 the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
 every man his drink offering; then they threw the tongues of the
 victims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink offerings. when
 they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as was
 minded, minerva and telemachus were for going on board their ship, but
 nestor caught them up at once and stayed them.
 
“heaven and the immortal gods,” exclaimed, “forbid that you should
 leave my house to go on board of ship. do you think i am so poor and
 short of clothes, or that i have so few cloaks and as to be unable to
 find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? let tell
 you i have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son
 of my old friend ulysses to camp down on the deck of ship—not while i
 live—nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as i
 have done.”
 
then minerva answered, “sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much
 better that telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall
 return with you and sleep at your house, but i must go back to give
 orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. i am the only older
 person among them; the rest are all young men of telemachus’ own age,
 who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so i must return to the
 ship and sleep there. moreover to-morrow i must go to the cauconians
 where i have large sum of money long owing to me. as for telemachus,
 now that is your guest, send him to lacedaemon in chariot, and let
 one of your sons go with him. be pleased to also provide him with your
 best and fleetest horses.”
 
when she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and
 all marvelled as they beheld it. nestor was astonished, and took
 telemachus by the hand. “my friend,” said he, “i see that you are going
 to be great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while
 you are still so young. this can have been none other of those who
 dwell in heaven than jove’s redoubtable daughter, the trito-born, who
 shewed such favour towards your brave father among the argives. holy
 queen,” continued, “vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my
 good wife, and my children. in return, i will offer you in sacrifice a
 broad-browed heifer of year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by
 man under the yoke. i will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you
 in sacrifice.”
 
thus did pray, and minerva heard his prayer. then led the way to
 his own house, followed by his sons and sons in law. when they had got
 there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, mixed
 them bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the
 housekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it. as mixed the
 wine, prayed much and made drink offerings to minerva, daughter of
 aegis-bearing jove. then, when they had made their drink offerings and
 had drunk each as much as was minded, the others went home to bed
 each in his own abode; but nestor put telemachus to sleep in the room
 that was over the gateway along with pisistratus, who was the only
 unmarried now left him. as for himself, slept in an inner room
 of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.
 
now when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared, nestor left
 his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble
 that stood in front of his house. here aforetime sat neleus, peer of
 gods in counsel, but was now dead, and had gone to the house of
 hades; so nestor sat in his seat sceptre in hand, as guardian of the
 public weal. his sons as they left their rooms gathered round him,
 echephron, stratius, perseus, aretus, and thrasymedes; the sixth son
 was pisistratus, and when telemachus joined them they made him sit with
 them. nestor then addressed them.
 
“my sons,” said he, “make haste to do as i shall bid you. i wish first
 and foremost to propitiate the great goddess minerva, who manifested
 herself visibly to during yesterday’s festivities. go, then, one or
 other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look out heifer,
 and come on here with it at once. another must go to telemachus’ ship,
 and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel.
 some one else will run and fetch laerceus the goldsmith to gild the
 horns of the heifer. the rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the
 maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats,
 and logs of wood for burnt offering. tell them also to bring some
 clear spring water.”
 
on this they hurried off on their several errands. the heifer was
 brought in from the plain, and telemachus’s crew came from the ship;
 the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he
 worked his gold, and minerva herself came to accept the sacrifice.
 nestor gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer
 that the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty. then stratius and
 echephron brought her in by the horns; aretus fetched water from the
 house in ewer that had flower pattern on it, and in his other hand
 held basket of barley meal; sturdy thrasymedes stood by with a
 sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while perseus held bucket.
 then nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley
 meal, and offered many prayer to minerva as threw lock from
 the heifer’s head upon the fire.
 
when they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal32 thrasymedes
 dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with stroke that cut
 through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters and
 daughters in law of nestor, and his venerable wife eurydice (she was
 eldest daughter to clymenus) screamed with delight. then they lifted
 the heifer’s head from off the ground, and pisistratus cut her throat.
 when she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up. they
 cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round in two
 layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then
 nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while
 the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands.
 when the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they
 cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the spits and
 toasted them over the fire.
 
meanwhile lovely polycaste, nestor’s youngest daughter, washed
 telemachus. when she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she
 brought him fair mantle and shirt,33 and looked like god as he
 came from the bath and took his seat by the side of nestor. when the
 outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to
 dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept
 pouring them out their wine in cups of gold. as soon as they had had
 enough to eat and drink nestor said, “sons, put telemachus’s horses to
 the chariot that may start at once.”
 
thus did speak, and they did even as had said, and yoked the
 fleet horses to the chariot. the housekeeper packed them up provision
 of bread, wine, and sweet meats fit for the sons of princes. then
 telemachus got into the chariot, while pisistratus gathered up the
 reins and took his seat beside him. lashed the horses on and they
 flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high
 citadel of pylos behind them. all that day did they travel, swaying the
 yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all
 the land. then they reached pherae where diocles lived, who was to
 ortilochus and grandson to alpheus. here they passed the night and
 diocles entertained them hospitably. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and drove
 out through the gateway under the echoing gatehouse.34 pisistratus
 lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently they
 came to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of time
 completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them.35
 
now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,
 



book iv
 

the visit to king menelaus, who tells his story—meanwhile the suitors
 in ithaca plot against telemachus.
 

they reached the low lying city of lacedaemon, where they drove
 straight to the abode of menelaus36 [and found him in his own house,
 feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son,
 and also of his daughter, whom was marrying to the of that
 valiant warrior achilles. had given his consent and promised her to
 him while was still at troy, and now the gods were bringing the
 marriage about; so was sending her with chariots and horses to the
 city of the myrmidons over whom achilles’ was reigning. for his
 only had found bride from sparta,37 the daughter of alector.
 this son, megapenthes, was born to him of bondwoman, for heaven
 vouchsafed helen more children after she had borne hermione, who was
 fair as golden venus herself.
 
so the neighbours and kinsmen of menelaus were feasting and making
 merry in his house. there was bard also to sing to them and play his
 lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them
 when the man struck up with his tune.38
 
telemachus and the of nestor stayed their horses at the gate,
 whereon eteoneus servant to menelaus came out, and as soon as saw
 them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his master. went close
 up to him and said, “menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two
 men, who look like sons of jove. what are we to do? shall we take their
 horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?”
 
menelaus was very angry and said, “eteoneus, of boethous, you never
 used to be fool, but now you talk like simpleton. take their horses
 out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper;
 you and i have staid often enough at other people’s houses before we
 got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace
 henceforward.”
 
so eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him.
 they took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to
 the mangers, and gave them feed of oats and barley mixed. then they
 leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the
 way into the house. telemachus and pisistratus were astonished when
 they saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then,
 when they had admired everything to their heart’s content, they went
 into the bath room and washed themselves.
 
when the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they
 brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by
 the side of menelaus. maid-servant brought them water in beautiful
 golden ewer, and poured it into silver basin for them to wash their
 hands; and she drew clean table beside them. an upper servant brought
 them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the
 house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and
 set cups of gold by their side.
 
menelaus then greeted them saying, “fall to, and welcome; when you have
 done supper i shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you
 cannot have been lost. you must be descended from line of
 sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you
 are.”
 
on this handed them39 piece of fat roast loin, which had been set
 near him as being prime part, and they laid their hands on the good
 things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and
 drink, telemachus said to the of nestor, with his head so close
 that one might hear, “look, pisistratus, man after my own heart, see
 the gleam of bronze and gold—of amber,40 ivory, and silver. everything
 is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of olympian jove. i am
 lost in admiration.”
 
menelaus overheard him and said, “no one, my sons, can hold his own
 with jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but
 among mortal men—well, there may be another who has as much wealth as i
 have, or there may not; but at all events i have travelled much and
 have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before i
 could get home with my fleet. i went to cyprus, phoenicia and the
 egyptians; i went also to the ethiopians, the sidonians, and the
 erembians, and to libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are
 born, and the sheep lamb down three times year. every one in that
 country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good
 milk, for the ewes yield all the year round. but while i was travelling
 and getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretly
 and shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that
 i have pleasure in being lord of all this wealth. whoever your
 parents may be they must have told you about all this, and of my heavy
 loss in the ruin41 of stately mansion fully and magnificently
 furnished. would that i had only third of what i now have so that i
 had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain
 of troy, far from argos. i often grieve, as i sit here in my house, for
 one and all of them. at times i cry aloud for sorrow, but presently i
 leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it.
 yet grieve for these as i may, i do so for one man more than for them
 all. i cannot even think of him without loathing both food and sleep,
 so miserable does make me, for one of all the achaeans worked so
 hard or risked so much as did. took nothing by it, and has left a
 legacy of sorrow to myself, for has been gone long time, and we
 know not whether is alive or dead. his old father, his
 long-suffering wife penelope, and his telemachus, whom left
 behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.”
 
thus spoke menelaus, and the heart of telemachus yearned as he
 bethought him of his father. tears fell from his eyes as heard him
 thus mentioned, so that held his cloak before his face with both
 hands. when menelaus saw this doubted whether to let him choose his
 own time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all
 about.
 
while was thus in two minds helen came down from her high vaulted
 and perfumed room, looking as lovely as diana herself. adraste brought
 her seat, alcippe soft woollen rug while phylo fetched her the
 silver work-box which alcandra wife of polybus had given her. polybus
 lived in egyptian thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world;
 gave menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten
 talents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave helen some beautiful
 presents, to wit, golden distaff, and silver work box that ran on
 wheels, with gold band round the top of it. phylo now placed this by
 her side, full of fine spun yarn, and distaff charged with violet
 coloured wool was laid upon the top of it. then helen took her seat,
 put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband.42
 
“do we know, menelaus,” said she, “the names of these strangers who
 have come to visit us? shall i guess right or wrong?—but i cannot help
 saying what i think. never yet have i seen either man or woman so like
 somebody else (indeed when i look at him i hardly know what to think)
 as this young man is like telemachus, whom ulysses left as baby
 behind him, when you achaeans went to troy with battle in your hearts,
 on account of my most shameless self.”
 
“my dear wife,” replied menelaus, “i see the likeness just as you do.
 his hands and feet are just like ulysses; so is his hair, with the
 shape of his head and the expression of his eyes. moreover, when i was
 talking about ulysses, and saying how much had suffered on my
 account, tears fell from his eyes, and hid his face in his mantle.”
 
then pisistratus said, “menelaus, of atreus, you are right in
 thinking that this young man is telemachus, but is very modest, and
 is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose
 conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. my father, nestor,
 sent to escort him hither, for wanted to know whether you could
 give him any counsel or suggestion. has always trouble at home
 when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this
 is how telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is
 one among his own people to stand by him.”
 
“bless my heart,” replied menelaus, “then i am receiving visit from
 the of very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.
 i had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when
 heaven had granted us safe return from beyond the seas. i should have
 founded city for him in argos, and built him house. i should have
 made him leave ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and
 should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities that
 are subject to me. we should thus have seen one another continually,
 and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an
 intercourse. i suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great good
 fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at
 all.”
 
thus did speak, and his words set them all weeping. helen wept,
 telemachus wept, and so did menelaus, nor could pisistratus keep his
 eyes from filling, when remembered his dear brother antilochus whom
 the of bright dawn had killed. thereon said to menelaus,
 
“sir, my father nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me
 you were person of rare and excellent understanding. if, then, it be
 possible, do as i would urge you. i am not fond of crying while i am
 getting my supper. morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon
 i care not how much i cry for those that are dead and gone. this is all
 we can do for the poor things. we can only shave our heads for them and
 wring the tears from our cheeks. i had brother who died at troy; he
 was by means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him—his
 name was antilochus; i never set eyes upon him myself, but they say
 that was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.”
 
“your discretion, my friend,” answered menelaus, “is beyond your years.
 it is plain you take after your father. one can soon see when man is
 to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and
 offspring—and it has blessed nestor from first to last all his days,
 giving him green old age in his own house, with sons about him who
 are both well disposed and valiant. we will put an end therefore to all
 this weeping, and attend to our supper again. let water be poured over
 our hands. telemachus and i can talk with one another fully in the
 morning.”
 
on this asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands
 and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.
 
then jove’s daughter helen bethought her of another matter. she drugged
 the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.
 whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed single tear all the rest
 of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them drop
 down dead, or sees brother or hewn in pieces before his very
 eyes. this drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given to
 helen by polydamna wife of thon, woman of egypt, where there grow all
 sorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing bowl and others
 poisonous. moreover, every one in the whole country is skilled
 physician, for they are of the race of paeeon. when helen had put this
 drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round,
 she said:
 
“menelaus, of atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable
 men (which is as jove wills, for is the giver both of good and evil,
 and can do what chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while i
 tell you tale in season. i cannot indeed name every single one of the
 exploits of ulysses, but i can say what did when was before troy,
 and you achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. covered himself
 with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the
 enemy’s city looking like menial or beggar, and quite different
 from what did when was among his own people. in this disguise he
 entered the city of troy, and one said anything to him. i alone
 recognised him and began to question him, but was too cunning for
 me. when, however, i had washed and anointed him and had given him
 clothes, and after i had sworn solemn oath not to betray him to the
 trojans till had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships,
 told all that the achaeans meant to do. killed many trojans
 and got much information before reached the argive camp, for all
 which things the trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part i
 was glad, for my heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and i was
 unhappy about the wrong that venus had done in taking over there,
 away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is
 indeed by means deficient either in person or understanding.”
 
then menelaus said, “all that you have been saying, my dear wife, is
 true. i have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but i
 have never seen such another man as ulysses. what endurance too, and
 what courage displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the
 bravest of the argives were lying in wait to bring death and
 destruction upon the trojans.43 at that moment you came up to us; some
 god who wished well to the trojans must have set you on to it and you
 had deiphobus with you. three times did you go all round our hiding
 place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and
 mimicked all our wives—diomed, ulysses, and i from our seats inside
 heard what noise you made. diomed and i could not make up our minds
 whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but
 ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except
 anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when ulysses clapped his two
 brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. it was this that
 saved us all, for muzzled anticlus till minerva took you away
 again.”
 
“how sad,” exclaimed telemachus, “that all this was of avail to save
 him, nor yet his own iron courage. but now, sir, be pleased to send us
 all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”
 
on this helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was
 in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread
 coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to
 wear. so the maids went out, carrying torch, and made the beds, to
 which man-servant presently conducted the strangers. thus, then, did
 telemachus and pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the son
 of atreus lay in an inner room with lovely helen by his side.
 
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn appeared, menelaus rose
 and dressed himself. bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded
 his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an
 immortal god. then, taking seat near telemachus said:
 
“and what, telemachus, has led you to take this long voyage to
 lacedaemon? are you on public, or private business? tell all about
 it.”
 
“i have come, sir,” replied telemachus, “to see if you can tell me
 anything about my father. i am being eaten out of house and home; my
 fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who
 keep killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of
 paying their addresses to my mother. therefore, i am suppliant at your
 knees if haply you may tell about my father’s melancholy end,
 whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other
 traveller; for was man born to trouble. do not soften things out
 of any pity for myself, but tell in all plainness exactly what you
 saw. if my brave father ulysses ever did you loyal service either by
 word or deed, when you achaeans were harassed by the trojans, bear it
 in mind now as in my favour and tell truly all.”
 
menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. “so,” exclaimed,
 “these cowards would usurp brave man’s bed? hind might as well lay
 her new born young in the lair of lion, and then go off to feed in
 the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when comes back to his
 lair will make short work with the pair of them—and so will ulysses
 with these suitors. by father jove, minerva, and apollo, if ulysses is
 still the man that was when wrestled with philomeleides in
 lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the achaeans cheered him—if
 is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have a
 short shrift and sorry wedding. as regards your questions, however, i
 will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without
 concealment all that the old man of the told me.
 
“i was trying to come on here, but the gods detained in egypt, for
 my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are
 very strict about having their dues. now off egypt, about as far as a
 ship can sail in day with good stiff breeze behind her, there is an
 island called pharos—it has good harbour from which vessels can get
 out into open when they have taken in water—and here the gods
 becalmed twenty days without so much as breath of fair wind to
 help forward. we should have run clean out of provisions and my men
 would have starved, if goddess had not taken pity upon and saved
 in the person of idothea, daughter to proteus, the old man of the
 sea, for she had taken great fancy to me.
 
“she came to one day when i was by myself, as i often was, for the
 men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope
 of catching fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger.
 ‘stranger,’ said she, ‘it seems to that you like starving in this
 way—at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day
 after day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by
 inches.’
 
“‘let tell you,’ said i, ‘whichever of the goddesses you may happen
 to be, that i am not staying here of my own accord, but must have
 offended the gods that live in heaven. tell me, therefore, for the gods
 know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering in
 this way, and tell also how i may sail the so as to reach my
 home.’
 
“‘stranger,’ replied she, ‘i will make it all quite clear to you. there
 is an old immortal who lives under the hereabouts and whose name is
 proteus. is an egyptian, and people say is my father; is
 neptune’s head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom
 of the sea. if you can snare him and hold him tight, will tell you
 about your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to
 sail the so as to reach your home. will also tell you, if you so
 will, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while
 you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’
 
“‘can you show me,’ said i, ‘some stratagem by means of which i may
 catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding out? for a
 god is not easily caught—not by mortal man.’
 
“‘stranger,’ said she, ‘i will make it all quite clear to you. about
 the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the
 comes up from under the waves, heralded by the west wind that furs
 the water over his head. as soon as has come up lies down, and
 goes to sleep in great cave, where the seals—halosydne’s chickens
 as they call them—come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in
 shoals all round him; and very strong and fish-like smell do they
 bring with them. 44 early to-morrow morning i will take you to this
 place and will lay you in ambush. pick out, therefore, the three best
 men you have in your fleet, and i will tell you all the tricks that the
 old man will play you.
 
“‘first will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he
 has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, will go to sleep
 among them, as shepherd among his sheep. the moment you see that he
 is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for
 will do his very utmost to get away from you. will turn himself
 into every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will become
 also both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip him
 tighter and tighter, till begins to talk to you and comes back to
 what was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your
 hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that
 is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over the
 seas.’
 
“having so said she dived under the waves, whereon i turned back to the
 place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was
 clouded with care as i went along. when i reached my ship we got supper
 ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.
 
“when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared, i took the
 three men on whose prowess of all kinds i could most rely, and went
 along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. meanwhile the
 goddess fetched up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all
 of them just skinned, for she meant playing trick upon her father.
 then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we
 should come up. when we were close to her, she made us lie down in the
 pits one after the other, and threw seal skin over each of us. our
 ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy
 seals was most distressing45—who would go to bed with monster if
 could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of
 something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under
 each man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of
 the seals.46
 
“we waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the
 seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the shore, till at noon the
 old man of the came up too, and when had found his fat seals he
 went over them and counted them. we were among the first counted,
 and never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as
 soon as had done counting. then we rushed upon him with shout and
 seized him; on which began at once with his old tricks, and changed
 himself first into lion with great mane; then all of sudden he
 became dragon, leopard, wild boar; the next moment was running
 water, and then again directly was tree, but we stuck to him and
 never lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became
 distressed, and said, ‘which of the gods was it, of atreus, that
 hatched this plot with you for snaring and seizing against my
 will? what do you want?’
 
“‘you know that yourself, old man,’ i answered, ‘you will gain nothing
 by trying to put off. it is because i have been kept so long in this
 island, and see sign of my being able to get away. i am losing all
 heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the
 immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell also how i may sail
 the so as to reach my home?’
 
“then,’ said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly,
 you must offer sacrifices to jove and to the rest of the gods before
 embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your
 friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the
 heaven-fed stream of egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal
 gods that reign in heaven. when you have done this they will let you
 finish your voyage.’
 
“i was broken hearted when i heard that i must go back all that long
 and terrible voyage to egypt;47 nevertheless, i answered, ‘i will do
 all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me
 true, whether all the achaeans whom nestor and i left behind us when we
 set sail from troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them
 came to bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends
 when the days of his fighting were done.’
 
“‘son of atreus,’ answered, ‘why ask me? you had better not know
 what i can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard
 my story. many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many
 still remain, and only two of the chief men among the achaeans perished
 during their return home. as for what happened on the field of
 battle—you were there yourself. third achaean leader is still at sea,
 alive, but hindered from returning. ajax was wrecked, for neptune drove
 him on to the great rocks of gyrae; nevertheless, let him get safe
 out of the water, and in spite of all minerva’s hatred would have
 escaped death, if had not ruined himself by boasting. said the
 gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when
 neptune heard this large talk, seized his trident in his two brawny
 hands, and split the rock of gyrae in two pieces. the base remained
 where it was, but the part on which ajax was sitting fell headlong into
 the and carried ajax with it; so drank salt water and was
 drowned.
 
“‘your brother and his ships escaped, for juno protected him, but when
 was just about to reach the high promontory of malea, was caught
 by heavy gale which carried him out to again sorely against his
 will, and drove him to the foreland where thyestes used to dwell, but
 where aegisthus was then living. by and by, however, it seemed as
 though was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the wind
 into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon agamemnon kissed
 his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his own
 country.
 
“‘now there was watchman whom aegisthus kept always on the watch, and
 to whom had promised two talents of gold. this man had been looking
 out for whole year to make sure that agamemnon did not give him the
 slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw agamemnon go by, he
 went and told aegisthus, who at once began to lay plot for him. he
 picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on
 one side the cloister, while on the opposite side prepared a
 banquet. then sent his chariots and horsemen to agamemnon, and
 invited him to the feast, but meant foul play. got him there, all
 unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when the
 banquet was over as though were butchering an ox in the shambles;
 not one of agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one of
 aegisthus’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’
 
“thus spoke proteus, and i was broken hearted as i heard him. i sat
 down upon the sands and wept; i felt as though i could longer bear
 to live nor look upon the light of the sun. presently, when i had had
 my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea
 said, ‘son of atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly;
 it can do manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you
 can, for aegisthus may be still alive, and even though orestes has been
 beforehand with you in killing him, you may yet come in for his
 funeral.’
 
“on this i took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘i know,
 then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom
 you spoke; is still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is
 dead? tell me, matter how much it may grieve me.’
 
“‘the third man,’ answered, ‘is ulysses who dwells in ithaca. i can
 see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph
 calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and cannot reach his home for
 has ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. as for your own
 end, menelaus, you shall not die in argos, but the gods will take you
 to the elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. there
 fair-haired rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any
 where else in the world, for in elysium there falls not rain, nor hail,
 nor snow, but oceanus breathes ever with west wind that sings softly
 from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. this will happen to you
 because you have married helen, and are jove’s son-in-law.’
 
“as spoke dived under the waves, whereon i turned back to the
 ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as i went
 along. when we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was
 falling, and camped down upon the beach. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put
 our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took
 our seats on the benches, and smote the grey with our oars. i again
 stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of egypt, and offered
 hecatombs that were full and sufficient. when i had thus appeased
 heaven’s anger, i raised barrow to the memory of agamemnon that his
 name might live for ever, after which i had quick passage home, for
 the gods sent fair wind.
 
“and now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and i
 will then speed you on your way. i will make you noble present of a
 chariot and three horses. i will also give you beautiful chalice that
 so long as you live you may think of whenever you make a
 drink-offering to the immortal gods.”
 
“son of atreus,” replied telemachus, “do not press to stay longer; i
 should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; i
 find your conversation so delightful that i should never once wish
 myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom i have left at pylos
 are already impatient, and you are detaining from them. as for any
 present you may be disposed to make me, i had rather that it should be
 piece of plate. i will take horses back with to ithaca, but
 will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat
 ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet and
 wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas
 in ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country
 is more fit for goats than horses, and i like it the better for that.
 48 none of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and
 ithaca least of all.”
 
menelaus smiled and took telemachus’s hand within his own. “what you
 say,” said he, “shows that you come of good family. i both can, and
 will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most
 precious piece of plate in all my house. it is mixing bowl by
 vulcan’s own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with
 gold. phaedimus, king of the sidonians, gave it in the course of a
 visit which i paid him when i returned thither on my homeward journey.
 i will make you present of it.”
 
thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house.
 they brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for
 them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the
 courts].49
 
meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a
 mark on the levelled ground in front of ulysses’ house, and were
 behaving with all their old insolence. antinous and eurymachus, who
 were their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were
 sitting together when noemon of phronius came up and said to
 antinous,
 
“have we any idea, antinous, on what day telemachus returns from pylos?
 has ship of mine, and i want it, to cross over to elis: i have
 twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet
 broken in, and i want to bring one of them over here and break him.”
 
they were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that
 telemachus had not gone to the city of neleus. they thought was only
 away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the
 swineherd; so antinous said, “when did go? tell truly, and what
 young men did take with him? were they freemen or his own
 bondsmen—for might manage that too? tell also, did you let him
 have the ship of your own free will because asked you, or did he
 take it without your leave?”
 
“i lent it him,” answered noemon, “what else could i do when man of
 his position said was in difficulty, and asked to oblige him? i
 could not possibly refuse. as for those who went with him they were the
 best young men we have, and i saw mentor go on board as captain—or some
 god who was exactly like him. i cannot understand it, for i saw mentor
 here myself yesterday morning, and yet was then setting out for
 pylos.”
 
noemon then went back to his father’s house, but antinous and
 eurymachus were very angry. they told the others to leave off playing,
 and to come and sit down along with themselves. when they came,
 antinous of eupeithes spoke in anger. his heart was black with
 rage, and his eyes flashed fire as said:
 
“good heavens, this voyage of telemachus is very serious matter; we
 had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has
 got away in spite of us, and with picked crew too. will be giving
 us trouble presently; may jove take him before is full grown. find
 ship, therefore, with crew of twenty men, and i will lie in wait
 for him in the straits between ithaca and samos; will then rue the
 day that set out to try and get news of his father.”
 
thus did speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all
 of them went inside the buildings.
 
it was not long ere penelope came to know what the suitors were
 plotting; for man servant, medon, overheard them from outside the
 outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell
 his mistress. as crossed the threshold of her room penelope said:
 “medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? is it to tell the
 maids to leave their master’s business and cook dinner for them? i wish
 they may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere
 else, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of
 my son’s estate. did not your fathers tell you when you were children,
 how good ulysses had been to them—never doing anything high-handed, nor
 speaking harshly to anybody? kings may say things sometimes, and they
 may take fancy to one man and dislike another, but ulysses never did
 an unjust thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, and
 that there is such thing as gratitude left in this world.”
 
then medon said, “i wish, madam, that this were all; but they are
 plotting something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate their
 design. they are going to try and murder telemachus as is coming
 home from pylos and lacedaemon, where has been to get news of his
 father.”
 
then penelope’s heart sank within her, and for long time she was
 speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no
 utterance. at last, however, she said, “why did my leave me? what
 business had to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over
 the ocean like sea-horses? does want to die without leaving any one
 behind him to keep up his name?”
 
“i do not know,” answered medon, “whether some god set him on to it, or
 whether went on his own impulse to see if could find out if his
 father was dead, or alive and on his way home.”
 
then went downstairs again, leaving penelope in an agony of grief.
 there were plenty of seats in the house, but she had heart for
 sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor
 of her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both old
 and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in a
 transport of sorrow she exclaimed,
 
“my dears, heaven has been pleased to try with more affliction than
 any other woman of my age and country. first i lost my brave and
 lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and
 whose name was great over all hellas and middle argos, and now my
 darling is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my having
 heard one word about his leaving home. you hussies, there was not one
 of you would so much as think of giving call out of my bed, though
 you all of you very well knew when was starting. if i had known he
 meant taking this voyage, would have had to give it up, matter
 how much was bent upon it, or leave corpse behind him—one or
 other. now, however, go some of you and call old dolius, who was given
 by my father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. bid him go at
 once and tell everything to laertes, who may be able to hit on some
 plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those who
 are trying to exterminate his own race and that of ulysses.”
 
then the dear old nurse euryclea said, “you may kill me, madam, or let
 live on in your house, whichever you please, but i will tell you the
 real truth. i knew all about it, and gave him everything wanted in
 the way of bread and wine, but made take my solemn oath that i
 would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless you
 asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for did not want you
 to spoil your beauty by crying. and now, madam, wash your face, change
 your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to
 minerva, daughter of aegis-bearing jove, for she can save him even
 though be in the jaws of death. do not trouble laertes: has
 trouble enough already. besides, i cannot think that the gods hate the
 race of the of arceisius so much, but there will be left to
 come up after him, and inherit both the house and the fair fields that
 lie far all round it.”
 
with these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the
 tears from her eyes. penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and
 went upstairs with her maids. she then put some bruised barley into a
 basket and began praying to minerva.
 
“hear me,” she cried, “daughter of aegis-bearing jove, unweariable. if
 ever ulysses while was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or
 heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son
 from the villainy of the suitors.”
 
she cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer;
 meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister,
 and one of them said:
 
“the queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us.
 little does she dream that her has now been doomed to die.”
 
this was what they said, but they did not know what was going to
 happen. then antinous said, “comrades, let there be loud talking,
 lest some of it get carried inside. let us be up and do that in
 silence, about which we are all of mind.”
 
then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the
 side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and
 sails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted
 thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft,
 while their fine servants brought them their armour. then they made the
 ship fast little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, and
 waited till night should fall.
 
but penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and
 wondering whether her brave would escape, or be overpowered by the
 wicked suitors. like lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen
 hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank into
 slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.
 
then minerva bethought her of another matter, and made vision in the
 likeness of penelope’s sister iphthime daughter of icarius who had
 married eumelus and lived in pherae. she told the vision to go to the
 house of ulysses, and to make penelope leave off crying, so it came
 into her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling the
 door to, and hovered over her head saying,
 
“you are asleep, penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer
 you to weep and be so sad. your has done them wrong, so will
 yet come back to you.”
 
penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,
 “sister, why have you come here? you do not come very often, but i
 suppose that is because you live such long way off. am i, then, to
 leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me?
 i, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good
 quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all hellas and
 middle argos; and now my darling has gone off on board of ship—a
 foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to going
 about among gatherings of men. i am even more anxious about him than
 about my husband; i am all in tremble when i think of him, lest
 something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he
 has gone, or by sea, for has many enemies who are plotting against
 him, and are bent on killing him before can return home.”
 
then the vision said, “take heart, and be not so much dismayed. there
 is one gone with him whom many man would be glad enough to have stand
 by his side, i mean minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and
 who has sent to bear you this message.”
 
“then,” said penelope, “if you are god or have been sent here by
 divine commission, tell also about that other unhappy one—is he
 still alive, or is already dead and in the house of hades?”
 
and the vision said, “i shall not tell you for certain whether is
 alive or dead, and there is use in idle conversation.”
 
then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated
 into thin air; but penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and
 comforted, so vivid had been her dream.
 
meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea,
 intent on murdering telemachus. now there is rocky islet called
 asteris, of great size, in mid channel between ithaca and samos, and
 there is harbour on either side of it where ship can lie. here then
 the achaeans placed themselves in ambush.
 



book v
 

calypso—ulysses reaches scheria on raft.
 

and now, as dawn rose from her couch beside tithonus—harbinger of light
 alike to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them,
 jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. thereon minerva began to
 tell them of the many sufferings of ulysses, for she pitied him away
 there in the house of the nymph calypso.
 
“father jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live in
 everlasting bliss, i hope there may never be such thing as kind and
 well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. i hope
 they will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of
 his subjects but has forgotten ulysses, who ruled them as though he
 were their father. there is, lying in great pain in an island where
 dwells the nymph calypso, who will not let him go; and cannot get
 back to his own country, for can find neither ships nor sailors to
 take him over the sea. furthermore, wicked people are now trying to
 murder his only telemachus, who is coming home from pylos and
 lacedaemon, where has been to see if can get news of his father.”
 
“what, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father, “did you
 not send him there yourself, because you thought it would help ulysses
 to get home and punish the suitors? besides, you are perfectly able to
 protect telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors
 have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him.”
 
when had thus spoken, said to his mercury, “mercury, you are
 our messenger, go therefore and tell calypso we have decreed that poor
 ulysses is to return home. is to be convoyed neither by gods nor
 men, but after perilous voyage of twenty days upon raft is to
 reach fertile scheria,50 the land of the phaeacians, who are near of
 kin to the gods, and will honour him as though were one of
 ourselves. they will send him in ship to his own country, and will
 give him more bronze and gold and raiment than would have brought
 back from troy, if had had all his prize money and had got home
 without disaster. this is how we have settled that shall return to
 his country and his friends.”
 
thus spoke, and mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of argus, did as
 was told. forthwith bound on his glittering golden sandals with
 which could fly like the wind over land and sea. took the wand
 with which seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he
 pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over pieria; then swooped
 down through the firmament till reached the level of the sea, whose
 waves skimmed like cormorant that flies fishing every hole and
 corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray. he
 flew and flew over many weary wave, but when at last got to the
 island which was his journey’s end, left the and went on by land
 till came to the cave where the nymph calypso lived.
 
found her at home. there was large fire burning on the hearth, and
 one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal
 wood. as for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden
 shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. round her cave there
 was thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees,
 wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests—owls, hawks, and
 chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters. vine
 loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth of
 the cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cut
 pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigate
 the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed. 51
 even god could not help being charmed with such lovely spot, so
 mercury stood still and looked at it; but when had admired it
 sufficiently went inside the cave.
 
calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, matter
 how far they live from one another—but ulysses was not within; was
 on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears
 in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. calypso gave
 mercury seat and said: “why have you come to see me,
 mercury—honoured, and ever welcome—for you do not visit often? say
 what you want; i will do it for you at once if i can, and if it can be
 done at all; but come inside, and let set refreshment before you.”
 
as she spoke she drew table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed
 him some red nectar, so mercury ate and drank till had had enough,
 and then said:
 
“we are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask why i
 have come here, and i will tell you truly as you would have do. jove
 sent me; it was doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all
 this way over the where there are cities full of people to offer
 sacrifices or choice hecatombs? nevertheless i had to come, for none
 of us other gods can cross jove, nor transgress his orders. says
 that you have here the most ill-starred of all those who fought nine
 years before the city of king priam and sailed home in the tenth year
 after having sacked it. on their way home they sinned against
 minerva,52 who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all his
 brave companions perished, and alone was carried hither by wind and
 tide. jove says that you are to let this man go at once, for it is
 decreed that shall not perish here, far from his own people, but
 shall return to his house and country and see his friends again.”
 
calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “you gods,” she
 exclaimed, “ought to be ashamed of yourselves. you are always jealous
 and hate seeing goddess take fancy to mortal man, and live with
 him in open matrimony. so when rosy-fingered dawn made love to orion,
 you precious gods were all of you furious till diana went and killed
 him in ortygia. so again when ceres fell in love with iasion, and
 yielded to him in thrice-ploughed fallow field, jove came to hear of
 it before so very long and killed iasion with his thunderbolts. and now
 you are angry with too because i have man here. i found the poor
 creature sitting all alone astride of keel, for jove had struck his
 ship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were
 drowned, while himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island.
 i got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him
 immortal, so that should never grow old all his days; still i cannot
 cross jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if insists
 upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but i cannot send him
 anywhere myself for i have neither ships nor men who can take him.
 nevertheless i will readily give him such advice, in all good faith, as
 will be likely to bring him safely to his own country.”
 
“then send him away,” said mercury, “or jove will be angry with you and
 punish you”.
 
on this took his leave, and calypso went out to look for ulysses,
 for she had heard jove’s message. she found him sitting upon the beach
 with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness;
 for had got tired of calypso, and though was forced to sleep with
 her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so. as
 for the day time, spent it on the rocks and on the shore,
 weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon the
 sea. calypso then went close up to him said:
 
“my poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your
 life out any longer. i am going to send you away of my own free will;
 so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself large raft with an
 upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. i will put bread,
 wine, and water on board to save you from starving. i will also give
 you clothes, and will send you fair wind to take you home, if the
 gods in heaven so will it—for they know more about these things, and
 can settle them better than i can.”
 
ulysses shuddered as heard her. “now goddess,” answered, “there
 is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me
 home when you bid do such dreadful thing as put to on raft.
 not even well found ship with fair wind could venture on such a
 distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall make go on
 board raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean no
 mischief.”
 
calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “you know a
 great deal,” said she, “but you are quite wrong here. may heaven above
 and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river styx—and
 this is the most solemn oath which blessed god can take—that i mean
 you sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what i
 should do myself in your place. i am dealing with you quite
 straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and i am very sorry
 for you.”
 
when she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and
 ulysses followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on
 and on till they came to calypso’s cave, where ulysses took the seat
 that mercury had just left. calypso set meat and drink before him of
 the food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar
 for herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were
 before them. when they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink,
 calypso spoke, saying:
 
“ulysses, noble of laertes, so you would start home to your own
 land at once? good luck go with you, but if you could only know how
 much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own
 country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and
 let make you immortal, matter how anxious you may be to see this
 wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yet
 i flatter myself that i am whit less tall or well-looking than she
 is, for it is not to be expected that mortal woman should compare in
 beauty with an immortal.”
 
“goddess,” replied ulysses, “do not be angry with about this. i am
 quite aware that my wife penelope is nothing like so tall or so
 beautiful as yourself. she is only woman, whereas you are an
 immortal. nevertheless, i want to get home, and can think of nothing
 else. if some god wrecks when i am on the sea, i will bear it and
 make the best of it. i have had infinite trouble both by land and sea
 already, so let this go with the rest.”
 
presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into
 the inner part of the cave and went to bed.
 
when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared, ulysses put on
 his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore dress of light gossamer
 fabric, very fine and graceful, with beautiful golden girdle about
 her waist and veil to cover her head. she at once set herself to
 think how she could speed ulysses on his way. so she gave him great
 bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, and
 had beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. she also gave
 him sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the island
 where the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, that reached the
 sky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the
 water.53 then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew,
 calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which soon finished
 doing. cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring
 them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. meanwhile calypso came back
 with some augers, so bored holes with them and fitted the timbers
 together with bolts and rivets. made the raft as broad as skilled
 shipwright makes the beam of large vessel, and fixed deck on top
 of the ribs, and ran gunwale all round it. also made mast with a
 yard arm, and rudder to steer with. fenced the raft all round with
 wicker hurdles as protection against the waves, and then threw on
 quantity of wood. by and by calypso brought him some linen to make
 the sails, and made these too, excellently, making them fast with
 braces and sheets. last of all, with the help of levers, drew the
 raft down into the water.
 
in four days had completed the whole work, and on the fifth calypso
 sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean
 clothes. she gave him goat skin full of black wine, and another
 larger one of water; she also gave him wallet full of provisions, and
 found him in much good meat. moreover, she made the wind fair and warm
 for him, and gladly did ulysses spread his sail before it, while sat
 and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder. never closed
 his eyes, but kept them fixed on the pleiads, on late-setting bootes,
 and on the bear—which men also call the wain, and which turns round and
 round where it is, facing orion, and alone never dipping into the
 stream of oceanus—for calypso had told him to keep this to his left.
 days seven and ten did sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the
 dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the phaeacian
 coast appeared, rising like shield on the horizon.
 
but king neptune, who was returning from the ethiopians, caught sight
 of ulysses long way off, from the mountains of the solymi. could
 see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so wagged
 his head and muttered to himself, saying, “good heavens, so the gods
 have been changing their minds about ulysses while i was away in
 ethiopia, and now is close to the land of the phaeacians, where it
 is decreed that shall escape from the calamities that have befallen
 him. still, shall have plenty of hardship yet before has done
 with it.”
 
thereon gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred
 it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till
 earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of
 the heavens. winds from east, south, north, and west fell upon him all
 at the same time, and tremendous got up, so that ulysses’ heart
 began to fail him. “alas,” said to himself in his dismay, “what ever
 will become of me? i am afraid calypso was right when she said i should
 have trouble by before i got back home. it is all coming true. how
 black is jove making heaven with his clouds, and what the winds
 are raising from every quarter at once. i am now safe to perish. blest
 and thrice blest were those danaans who fell before troy in the cause
 of the sons of atreus. would that i had been killed on the day when the
 trojans were pressing so sorely about the dead body of achilles, for
 then i should have had due burial and the achaeans would have honoured
 my name; but now it seems that i shall come to most pitiable end.”
 
as spoke broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft
 reeled again, and was carried overboard long way off. let go
 the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the
 mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea. for a
 long time ulysses was under water, and it was all could do to rise
 to the surface again, for the clothes calypso had given him weighed him
 down; but at last got his head above water and spat out the bitter
 brine that was running down his face in streams. in spite of all this,
 however, did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as he
 could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to
 escape drowning. the took the raft and tossed it about as autumn
 winds whirl thistledown round and round upon road. it was as though
 the south, north, east, and west winds were all playing battledore and
 shuttlecock with it at once.
 
when was in this plight, ino daughter of cadmus, also called
 leucothea, saw him. she had formerly been mere mortal, but had been
 since raised to the rank of marine goddess. seeing in what great
 distress ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like
 sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft.
 
“my poor good man,” said she, “why is neptune so furiously angry with
 you? is giving you great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster
 will not kill you. you seem to be sensible person, do then as i
 bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to
 the phaeacian coast where better luck awaits you. and here, take my
 veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to
 harm so long as you wear it. as soon as you touch land take it off,
 throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again.”
 with these words she took off her veil and gave it him. then she dived
 down again like sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.
 
but ulysses did not know what to think. “alas,” said to himself in
 his dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring
 to ruin by advising to quit my raft. at any rate i will not do so
 at present, for the land where she said i should be quit of all
 troubles seemed to be still good way off. i know what i will do—i am
 sure it will be best—no matter what happens i will stick to the raft as
 long as her timbers hold together, but when the breaks her up i
 will swim for it; i do not see how i can do any better than this.”
 
while was thus in two minds, neptune sent terrible great wave that
 seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft,
 which then went to pieces as though it were heap of dry chaff tossed
 about by whirlwind. ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it
 as if were on horseback; then took off the clothes calypso had
 given him, bound ino’s veil under his arms, and plunged into the
 sea—meaning to swim on shore. king neptune watched him as did so,
 and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, “there now, swim
 up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people. i
 do not think you will be able to say that i have let you off too
 lightly.” on this lashed his horses and drove to aegae where his
 palace is.
 
but minerva resolved to help ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the
 winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused good
 stiff breeze from the north that should lay the waters till ulysses
 reached the land of the phaeacians where would be safe.
 
thereon floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with
 heavy swell on the and death staring him in the face; but when
 the third day broke, the wind fell and there was dead calm without so
 much as breath of air stirring. as rose on the swell looked
 eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. then, as children rejoice
 when their dear father begins to get better after having for long
 time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the gods
 deliver him from evil, so was ulysses thankful when again saw land
 and trees, and swam on with all his strength that might once more
 set foot upon dry ground. when, however, got within earshot, he
 began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell
 still broke against them with terrific roar. everything was enveloped
 in spray; there were harbours where ship might ride, nor shelter
 of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.
 
ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and said despairingly to
 himself, “alas, jove has let see land after swimming so far that i
 had given up all hope, but i can find landing place, for the coast
 is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the
 sea, with deep water close under them so that i cannot climb out for
 want of foot hold. i am afraid some great wave will lift off my legs
 and dash against the rocks as i leave the water—which would give me
 sorry landing. if, on the other hand, i swim further in search of
 some shelving beach or harbour, hurricane may carry out to sea
 again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster of
 the deep to attack me; for amphitrite breeds many such, and i know that
 neptune is very angry with me.”
 
while was thus in two minds wave caught him and took him with such
 force against the rocks that would have been smashed and torn to
 pieces if minerva had not shown him what to do. caught hold of the
 rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the wave
 retired, so was saved that time; but presently the wave came on
 again and carried him back with it far into the sea—tearing his hands
 as the suckers of polypus are torn when some one plucks it from its
 bed, and the stones come up along with it—even so did the rocks tear
 the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep down
 under the water.
 
here poor ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his
 own destiny, if minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him.
 swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating
 against the land, and at the same time kept looking towards the
 shore to see if could find some haven, or spit that should take
 the waves aslant. by and by, as swam on, came to the mouth of a
 river, and here thought would be the best place, for there were no
 rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. felt that there was a
 current, so prayed inwardly and said:
 
“hear me, king, whoever you may be, and save from the anger of the
 sea-god neptune, for i approach you prayerfully. any one who has lost
 his way has at all times claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my
 distress i draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of your
 riverhood. have mercy upon me, king, for i declare myself your
 suppliant.”
 
then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm
 before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. here
 at last ulysses’ knees and strong hands failed him, for the had
 completely broken him. his body was all swollen, and his mouth and
 nostrils ran down like river with sea-water, so that could neither
 breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,
 when had got his breath and came to himself again, took off the
 scarf that ino had given him and threw it back into the salt54 stream
 of the river, whereon ino received it into her hands from the wave that
 bore it towards her. then left the river, laid himself down among
 the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.
 
“alas,” cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of
 me, and how is it all to end? if i stay here upon the river bed through
 the long watches of the night, i am so exhausted that the bitter cold
 and damp may make an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be keen
 wind blowing from off the river. if, on the other hand, i climb the
 hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, i may
 escape the cold and have good night’s rest, but some savage beast may
 take advantage of and devour me.”
 
in the end deemed it best to take to the woods, and found one
 upon some high ground not far from the water. there crept beneath
 two shoots of olive that grew from single stock—the one an ungrafted
 sucker, while the other had been grafted. wind, however squally,
 could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun’s rays
 pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow
 into one another. ulysses crept under these and began to make himself a
 bed to lie on, for there was great litter of dead leaves lying
 about—enough to make covering for two or three men even in hard
 winter weather. was glad enough to see this, so laid himself down
 and heaped the leaves all round him. then, as one who lives alone in
 the country, far from any neighbor, hides brand as fire-seed in the
 ashes to save himself from having to get light elsewhere, even so did
 ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and minerva shed sweet sleep
 upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories of
 his sorrows.
 



book vi
 

the meeting between nausicaa and ulysses.
 

so here ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but minerva went off
 to the country and city of the phaeacians—a people who used to live in
 the fair town of hypereia, near the lawless cyclopes. now the cyclopes
 were stronger than they and plundered them, so their king nausithous
 moved them thence and settled them in scheria, far from all other
 people. surrounded the city with wall, built houses and temples,
 and divided the lands among his people; but was dead and gone to the
 house of hades, and king alcinous, whose counsels were inspired of
 heaven, was now reigning. to his house, then, did minerva hie in
 furtherance of the return of ulysses.
 
she went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there
 slept girl who was as lovely as goddess, nausicaa, daughter to king
 alcinous. two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty,
 one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well made
 folding doors. minerva took the form of the famous captain dymas’s
 daughter, who was bosom friend of nausicaa and just her own age;
 then, coming up to the girl’s bedside like breath of wind, she
 hovered over her head and said:
 
“nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such lazy
 daughter? here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are
 going to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well
 dressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend
 you. this is the way to get yourself good name, and to make your
 father and mother proud of you. suppose, then, that we make tomorrow a
 washing day, and start at daybreak. i will come and help you so that
 you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best
 young men among your own people are courting you, and you are not going
 to remain maid much longer. ask your father, therefore, to have a
 waggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and
 girdles, and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you
 than walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town.”
 
when she had said this minerva went away to olympus, which they say is
 the everlasting home of the gods. here wind beats roughly, and
 neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine
 and in great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are
 illumined for ever and ever. this was the place to which the goddess
 went when she had given instructions to the girl.
 
by and by morning came and woke nausicaa, who began wondering about her
 dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her
 father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room. her
 mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with her
 maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as was
 going out to attend meeting of the town council, which the phaeacian
 aldermen had convened. she stopped him and said:
 
“papa dear, could you manage to let have good big waggon? i want
 to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. you are the
 chief man here, so it is only right that you should have clean shirt
 when you attend meetings of the council. moreover, you have five sons
 at home, two of them married, while the other three are good looking
 bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they go
 to dance, and i have been thinking about all this.”
 
she did not say word about her own wedding, for she did not like to,
 but her father knew and said, “you shall have the mules, my love, and
 whatever else you have mind for. be off with you, and the men shall
 get you good strong waggon with body to it that will hold all your
 clothes.”
 
on this gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out,
 harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the
 clothes down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. her
 mother prepared her basket of provisions with all sorts of good
 things, and goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon,
 and her mother gave her also golden cruse of oil, that she and her
 women might anoint themselves. then she took the whip and reins and
 lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on
 the road. they pulled without flagging, and carried not only nausicaa
 and her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.
 
when they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns,
 through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any
 quantity of linen, matter how dirty. here they unharnessed the mules
 and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the
 water side. they took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in the
 water, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to get
 the dirt out. after they had washed them and got them quite clean, they
 laid them out by the side, where the waves had raised high beach
 of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselves
 with olive oil. then they got their dinner by the side of the stream,
 and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. when they had done
 dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to
 play at ball, while nausicaa sang for them. as the huntress diana goes
 forth upon the mountains of taygetus or erymanthus to hunt wild boars
 or deer, and the wood nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing jove, take
 their sport along with her (then is leto proud at seeing her daughter
 stand full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliest
 amid whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine her
 handmaids.
 
when it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the
 clothes and putting them into the waggon, minerva began to consider how
 ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him
 to the city of the phaeacians. the girl, therefore, threw ball at one
 of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. on this they
 all shouted, and the noise they made woke ulysses, who sat up in his
 bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.
 
“alas,” said to himself, “what kind of people have i come amongst?
 are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? i
 seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of
 the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows
 of green grass. at any rate i am among race of men and women. let me
 try if i cannot manage to get look at them.”
 
as said this crept from under his bush, and broke off bough
 covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. looked like some
 lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and
 defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as prowls in quest of
 oxen, sheep, or deer, for is famished, and will dare break even into
 well fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep—even such did
 ulysses seem to the young women, as drew near to them all naked as
 was, for was in great want. on seeing one so unkempt and so
 begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that
 jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of alcinous stood firm, for
 minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. she
 stood right in front of ulysses, and doubted whether should go up
 to her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a
 suppliant, or stay where was and entreat her to give him some
 clothes and show him the way to the town. in the end deemed it best
 to entreat her from distance in case the girl should take offence at
 his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so addressed her in
 honeyed and persuasive language.
 
“o queen,” said, “i implore your aid—but tell me, are you goddess
 or are you mortal woman? if you are goddess and dwell in heaven, i
 can only conjecture that you are jove’s daughter diana, for your face
 and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a
 mortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and
 mother—thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and
 delighted they must feel when they see so fair scion as yourself
 going out to dance; most happy, however, of all will be whose
 wedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home.
 i never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am
 lost in admiration as i behold you. i can only compare you to young
 palm tree which i saw when i was at delos growing near the altar of
 apollo—for i was there, too, with much people after me, when i was on
 that journey which has been the source of all my troubles. never yet
 did such young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and i
 admired and wondered at it exactly as i now admire and wonder at
 yourself. i dare not clasp your knees, but i am in great distress;
 yesterday made the twentieth day that i had been tossing about upon the
 sea. the winds and waves have taken all the way from the ogygian
 island,55 and now fate has flung upon this coast that i may endure
 still further suffering; for i do not think that i have yet come to the
 end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for me.
 
“and now, queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person i
 have met, and i know one else in this country. show the way to
 your town, and let have anything that you may have brought hither to
 wrap your clothes in. may heaven grant you in all things your heart’s
 desire—husband, house, and happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing
 better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in a
 house. it discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friends
 glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one.”
 
to this nausicaa answered, “stranger, you appear to be sensible,
 well-disposed person. there is accounting for luck; jove gives
 prosperity to rich and poor just as chooses, so you must take what
 has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. now, however,
 that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes
 nor for anything else that foreigner in distress may reasonably look
 for. i will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name of
 our people; we are called phaeacians, and i am daughter to alcinous, in
 whom the whole power of the state is vested.”
 
then she called her maids and said, “stay where you are, you girls. can
 you not see man without running away from him? do you take him for a
 robber or murderer? neither nor any one else can come here to do
 us phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on
 land’s end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do
 with any other people. this is only some poor man who has lost his way,
 and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distress
 are under jove’s protection, and will take what they can get and be
 thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink,
 and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from the
 wind.”
 
on this the maids left off running away and began calling one another
 back. they made ulysses sit down in the shelter as nausicaa had told
 them, and brought him shirt and cloak. they also brought him the
 little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream.
 but ulysses said, “young women, please to stand little on one side
 that i may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil,
 for it is long enough since my skin has had drop of oil upon it. i
 cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. i am ashamed to
 strip56 before number of good looking young women.”
 
then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while ulysses
 washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and
 from his broad shoulders. when had thoroughly washed himself, and
 had got the brine out of his hair, anointed himself with oil, and
 put on the clothes which the girl had given him; minerva then made him
 look taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thick
 on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
 she glorified him about the head and shoulders as skilful workman who
 has studied art of all kinds under vulcan and minerva enriches piece
 of silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full of beauty. then he
 went and sat down little way off upon the beach, looking quite young
 and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said
 to her maids:
 
“hush, my dears, for i want to say something. i believe the gods who
 live in heaven have sent this man to the phaeacians. when i first saw
 him i thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of the
 gods who dwell in heaven. i should like my future husband to be just
 such another as is, if would only stay here and not want to go
 away. however, give him something to eat and drink.”
 
they did as they were told, and set food before ulysses, who ate and
 drank ravenously, for it was long since had had food of any kind.
 meanwhile, nausicaa bethought her of another matter. she got the linen
 folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she
 took her seat, she called ulysses:
 
“stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to the town; i
 will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where i can
 tell you that you will meet all the best people among the phaeacians.
 but be sure and do as i bid you, for you seem to be sensible person.
 as long as we are going past the fields and farm lands, follow briskly
 behind the waggon along with the maids and i will lead the way myself.
 presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find a
 high wall running all round it, and good harbour on either side with
 narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by the
 road side, for every one has place where his own ship can lie. you
 will see the market place with temple of neptune in the middle of it,
 and paved with large stones bedded in the earth. here people deal in
 ship’s gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are
 the places where oars are made, for the phaeacians are not nation of
 archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are sea-faring
 folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which
 they travel far over the sea.
 
“i am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against
 later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low
 fellow, if met us, might say, ‘who is this fine-looking stranger
 that is going about with nausicaa? where did she find him? i suppose
 she is going to marry him. perhaps is vagabond sailor whom she has
 taken from some foreign vessel, for we have neighbours; or some god
 has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she is
 going to live with him all the rest of her life. it would be good
 thing if she would take herself off and find husband somewhere else,
 for she will not look at one of the many excellent young phaeacians who
 are in love with her.’ this is the kind of disparaging remark that
 would be made about me, and i could not complain, for i should myself
 be scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with
 men in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still
 alive, and without having been married in the face of all the world.
 
“if, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help
 you home, do as i bid you; you will see beautiful grove of poplars by
 the road side dedicated to minerva; it has well in it and meadow
 all round it. here my father has field of rich garden ground, about
 as far from the town as man’s voice will carry. sit down there and
 wait for while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach my
 father’s house. then, when you think we must have done this, come into
 the town and ask the way to the house of my father alcinous. you will
 have difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you,
 for one else in the whole town has anything like such fine house
 as has. when you have got past the gates and through the outer
 court, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. you
 will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by
 firelight. it is fine sight to see her as she leans back against one
 of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind her. close to her
 seat stands that of my father, on which sits and topes like an
 immortal god. never mind him, but go up to my mother, and lay your
 hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. if you can gain her
 over, you may hope to see your own country again, matter how distant
 it may be.”
 
so saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
 the mules drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
 she was careful not to go too fast for ulysses and the maids who were
 following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with
 judgement. as the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove of
 minerva, and there ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter
 of jove.
 
“hear me,” cried, “daughter of aegis-bearing jove, unweariable, hear
 now, for you gave heed to my prayers when neptune was wrecking
 me. now, therefore, have pity upon and grant that i may find friends
 and be hospitably received by the phaeacians.”
 
thus did pray, and minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show
 herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle neptune, who was
 still furious in his endeavors to prevent ulysses from getting home.
 



book vii
 

reception of ulysses at the palace of king alcinous.
 

thus, then, did ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
 town. when she reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway,
 and her brothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mules
 out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she
 went to her own room, where an old servant, eurymedusa of apeira, lit
 the fire for her. this old woman had been brought by from apeira,
 and had been chosen as prize for alcinous because was king over
 the phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though were god.57
 she had been nurse to nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and
 brought her supper for her into her own room.
 
presently ulysses got up to go towards the town; and minerva shed a
 thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud
 phaeacians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who was.
 then, as was just entering the town, she came towards him in the
 likeness of little girl carrying pitcher. she stood right in front
 of him, and ulysses said:
 
“my dear, will you be so kind as to show the house of king alcinous?
 i am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your
 town and country.”
 
then minerva said, “yes, father stranger, i will show you the house you
 want, for alcinous lives quite close to my own father. i will go before
 you and show the way, but say not word as you go, and do not look at
 any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide
 strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. they are
 sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of neptune in ships
 that glide along like thought, or as bird in the air.”
 
on this she led the way, and ulysses followed in her steps; but not one
 of the phaeacians could see him as passed through the city in the
 midst of them; for the great goddess minerva in her good will towards
 him had hidden him in thick cloud of darkness. admired their
 harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city,
 which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when
 they reached the king’s house minerva said:
 
“this is the house, father stranger, which you would have show you.
 you will find number of great people sitting at table, but do not be
 afraid; go straight in, for the bolder man is the more likely is
 to carry his point, even though is stranger. first find the queen.
 her name is arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband
 alcinous. they both descend originally from neptune, who was father to
 nausithous by periboea, woman of great beauty. periboea was the
 youngest daughter of eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the
 giants, but ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own life to
 boot.
 
“neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had by him, the
 great nausithous, who reigned over the phaeacians. nausithous had two
 sons rhexenor and alcinous;58 apollo killed the first of them while he
 was still bridegroom and without male issue; but left daughter
 arete, whom alcinous married, and honours as other woman is honoured
 of all those that keep house along with their husbands.
 
“thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her
 children, by alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon
 her as goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for
 she is thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any
 women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle
 their disputes. if you can gain her good will, you may have every hope
 of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and
 country.”
 
then minerva left scheria and went away over the sea. she went to
 marathon59 and to the spacious streets of athens, where she entered the
 abode of erechtheus; but ulysses went on to the house of alcinous, and
 pondered much as paused while before reaching the threshold of
 bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or
 moon. the walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the
 cornice was of blue enamel. the doors were gold, and hung on pillars of
 silver that rose from floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver
 and the hook of the door was of gold.
 
on either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which vulcan, with
 his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the
 palace of king alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow
 old. seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end
 to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the
 house had made. here the chief persons of the phaeacians used to sit
 and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there
 were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands,
 raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table.
 there are60 fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always
 grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom,
 or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the
 fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it
 will turn oil. as the phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so
 their women excel all others in weaving, for minerva has taught them
 all manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.
 
outside the gate of the outer court there is large garden of about
 four acres with wall all round it. it is full of beautiful
 trees—pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. there are
 luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. the fruits never rot nor
 fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so
 soft that new crop ripens before the old has dropped. pear grows on
 pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for
 there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of part of this,
 the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
 gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on
 have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again
 are just changing colour. in the furthest part of the ground there are
 beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year
 round. two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout
 the whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the
 outer court to the house itself, and the town’s people draw water from
 it. such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the
 house of king alcinous.
 
so here ulysses stood for while and looked about him, but when had
 looked long enough crossed the threshold and went within the
 precincts of the house. there found all the chief people among the
 phaeacians making their drink offerings to mercury, which they always
 did the last thing before going away for the night.61 went straight
 through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which
 minerva had enveloped him, till reached arete and king alcinous;
 then laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at that moment
 the miraculous darkness fell away from him and became visible. every
 one was speechless with surprise at seeing man there, but ulysses
 began at once with his petition.
 
“queen arete,” exclaimed, “daughter of great rhexenor, in my
 distress i humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests
 (whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they
 leave their possessions to their children, and all the honours
 conferred upon them by the state) to help home to my own country as
 soon as possible; for i have been long in trouble and away from my
 friends.”
 
then sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their
 peace, till presently the old hero echeneus, who was an excellent
 speaker and an elder among the phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
 addressed them thus:
 
“alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that stranger
 should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is
 waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and
 take seat on stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix
 some wine and water that we may make drink offering to jove the lord
 of thunder, who takes all well disposed suppliants under his
 protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever
 there may be in the house.”
 
when alcinous heard this took ulysses by the hand, raised him from
 the hearth, and bade him take the seat of laodamas, who had been
 sitting beside him, and was his favourite son. maid servant then
 brought him water in beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a
 silver basin for him to wash his hands, and she drew clean table
 beside him; an upper servant brought him bread and offered him many
 good things of what there was in the house, and ulysses ate and drank.
 then alcinous said to one of the servants, “pontonous, mix cup of
 wine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to jove the
 lord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants.”
 
pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving
 every man his drink-offering. when they had made their offerings, and
 had drunk each as much as was minded, alcinous said:
 
“aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians, hear my words. you
 have had your supper, so now go home to bed. to-morrow morning i shall
 invite still larger number of aldermen, and will give sacrificial
 banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his
 escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his
 own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, matter how
 distant it may be. we must see that comes to harm while on his
 homeward journey, but when is once at home will have to take the
 luck was born with for better or worse like other people. it is
 possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who has
 come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are
 departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made
 themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them
 hecatombs. they come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves,
 and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other
 of them, they affect concealment, for we are as near of kin to the
 gods as the cyclopes and the savage giants are.”62
 
then ulysses said: “pray, alcinous, do not take any such notion into
 your head. i have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor
 mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
 indeed, were i to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me,
 you would say that i was still worse off than they are. nevertheless,
 let sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is very
 importunate thing, and thrusts itself on man’s notice matter how
 dire is his distress. i am in great trouble, yet it insists that i
 shall eat and drink, bids lay aside all memory of my sorrows and
 dwell only on the due replenishing of itself. as for yourselves, do as
 you propose, and at break of day set about helping to get home. i
 shall be content to die if i may first once more behold my property, my
 bondsmen, and all the greatness of my house.”63
 
thus did speak. every one approved his saying, and agreed that he
 should have his escort inasmuch as had spoken reasonably. then when
 they had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he
 was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving
 ulysses in the cloister with arete and alcinous while the servants were
 taking the things away after supper. arete was the first to speak, for
 she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that ulysses was
 wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said,
 “stranger, before we go any further, there is question i should like
 to ask you. who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes?
 did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?”
 
and ulysses answered, “it would be long story madam, were i to relate
 in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been
 laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island
 far away in the which is called ‘the ogygian.’ here dwells the
 cunning and powerful goddess calypso, daughter of atlas. she lives by
 herself far from all neighbours human or divine. fortune, however,
 brought to her hearth all desolate and alone, for jove struck my
 ship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. my brave
 comrades were drowned every man of them, but i stuck to the keel and
 was carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last
 during the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought to the
 ogygian island where the great goddess calypso lives. she took in
 and treated with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me
 immortal that i might never grow old, but she could not persuade to
 let her do so.
 
“i stayed with calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the
 good clothes she gave with my tears during the whole time; but at
 last when the eighth year came round she bade depart of her own free
 will, either because jove had told her she must, or because she had
 changed her mind. she sent from her island on raft, which she
 provisioned with abundance of bread and wine. moreover she gave good
 stout clothing, and sent wind that blew both warm and fair. days
 seven and ten did i sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth i caught
 sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast—and glad
 indeed was i to set eyes upon them. nevertheless there was still much
 trouble in store for me, for at this point neptune would let go no
 further, and raised great storm against me; the was so terribly
 high that i could longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under
 the fury of the gale, and i had to swim for it, till wind and current
 brought to your shores.
 
“there i tried to land, but could not, for it was bad place and the
 waves dashed against the rocks, so i again took to the and swam
 on till i came to river that seemed the most likely landing place,
 for there were rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. here, then,
 i got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. night was
 coming on, so i left the river, and went into thicket, where i
 covered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent off
 into very deep sleep. sick and sorry as i was i slept among the
 leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when i woke
 as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’s maid servants playing
 upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like goddess. i
 besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition,
 much more so than could be expected from so young person—for young
 people are apt to be thoughtless. she gave plenty of bread and wine,
 and when she had had washed in the river she also gave the
 clothes in which you see me. now, therefore, though it has pained to
 do so, i have told you the whole truth.”
 
then alcinous said, “stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to
 bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she
 was the first person whose aid you asked.”
 
“pray do not scold her,” replied ulysses; “she is not to blame. she did
 tell to follow along with the maids, but i was ashamed and afraid,
 for i thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. every
 human being is sometimes little suspicious and irritable.”
 
“stranger,” replied alcinous, “i am not the kind of man to get angry
 about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by father
 jove, minerva, and apollo, now that i see what kind of person you are,
 and how much you think as i do, i wish you would stay here, marry my
 daughter, and become my son-in-law. if you will stay i will give you a
 house and an estate, but one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here
 against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this i will attend
 tomorrow to the matter of your escort. you can sleep64 during the whole
 voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters
 either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be a
 long way further off than euboea, which those of my people who saw it
 when they took yellow-haired rhadamanthus to see tityus the of
 gaia, tell is the furthest of any place—and yet they did the whole
 voyage in single day without distressing themselves, and came back
 again afterwards. you will thus see how much my ships excel all others,
 and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are.”
 
then was ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “father jove, grant that
 alcinous may do all as has said, for so will win an imperishable
 name among mankind, and at the same time i shall return to my country.”
 
thus did they converse. then arete told her maids to set bed in the
 room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to
 spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for ulysses to
 wear. the maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when
 they had made the bed they came up to ulysses and said, “rise, sir
 stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready,” and glad indeed was
 to go to his rest.
 
so ulysses slept in bed placed in room over the echoing gateway;
 but alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his
 wife by his side.
 



book viii
 

banquet in the house of alcinous—the games.
 

now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, alcinous
 and ulysses both rose, and alcinous led the way to the phaeacian place
 of assembly, which was near the ships. when they got there they sat
 down side by side on seat of polished stone, while minerva took the
 form of one of alcinous’ servants, and went round the town in order to
 help ulysses to get home. she went up to the citizens, man by man, and
 said, “aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians, come to the
 assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off a
 long voyage to the house of king alcinous; looks like an immortal
 god.”
 
with these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to
 the assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. every one
 was struck with the appearance of ulysses, for minerva had beautified
 him about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter
 than really was, that might impress the phaeacians favourably as
 being very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trials
 of skill to which they would challenge him. then, when they were got
 together, alcinous spoke:
 
“hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians,
 that i may speak even as i am minded. this stranger, whoever may be,
 has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either east or
 west. wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. let us
 then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him;
 indeed, one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain
 of for not speeding on his way soon enough. let us draw ship into
 the sea—one that has never yet made voyage—and man her with two and
 fifty of our smartest young sailors. then when you have made fast your
 oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to
 prepare feast.65 i will find you in everything. i am giving these
 instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regards
 you aldermen and town councillors, you will join in entertaining our
 guest in the cloisters. i can take excuses, and we will have
 demodocus to sing to us; for there is bard like him whatever may
 choose to sing about.”
 
alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a
 servant went to fetch demodocus. the fifty-two picked oarsmen went to
 the shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drew
 the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound the
 oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due
 course, and spread the white sails aloft. they moored the vessel a
 little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the house
 of king alcinous. the out houses,66 yards, and all the precincts were
 filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and
 alcinous killed them dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two
 oxen. these they skinned and dressed so as to provide magnificent
 banquet.
 
servant presently led in the famous bard demodocus, whom the muse had
 dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though
 she had endowed him with divine gift of song, she had robbed him of
 his eyesight. pontonous set seat for him among the guests, leaning it
 up against bearing-post. hung the lyre for him on peg over his
 head, and showed him where was to feel for it with his hands. he
 also set fair table with basket of victuals by his side, and cup
 of wine from which might drink whenever was so disposed.
 
the company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before
 them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse
 inspired demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a
 matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel
 between ulysses and achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on
 one another as they sat together at banquet. but agamemnon was glad
 when heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for apollo
 had foretold him this at pytho when crossed the stone floor to
 consult the oracle. here was the beginning of the evil that by the will
 of jove fell both upon danaans and trojans.
 
thus sang the bard, but ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head
 and covered his face, for was ashamed to let the phaeacians see that
 was weeping. when the bard left off singing wiped the tears from
 his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a
 drink-offering to the gods; but when the phaeacians pressed demodocus
 to sing further, for they delighted in his lays, then ulysses again
 drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly. one noticed his
 distress except alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy
 sighs that was heaving. so at once said, “aldermen and town
 councillors of the phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the
 feast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us
 proceed therefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his
 return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all
 other nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners.”
 
with these words led the way, and the others followed after. a
 servant hung demodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the
 cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief
 men of the phaeacians were going to see the sports; crowd of several
 thousands of people followed them, and there were many excellent
 competitors for all the prizes. acroneos, ocyalus, elatreus, nauteus,
 prymneus, anchialus, eretmeus, ponteus, proreus, thoon, anabesineus,
 and amphialus of polyneus of tecton. there was also euryalus
 of naubolus, who was like mars himself, and was the best looking
 man among the phaeacians except laodamas. three sons of alcinous,
 laodamas, halios, and clytoneus, competed also.
 
the foot races came first. the course was set out for them from the
 starting post, and they raised dust upon the plain as they all flew
 forward at the same moment. clytoneus came in first by long way; he
 left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a
 couple of mules can plough in fallow field.67 they then turned to the
 painful art of wrestling, and here euryalus proved to be the best man.
 amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the
 disc there was one who could approach elatreus. alcinous’s son
 laodamas was the best boxer, and it was who presently said, when
 they had all been diverted with the games, “let us ask the stranger
 whether excels in any of these sports; seems very powerfully
 built; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength,
 nor is at all old, but has suffered much lately, and there is
 nothing like the for making havoc with man, matter how strong
 is.”
 
“you are quite right, laodamas,” replied euryalus, “go up to your guest
 and speak to him about it yourself.”
 
when laodamas heard this made his way into the middle of the crowd
 and said to ulysses, “i hope, sir, that you will enter yourself for
 some one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of
 them—and you must have gone in for many one before now. there is
 nothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as the
 showing himself proper man with his hands and feet. have try
 therefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. your
 return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn
 into the water, and the crew is found.”
 
ulysses answered, “laodamas, why do you taunt in this way? my mind
 is set rather on cares than contests; i have been through infinite
 trouble, and am come among you now as suppliant, praying your king
 and people to further on my return home.”
 
then euryalus reviled him outright and said, “i gather, then, that you
 are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in.
 i suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships
 as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward
 freights and homeward cargoes. there does not seem to be much of the
 athlete about you.”
 
“for shame, sir,” answered ulysses, fiercely, “you are an insolent
 fellow—so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in
 speech, person, and understanding. one man may be of weak presence, but
 heaven has adorned this with such good conversation that charms
 every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with
 him so that is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever
 goes is looked up to. another may be as handsome as god, but
 his good looks are not crowned with discretion. this is your case. no
 god could make finer looking fellow than you are, but you are fool.
 your ill-judged remarks have made exceedingly angry, and you are
 quite mistaken, for i excel in great many athletic exercises; indeed,
 so long as i had youth and strength, i was among the first athletes of
 the age. now, however, i am worn out by labour and sorrow, for i have
 gone through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of the
 weary sea; still, in spite of all this i will compete, for your taunts
 have stung to the quick.”
 
so hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized disc,
 larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the phaeacians
 when disc-throwing among themselves.68 then, swinging it back, threw
 it from his brawny hand, and it made humming sound in the air as he
 did so. the phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it
 sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been
 made yet. minerva, in the form of man, came and marked the place
 where it had fallen. “a blind man, sir,” said she, “could easily tell
 your mark by groping for it—it is so far ahead of any other. you may
 make your mind easy about this contest, for phaeacian can come near
 to such throw as yours.”
 
ulysses was glad when found had friend among the lookers-on, so
 began to speak more pleasantly. “young men,” said he, “come up to
 that throw if you can, and i will throw another disc as heavy or even
 heavier. if anyone wants to have bout with let him come on, for i
 am exceedingly angry; i will box, wrestle, or run, i do not care what
 it is, with any man of you all except laodamas, but not with him
 because i am his guest, and one cannot compete with one’s own personal
 friend. at least i do not think it prudent or sensible thing for a
 guest to challenge his host’s family at any game, especially when is
 in foreign country. will cut the ground from under his own feet if
 does; but i make exception as regards any one else, for i want to
 have the matter out and know which is the best man. i am good hand at
 every kind of athletic sport known among mankind. i am an excellent
 archer. in battle i am always the first to bring man down with my
 arrow, matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me.
 philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than i could when
 we achaeans were before troy and in practice. i far excel every one
 else in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of
 the earth, but i should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such
 as hercules, or eurytus the oechalian—men who could shoot against the
 gods themselves. this in fact was how eurytus came prematurely by his
 end, for apollo was angry with him and killed him because challenged
 him as an archer. i can throw dart farther than any one else can
 shoot an arrow. running is the only point in respect of which i am
 afraid some of the phaeacians might beat me, for i have been brought
 down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore i am still
 weak.”
 
they all held their peace except king alcinous, who began, “sir, we
 have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which
 i understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been
 displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one
 of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who
 knows how to talk with propriety. i hope you will apprehend my meaning,
 and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining with
 yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary
 aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. we are not particularly
 remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly
 fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. we are extremely fond of good
 dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen,
 warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best
 dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be
 able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as
 sailors, runners, dancers, and minstrels. demodocus has left his lyre
 at my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him.”
 
on this servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house,
 and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. it was
 their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so they
 made the ground smooth and marked wide space for the dancers.
 presently the servant came back with demodocus’s lyre, and took his
 place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town
 began to foot and trip it so nimbly that ulysses was delighted with the
 merry twinkling of their feet.
 
meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of mars and venus, and how
 they first began their intrigue in the house of vulcan. mars made venus
 many presents, and defiled king vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who
 saw what they were about, told vulcan. vulcan was very angry when he
 heard such dreadful news, so went to his smithy brooding mischief,
 got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains
 which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there
 in that place.69 when had finished his snare went into his
 bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs;
 also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. not even
 god could see them so fine and subtle were they. as soon as had
 spread the chains all over the bed, made as though were setting
 out for the fair state of lemnos, which of all places in the world was
 the one was most fond of. but mars kept blind look out, and as
 soon as saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love
 for venus.
 
now venus was just come in from visit to her father jove, and was
 about sitting down when mars came inside the house, and said as took
 her hand in his own, “let us go to the couch of vulcan: is not at
 home, but is gone off to lemnos among the sintians, whose speech is
 barbarous.”
 
she was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,
 whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning vulcan had spread
 for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too
 late that they were in trap. then vulcan came up to them, for had
 turned back before reaching lemnos, when his scout the sun told him
 what was going on. was in furious passion, and stood in the
 vestibule making dreadful noise as shouted to all the gods.
 
“father jove,” cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live for
 ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that i
 will show you. jove’s daughter venus is always dishonouring because
 i am lame. she is in love with mars, who is handsome and clean built,
 whereas i am cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not i;
 they ought never to have begotten me. come and see the pair together
 asleep on my bed. it makes furious to look at them. they are very
 fond of one another, but i do not think they will lie there longer than
 they can help, nor do i think that they will sleep much; there,
 however, they shall stay till her father has repaid the sum i gave
 him for his baggage of daughter, who is fair but not honest.”
 
on this the gods gathered to the house of vulcan. earth-encircling
 neptune came, and mercury the bringer of luck, and king apollo, but the
 goddesses staid at home all of them for shame. then the givers of all
 good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with
 inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning vulcan had been,
 whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:
 
“ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. see how
 limping vulcan, lame as is, has caught mars who is the fleetest god
 in heaven; and now mars will be cast in heavy damages.”
 
thus did they converse, but king apollo said to mercury, “messenger
 mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains
 were, would you, if you could sleep with venus?”
 
“king apollo,” answered mercury, “i only wish i might get the chance,
 though there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, all
 of you, gods and goddesses, but i would sleep with her if i could.”
 
the immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but neptune
 took it all seriously, and kept on imploring vulcan to set mars free
 again. “let him go,” cried, “and i will undertake, as you require,
 that shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among
 the immortal gods.”
 
“do not,” replied vulcan, “ask to do this; bad man’s bond is bad
 security; what remedy could i enforce against you if mars should go
 away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?”
 
“vulcan,” said neptune, “if mars goes away without paying his damages,
 i will pay you myself.” so vulcan answered, “in this case i cannot and
 must not refuse you.”
 
thereon loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were
 free they scampered off, mars to thrace and laughter-loving venus to
 cyprus and to paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with
 burnt offerings. here the graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil
 of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her
 in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.
 
thus sang the bard, and both ulysses and the seafaring phaeacians were
 charmed as they heard him.
 
then alcinous told laodamas and halius to dance alone, for there was no
 one to compete with them. so they took red ball which polybus had
 made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up
 towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and
 caught it with ease before it came down again. when they had done
 throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at
 the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one
 another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made great
 stamping with their feet. then ulysses said:
 
“king alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the
 world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. i was
 astonished as i saw them.”
 
the king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the phaeacians,
 “aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be person of
 singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he
 may reasonably expect. there are twelve chief men among you, and
 counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, clean
 cloak, shirt, and talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in
 lump down at once, so that when gets his supper may do so with
 light heart. as for euryalus will have to make formal apology
 and present too, for has been rude.”
 
thus did speak. the others all of them applauded his saying, and
 sent their servants to fetch the presents. then euryalus said, “king
 alcinous, i will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. he
 shall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of
 silver. i will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into
 which it fits. it will be worth great deal to him.”
 
as spoke placed the sword in the hands of ulysses and said, “good
 luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the
 winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you safe return,
 for i understand you have been long away from home, and have gone
 through much hardship.”
 
to which ulysses answered, “good luck to you too my friend, and may the
 gods grant you every happiness. i hope you will not miss the sword you
 have given along with your apology.”
 
with these words girded the sword about his shoulders and towards
 sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of
 the donors kept bringing them to the house of king alcinous; here his
 sons received them, and placed them under their mother’s charge. then
 alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.
 
“wife,” said he, turning to queen arete, “go, fetch the best chest we
 have, and put clean cloak and shirt in it. also, set copper on the
 fire and heat some water; our guest will take warm bath; see also to
 the careful packing of the presents that the noble phaeacians have made
 him; will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that
 will follow. i shall myself give him this golden goblet—which is of
 exquisite workmanship—that may be reminded of for the rest of his
 life whenever makes drink offering to jove, or to any of the
 gods.”70
 
then arete told her maids to set large tripod upon the fire as fast
 as they could, whereon they set tripod full of bath water on to a
 clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became
 hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod.71 meanwhile
 arete brought magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it she
 packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the
 phaeacians had brought. lastly she added cloak and good shirt from
 alcinous, and said to ulysses:
 
“see to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for
 fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your
 ship.” 72
 
when ulysses heard this put the lid on the chest and made it fast
 with bond that circe had taught him. had done so before an upper
 servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. was very glad
 of warm bath, for had had one to wait upon him ever since he
 left the house of calypso, who as long as remained with her had
 taken as good care of him as though had been god. when the
 servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him
 clean cloak and shirt, left the bath room and joined the guests
 who were sitting over their wine. lovely nausicaa stood by one of the
 bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as
 she saw him pass. “farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget when
 you are safe at home again, for it is to first that you owe ransom
 for having saved your life.”
 
and ulysses said, “nausicaa, daughter of great alcinous, may jove the
 mighty husband of juno, grant that i may reach my home; so shall i
 bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved
 me.”
 
when had said this, seated himself beside alcinous. supper was
 then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. servant led in the
 favourite bard demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near
 one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that might lean
 against it. then ulysses cut off piece of roast pork with plenty of
 fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to servant,
 “take this piece of pork over to demodocus and tell him to eat it; for
 all the pain his lays may cause i will salute him none the less;
 bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse
 teaches them their songs and loves them.”
 
the servant carried the pork in his fingers over to demodocus, who took
 it and was very much pleased. they then laid their hands on the good
 things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and
 drink, ulysses said to demodocus, “demodocus, there is one in the
 world whom i admire more than i do you. you must have studied under the
 muse, jove’s daughter, and under apollo, so accurately do you sing the
 return of the achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. if you
 were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who
 was. now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse
 which epeus made with the assistance of minerva, and which ulysses got
 by stratagem into the fort of troy after freighting it with the men who
 afterwards sacked the city. if you will sing this tale aright i will
 tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”
 
the bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some
 of the argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others,
 hidden within the horse,73 were waiting with ulysses in the trojan
 place of assembly. for the trojans themselves had drawn the horse into
 their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it,
 and were in three minds as to what they should do. some were for
 breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top
 of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the
 precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering
 and propitiation for the gods. and this was how they settled it in the
 end, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which
 were all the bravest of the argives waiting to bring death and
 destruction on the trojans. anon sang how the sons of the achaeans
 issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their
 ambuscade. sang how they overran the city hither and thither and
 ravaged it, and how ulysses went raging like mars along with menelaus
 to the house of deiphobus. it was there that the fight raged most
 furiously, nevertheless by minerva’s help was victorious.
 
all this told, but ulysses was overcome as heard him, and his
 cheeks were wet with tears. wept as woman weeps when she throws
 herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city
 and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. she
 screams aloud and flings her arms about him as lies gasping for
 breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back
 and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to life of labour and
 sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously did
 ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
 alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
 that was heaving. the king, therefore, at once rose and said:
 
“aldermen and town councillors of the phaeacians, let demodocus cease
 his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. from
 the moment that we had done supper and demodocus began to sing, our
 guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. is evidently in
 great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy
 ourselves, hosts and guest alike. this will be much more as it should
 be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we
 are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any one
 with even moderate amount of right feeling knows that ought to
 treat guest and suppliant as though were his own brother.
 
“therefore, sir, do you on your part affect more concealment nor
 reserve in the matter about which i shall ask you; it will be more
 polite in you to give plain answer; tell the name by which your
 father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were
 known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. there is one,
 neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for
 people’s fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.
 tell also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape
 their purpose accordingly and take you there. for the phaeacians have
 pilots; their vessels have rudders as those of other nations
 have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are
 thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the
 whole world, and can traverse the just as well even when it is
 covered with mist and cloud, so that there is danger of being
 wrecked or coming to any harm. still i do remember hearing my father
 say that neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the
 matter of giving people escorts. said that one of these days he
 should wreck ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted
 some one,74 and bury our city under high mountain. this is what my
 father used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or no
 is matter which will decide for himself.
 
“and now, tell and tell true. where have you been wandering, and
 in what countries have you travelled? tell us of the peoples
 themselves, and of their cities—who were hostile, savage and
 uncivilised, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. tell us
 also why you are made so unhappy on hearing about the return of the
 argive danaans from troy. the gods arranged all this, and sent them
 their misfortunes in order that future generations might have something
 to sing about. did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when you
 were before troy? son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearest
 relations man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some
 brave and kindly-natured comrade—for good friend is as dear to man
 as his own brother?”
 



book ix
 

ulysses declares himself and begins his story—-the cicons, lotophagi,
 and cyclopes.
 

and ulysses answered, “king alcinous, it is good thing to hear bard
 with such divine voice as this man has. there is nothing better or
 more delightful than when whole people make merry together, with the
 guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
 and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every
 man. this is indeed as fair sight as man can see. now, however,
 since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my
 own sad memories in respect of them, i do not know how to begin, nor
 yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has
 been laid heavily upon me.
 
“firstly, then, i will tell you my name that you too may know it, and
 one day, if i outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though
 i live so far away from all of you. i am ulysses of laertes,
 renowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame
 ascends to heaven. i live in ithaca, where there is high mountain
 called neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is a
 group of islands very near to one another—dulichium, same, and the
 wooded island of zacynthus. it lies squat on the horizon, all highest
 up in the towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it
 towards dawn.75 it is rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my
 eyes know none that they better love to look upon. the goddess calypso
 kept with her in her cave, and wanted to marry her, as did also
 the cunning aeaean goddess circe; but they could neither of them
 persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to man than his own country
 and his parents, and however splendid home may have in foreign
 country, if it be far from father or mother, does not care about it.
 now, however, i will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by
 jove’s will i met with on my return from troy.
 
“when i had set sail thence the wind took first to ismarus, which is
 the city of the cicons. there i sacked the town and put the people to
 the sword. we took their wives and also much booty, which we divided
 equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. i
 then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very
 foolishly would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine and
 killing great numbers of sheep and oxen on the shore. meanwhile the
 cicons cried out for help to other cicons who lived inland. these were
 more in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of
 war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the
 occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as
 leaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so
 that we were hard pressed. they set the battle in array near the ships,
 and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.76 so long
 as the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against
 them, though they were more in number than we; but as the sun went
 down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the cicons got the
 better of us, and we lost half dozen men from every ship we had; so
 we got away with those that were left.
 
“thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have
 escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we
 had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the
 hands of the cicons. then jove raised the north wind against us till it
 blew hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and
 night sprang forth out of the heavens. we let the ships run before the
 gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took
 them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the
 land. there we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from
 toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again
 raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and
 steersmen direct our ship. i should have got home at that time unharmed
 had not the north wind and the currents been against as i was
 doubling cape malea, and set off my course hard by the island of
 cythera.
 
“i was driven thence by foul winds for space of nine days upon the
 sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the lotus-eaters, who
 live on food that comes from kind of flower. here we landed to take
 in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near
 the ships. when they had eaten and drunk i sent two of my company to
 see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had a
 third man under them. they started at once, and went about among the
 lotus-eaters, who did them hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus,
 which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about
 home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to
 them, but were for staying and munching lotus77 with the lotus-eaters
 without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they
 wept bitterly i forced them back to the ships and made them fast under
 the benches. then i told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of
 them should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so
 they took their places and smote the grey with their oars.
 
“we sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of
 the lawless and inhuman cyclopes. now the cyclopes neither plant nor
 plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and
 grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes
 yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. they have no
 laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of
 high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no
 account of their neighbours.
 
“now off their harbour there lies wooded and fertile island not quite
 close to the land of the cyclopes, but still not far. it is over-run
 with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never
 disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen—who as rule will suffer so
 much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices—do not go there,
 nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies wilderness
 untilled and unsown from year to year, and has living thing upon it
 but only goats. for the cyclopes have ships, nor yet shipwrights who
 could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city,
 or sail over the to one another’s country as people who have ships
 can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island,78
 for it is very good one, and would yield everything in due season.
 there are meadows that in some places come right down to the shore,
 well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there
 excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always
 yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. there is good
 harbour where cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need ship be
 moored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vessel and stay there
 till the wind becomes fair for putting out to again. at the head of
 the harbour there is spring of clear water coming out of cave, and
 there are poplars growing all round it.
 
“here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have
 brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. thick mist
 hung all round our ships;79 the moon was hidden behind mass of clouds
 so that one could have seen the island if had looked for it, nor
 were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we
 found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the
 ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach
 till daybreak.
 
“when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn appeared, we admired the
 island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs jove’s daughters
 roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. on
 this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and
 dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. heaven
 sent us excellent sport; i had twelve ships with me, and each ship got
 nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to
 the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plenty
 of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we
 sacked the city of the cicons, and this had not yet run out. while we
 were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the
 cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires.
 we could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their
 sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we
 camped down upon the beach, and next morning i called council.
 
“‘stay here, my brave fellows,’ said i, ‘all the rest of you, while i
 go with my ship and exploit these people myself: i want to see if they
 are uncivilised savages, or hospitable and humane race.’
 
“i went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers;
 so they took their places and smote the grey with their oars. when
 we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of cliff
 near the sea, we saw great cave overhung with laurels. it was a
 station for great many sheep and goats, and outside there was large
 yard, with high wall round it made of stones built into the ground
 and of trees both pine and oak. this was the abode of huge monster
 who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. would have
 nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. was
 horrid creature, not like human being at all, but resembling rather
 some crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of high
 mountain.
 
“i told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all
 but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. i
 also took goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given by
 maron, of euanthes, who was priest of apollo the patron god of
 ismarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. when we
 were sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also
 his wife and child; so made some presents of great value—seven
 talents of fine gold, and bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet
 wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. not man nor maid
 in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and one
 housekeeper: when drank it mixed twenty parts of water to one of
 wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that
 it was impossible to refrain from drinking. i filled large skin with
 this wine, and took wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind
 misgave that i might have to deal with some savage who would be of
 great strength, and would respect neither right nor law.
 
“we soon reached his cave, but was out shepherding, so we went
 inside and took stock of all that we could see. his cheese-racks were
 loaded with cheeses, and had more lambs and kids than his pens could
 hold. they were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets,
 then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones80
 all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels,
 bowls, and milk pails into which milked, were swimming with whey.
 when they saw all this, my men begged to let them first steal some
 cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return,
 drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with
 them. it would have been indeed better if we had done so but i would
 not listen to them, for i wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope
 that might give present. when, however, we saw him my poor men
 found him ill to deal with.
 
“we lit fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of
 them, and then sat waiting till the cyclops should come in with his
 sheep. when came, brought in with him huge load of dry firewood
 to light the fire for his supper, and this flung with such noise
 on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far
 end of the cavern. meanwhile drove all the ewes inside, as well as
 the she-goats that was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams
 and he-goats, outside in the yards. then rolled huge stone to the
 mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled
 waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the
 doorway. when had so done sat down and milked his ewes and goats,
 all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young. he
 curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the
 other half poured into bowls that might drink it for his supper.
 when had got through with all his work, lit the fire, and then
 caught sight of us, whereon said:
 
“‘strangers, who are you? where do sail from? are you traders, or do
 you sail the as rovers, with your hands against every man, and
 every man’s hand against you?’
 
“we were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
 form, but i managed to say, ‘we are achaeans on our way home from troy,
 but by the will of jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far
 out of our course. we are the people of agamemnon, of atreus, who
 has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
 city and killing so many people. we therefore humbly pray you to show
 us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors
 may reasonably expect. may your excellency fear the wrath of heaven,
 for we are your suppliants, and jove takes all respectable travellers
 under his protection, for is the avenger of all suppliants and
 foreigners in distress.’
 
“to this gave but pitiless answer, ‘stranger,’ said he, ‘you
 are fool, or else you know nothing of this country. talk to me,
 indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? we cyclopes do
 not care about jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so
 much stronger than they. i shall not spare either yourself or your
 companions out of any regard for jove, unless i am in the humour for
 doing so. and now tell where you made your ship fast when you came
 on shore. was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the
 land?’
 
“he said this to draw out, but i was too cunning to be caught in
 that way, so i answered with lie; ‘neptune,’ said i, ‘sent my ship on
 to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. we were
 driven on to them from the open sea, but i and those who are with me
 escaped the jaws of death.’
 
“the cruel wretch vouchsafed not one word of answer, but with a
 sudden clutch gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
 upon the ground as though they had been puppies. their brains were shed
 upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. then tore
 them limb from limb and supped upon them. gobbled them up like a
 lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without
 leaving anything uneaten. as for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to
 heaven on seeing such horrid sight, for we did not know what else to
 do; but when the cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed
 down his meal of human flesh with drink of neat milk, stretched
 himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep.
 i was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into
 his vitals, but i reflected that if i did we should all certainly be
 lost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monster
 had put in front of the door. so we stayed sobbing and sighing where we
 were till morning came.
 
“when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, again lit
 his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let
 each have her own young one; as soon as had got through with all his
 work, clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
 morning’s meal. presently, with the utmost ease, rolled the stone
 away from the door and drove out his sheep, but at once put it back
 again—as easily as though were merely clapping the lid on to a
 quiver full of arrows. as soon as had done so shouted, and cried
 ‘shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so i
 was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself
 with glory.
 
“in the end i deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: the
 cyclops had great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it
 was of green olive wood, and had cut it intending to use it for a
 staff as soon as it should be dry. it was so huge that we could only
 compare it to the mast of twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
 burden, and able to venture out into open sea. i went up to this club
 and cut off about six feet of it; i then gave this piece to the men and
 told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
 and lastly i brought it to point myself, charring the end in the fire
 to make it harder. when i had done this i hid it under dung, which was
 lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of
 them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the
 monster’s eye while was asleep. the lot fell upon the very four whom
 i should have chosen, and i myself made five. in the evening the wretch
 came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—this
 time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; i
 suppose some fancy must have taken him, or god must have prompted him
 to do so. as soon as had put the stone back to its place against the
 door, sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and
 then let each have her own young one; when had got through with all
 this work, gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off
 them. so i went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my
 hands:
 
“‘look here, cyclops,’ said i, you have been eating great deal of
 man’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
 kind of liquor we had on board my ship. i was bringing it to you as a
 drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon and
 further on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and
 raving most intolerably. you ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can
 you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this
 way?’
 
“he then took the cup and drank. was so delighted with the taste of
 the wine that begged for another bowl full. ‘be so kind,’ he
 said, ‘as to give some more, and tell your name at once. i want
 to make you present that you will be glad to have. we have wine even
 in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but
 this drinks like nectar and ambrosia all in one.’
 
“i then gave him some more; three times did i fill the bowl for him,
 and three times did drain it without thought or heed; then, when i
 saw that the wine had got into his head, i said to him as plausibly as
 i could: ‘cyclops, you ask my name and i will tell it you; give me,
 therefore, the present you promised me; my name is noman; this is what
 my father and mother and my friends have always called me.’
 
“but the cruel wretch said, ‘then i will eat all noman’s comrades
 before noman himself, and will keep noman for the last. this is the
 present that i will make him.’
 
“as spoke reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
 his great neck hung heavily backwards and deep sleep took hold upon
 him. presently turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets
 of human flesh on which had been gorging, for was very drunk.
 then i thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and
 encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. when the
 wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, i drew it out of the
 fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had
 filled their hearts with courage. we drove the sharp end of the beam
 into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight i kept
 turning it round and round as though i were boring hole in ship’s
 plank with an auger, which two men with wheel and strap can keep on
 turning as long as they choose. even thus did we bore the red hot beam
 into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked
 it round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded
 his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the
 fire. as blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to
 temper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and it makes a
 great hiss as does so, even thus did the cyclops’ eye hiss round the
 beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. we
 ran away in fright, but plucked the beam all besmirched with gore
 from his eye, and hurled it from him in frenzy of rage and pain,
 shouting as did so to the other cyclopes who lived on the bleak
 headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave
 when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.
 
“‘what ails you, polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such noise,
 breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able
 to sleep? surely man is carrying off your sheep? surely man is
 trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’
 
“but polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘noman is killing
 by fraud; man is killing by force.’
 
“‘then,’ said they, ‘if man is attacking you, you must be ill; when
 jove makes people ill, there is help for it, and you had better pray
 to your father neptune.’
 
“then they went away, and i laughed inwardly at the success of my
 clever stratagem, but the cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,
 felt about with his hands till found the stone and took it from the
 door; then sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it
 to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for thought i might be
 foolish enough to attempt this.
 
“as for myself i kept on puzzling to think how i could best save my own
 life and those of my companions; i schemed and schemed, as one who
 knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. in
 the end i deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were
 well grown, and carried heavy black fleece, so i bound them
 noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which the
 wicked monster used to sleep. there was to be man under the middle
 sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there were
 three sheep to each man. as for myself there was ram finer than any
 of the others, so i caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in
 the thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece,
 face upwards, keeping firm hold on it all the time.
 
“thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but
 when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, the male sheep
 hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens
 waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
 master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they
 stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were
 underneath their bellies. as the ram was going out, last of all, heavy
 with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, polyphemus laid
 hold of it and said:
 
“‘my good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
 morning? you are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the
 mob with run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are
 the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. is
 it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because
 that wicked noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and
 blinded him? but i will have his life yet. if you could understand and
 talk, you would tell where the wretch is hiding, and i would dash
 his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. i should
 thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good noman has done
 me.’
 
“as spoke drove the ram outside, but when we were little way
 out from the cave and yards, i first got from under the ram’s belly,
 and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
 constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them
 down to the ship. the crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who
 had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the cyclops had killed.
 however, i made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to
 hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once
 and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote
 the grey with their oars. then, when i had got as far out as my
 voice would reach, i began to jeer at the cyclops.
 
“‘cyclops,’ said i, ‘you should have taken better measure of your man
 before eating up his comrades in your cave. you wretch, eat up your
 visitors in your own house? you might have known that your would
 find you out, and now jove and the other gods have punished you.’
 
“he got more and more furious as heard me, so tore the top from
 off high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it
 was within little of hitting the end of the rudder.81 the quaked
 as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us
 back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. but i
 snatched up long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men
 by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they
 laid out with will. when we had got twice as far as we were before, i
 was for jeering at the cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of
 to hold my tongue.
 
“‘do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savage
 creature further; has thrown one rock at us already which drove us
 back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of
 us; if had then heard any further sound of voices would have
 pounded our heads and our ship’s timbers into jelly with the rugged
 rocks would have heaved at us, for can throw them long way.’
 
“but i would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
 ‘cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
 spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior ulysses, of
 laertes, who lives in ithaca.’
 
“on this groaned, and cried out, ‘alas, alas, then the old prophecy
 about is coming true. there was prophet here, at one time, man
 both brave and of great stature, telemus of eurymus, who was an
 excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the cyclopes till he
 grew old; told that all this would happen to some day, and
 said i should lose my sight by the hand of ulysses. i have been all
 along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength,
 whereas turns out to be little insignificant weakling, who has
 managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of in my drink; come
 here, then, ulysses, that i may make you presents to show my
 hospitality, and urge neptune to help you forward on your journey—for
 neptune and i are father and son. he, if so will, shall heal me,
 which one else neither god nor man can do.’
 
“then i said, ‘i wish i could be as sure of killing you outright and
 sending you down to the house of hades, as i am that it will take more
 than neptune to cure that eye of yours.’
 
“on this lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
 saying, ‘hear me, great neptune; if i am indeed your own true begotten
 son, grant that ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if must
 get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
 after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man’s ship
 and find trouble in his house.’82
 
“thus did pray, and neptune heard his prayer. then picked up a
 rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
 prodigious force. it fell just short of the ship, but was within a
 little of hitting the end of the rudder. the quaked as the rock
 fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on
 our way towards the shore of the island.
 
“when at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
 ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our
 return. we ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the
 shore; we also landed the cyclops’ sheep, and divided them
 equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. as for
 the ram, my companions agreed that i should have it as an extra share;
 so i sacrificed it on the shore, and burned its thigh bones to
 jove, who is the lord of all. but heeded not my sacrifice, and only
 thought how might destroy both my ships and my comrades.
 
“thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
 our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on
 dark, we camped upon the beach. when the child of morning rosy-fingered
 dawn appeared, i bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. then they
 took their places and smote the grey with their oars; so we sailed
 on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
 had lost our comrades.
 



book x
 

aeolus, the laestrygones, circe.
 

“thence we went on to the aeolian island where lives aeolus of
 hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. it is an island that floats (as it
 were) upon the sea,83 iron bound with wall that girds it. now, aeolus
 has six daughters and six lusty sons, so made the sons marry the
 daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,
 feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. all day long
 the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats
 till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their
 well made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. these
 were the people among whom we had now come.
 
“aeolus entertained for whole month asking questions all the
 time about troy, the argive fleet, and the return of the achaeans. i
 told him exactly how everything had happened, and when i said i must
 go, and asked him to further on my way, made sort of
 difficulty, but set about doing so at once. moreover, flayed a
 prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which shut up
 in the hide as in sack—for jove had made him captain over the winds,
 and could stir or still each one of them according to his own
 pleasure. put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly
 with silver thread that not even breath of side-wind could blow
 from any quarter. the west wind which was fair for us did alone let
 blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through
 our own folly.
 
“nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native
 land showed on the horizon. we got so close in that we could see the
 stubble fires burning, and i, being then dead beat, fell into light
 sleep, for i had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we
 might get home the faster. on this the men fell to talking among
 themselves, and said i was bringing back gold and silver in the sack
 that aeolus had given me. ‘bless my heart,’ would one turn to his
 neighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends to
 whatever city or country may go. see what fine prizes is taking
 home from troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as has,
 come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now aeolus has
 given him ever so much more. quick—let us see what it all is, and how
 much gold and silver there is in the sack gave him.’
 
“thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. they loosed the sack,
 whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised storm that carried
 us weeping out to and away from our own country. then i awoke, and
 knew not whether to throw myself into the or to live on and make
 the best of it; but i bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the
 ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our
 fleet back to the aeolian island.
 
“when we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by
 the ships. immediately after dinner i took herald and one of my men
 and went straight to the house of aeolus, where i found him feasting
 with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the
 threshold. they were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘ulysses,
 what brings you here? what god has been ill-treating you? we took great
 pains to further you on your way home to ithaca, or wherever it was
 that you wanted to go to.’
 
“thus did they speak, but i answered sorrowfully, ‘my men have undone
 me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. my friends, mend this
 mischief, for you can if you will.’
 
“i spoke as movingly as i could, but they said nothing, till their
 father answered, ‘vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the
 island; him whom heaven hates will i in wise help. be off, for you
 come here as one abhorred of heaven.’ and with these words sent me
 sorrowing from his door.
 
“thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and
 fruitless rowing, for there was longer any wind to help them. six
 days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the
 rocky stronghold of lamus—telepylus, the city of the laestrygonians,
 where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]
 salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last
 answers the salute. in that country man who could do without sleep
 might earn double wages, one as herdsman of cattle, and another as a
 shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day.84
 
“when we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep
 cliffs, with narrow entrance between two headlands. my captains took
 all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for
 there was never so much as breath of wind inside, but it was always
 dead calm. i kept my own ship outside, and moored it to rock at the
 very end of the point; then i climbed high rock to reconnoitre, but
 could see sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising
 from the ground. so i sent two of my company with an attendant to find
 out what sort of people the inhabitants were.
 
“the men when they got on shore followed level road by which the
 people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till
 presently they met young woman who had come outside to fetch water,
 and who was daughter to laestrygonian named antiphates. she was going
 to the fountain artacia from which the people bring in their water, and
 when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of
 that country might be, and over what kind of people ruled; so she
 directed them to her father’s house, but when they got there they found
 his wife to be giantess as huge as mountain, and they were
 horrified at the sight of her.
 
“she at once called her husband antiphates from the place of assembly,
 and forthwith set about killing my men. snatched up one of them,
 and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other
 two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. but antiphates
 raised hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy laestrygonians
 sprang up from every quarter—ogres, not men. they threw vast rocks at
 us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and i heard the
 horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the
 death cries of my men, as the laestrygonians speared them like fishes
 and took them home to eat them. while they were thus killing my men
 within the harbour i drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and
 told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare like
 the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough
 when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at
 us. as for the others there was not one of them left.
 
“thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had
 lost our comrades, and came to the aeaean island, where circe lives—a
 great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician aeetes—for
 they are both children of the sun by perse, who is daughter to oceanus.
 we brought our ship into safe harbour without word, for some god
 guided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two
 nights, worn out in body and mind. when the morning of the third day
 came i took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to
 reconnoitre, and see if i could discover signs of human handiwork, or
 hear the sound of voices. climbing to the top of high look-out i
 espied the smoke of circe’s house rising upwards amid dense forest of
 trees, and when i saw this i doubted whether, having seen the smoke, i
 would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end i deemed it
 best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some
 of them instead of going myself.
 
“when i had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
 solitude, and sent fine antlered stag right into the middle of my
 path. was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
 river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as passed i struck him
 in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean
 through him, and lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of
 him. then i set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and
 laid it down; i also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them
 into fathom or so of good stout rope, with which i bound the four
 feet of the noble creature together; having so done i hung him round my
 neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag
 was much too big for to be able to carry him on my shoulder,
 steadying him with one hand. as i threw him down in front of the ship,
 i called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘look
 here my friends,’ said i, ‘we are not going to die so much before our
 time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have
 got something to eat and drink on board.’ on this they uncovered their
 heads upon the shore and admired the stag, for was indeed a
 splendid fellow. then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him
 sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.
 
“thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
 there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it
 came on dark, we camped upon the shore. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, i called council and said, ‘my friends,
 we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. we have no
 idea where the sun either sets or rises,85 so that we do not even know
 east from west. i see way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and
 find one. we are certainly on an island, for i went as high as i could
 this morning, and saw the reaching all round it to the horizon; it
 lies low, but towards the middle i saw smoke rising from out of thick
 forest of trees.’
 
“their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had
 been treated by the laestrygonian antiphates, and by the savage ogre
 polyphemus. they wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing
 to be got by crying, so i divided them into two companies and set a
 captain over each; i gave one company to eurylochus, while i took
 command of the other myself. then we cast lots in helmet, and the lot
 fell upon eurylochus; so set out with his twenty-two men, and they
 wept, as also did we who were left behind.
 
“when they reached circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, on
 site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. there
 were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor
 bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
 into subjection. they did not attack my men, but wagged their great
 tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against
 them.86 as hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming
 from dinner—for they know will bring them something—even so did
 these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the
 men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.
 presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as they
 stood there they could hear circe within, singing most beautifully as
 she worked at her loom, making web so fine, so soft, and of such
 dazzling colours as one but goddess could weave. on this polites,
 whom i valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘there
 is some one inside working at loom and singing most beautifully; the
 whole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is
 woman or goddess.’
 
“they called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them
 enter. they, thinking evil, followed her, all except eurylochus, who
 suspected mischief and staid outside. when she had got them into her
 house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them mess with
 cheese, honey, meal, and pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked
 poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she
 turned them into pigs by stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her
 pig-styes. they were like pigs—head, hair, and all, and they grunted
 just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they
 remembered everything.
 
“thus then were they shut up squealing, and circe threw them some
 acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but eurylochus hurried back to
 tell about the sad fate of our comrades. was so overcome with
 dismay that though tried to speak could find words to do so;
 his eyes filled with tears and could only sob and sigh, till at last
 we forced his story out of him, and told us what had happened to the
 others.
 
“‘we went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in the
 middle of it there was fine house built with cut stones in place
 that could be seen from far. there we found woman, or else she was a
 goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to
 her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and
 invited us in. the others did not suspect any mischief so they followed
 her into the house, but i staid where i was, for i thought there might
 be some treachery. from that moment i saw them more, for not one of
 them ever came out, though i sat long time watching for them.’
 
“then i took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; i also
 took my bow, and told eurylochus to come back with and shew the
 way. but laid hold of with both his hands and spoke piteously,
 saying, ‘sir, do not force to go with you, but let stay here, for
 i know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return
 alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with
 the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.’
 
“‘stay where you are, then,’ answered i, ‘eating and drinking at the
 ship, but i must go, for i am most urgently bound to do so.’
 
“with this i left the ship and went up inland. when i got through the
 charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress circe, i
 met mercury with his golden wand, disguised as young man in the
 hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
 face. came up to and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘my
 poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone
 and without knowing the way? your men are shut up in circe’s pigstyes,
 like so many wild boars in their lairs. you surely do not fancy that
 you can set them free? i can tell you that you will never get back and
 will have to stay there with the rest of them. but never mind, i will
 protect you and get you out of your difficulty. take this herb, which
 is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to circe’s
 house, it will be talisman to you against every kind of mischief.
 
“‘and i will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that circe will try
 to practice upon you. she will mix mess for you to drink, and she
 will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to
 charm you, for the virtue of the herb that i shall give you will
 prevent her spells from working. i will tell you all about it. when
 circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as
 though you were going to kill her. she will then be frightened, and
 will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank
 refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to take
 good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all
 the blessed gods that she will plot further mischief against you, or
 else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for
 nothing.’
 
“as spoke pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed what it
 was like. the root was black, while the flower was as white as milk;
 the gods call it moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods
 can do whatever they like.
 
“then mercury went back to high olympus passing over the wooded island;
 but i fared onward to the house of circe, and my heart was clouded with
 care as i walked along. when i got to the gates i stood there and
 called the goddess, and as soon as she heard she came down, opened
 the door, and asked to come in; so i followed her—much troubled in
 my mind. she set on richly decorated seat inlaid with silver,
 there was footstool also under my feet, and she mixed mess in a
 golden goblet for to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me
 mischief. when she had given it me, and i had drunk it without its
 charming me, she struck with her wand. ‘there now,’ she cried, ‘be
 off to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’
 
“but i rushed at her with my sword drawn as though i would kill her,
 whereon she fell with loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke
 piteously, saying, ‘who and whence are you? from what place and people
 have you come? how can it be that my drugs have power to charm you?
 never yet was any man able to stand so much as taste of the herb i
 gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than
 the bold hero ulysses, who mercury always said would come here some day
 with his ship while on his way home from troy; so be it then; sheathe
 your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to
 trust each other.’
 
“and i answered, ‘circe, how can you expect to be friendly with you
 when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? and now that you
 have got here myself, you mean mischief when you ask to go to
 bed with you, and will unman and make fit for nothing. i shall
 certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take
 your solemn oath to plot further harm against me.’
 
“so she swore at once as i had told her, and when she had completed her
 oath then i went to bed with her.
 
“meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their
 work. they are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the
 holy waters that run down into the sea. one of them spread fair
 purple cloth over seat, and laid carpet underneath it. another
 brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of
 gold. third mixed some sweet wine with water in silver bowl and put
 golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set
 it to boil in large cauldron over good fire which she had lighted.
 when the water in the cauldron was boiling,87 she poured cold into it
 till it was just as i liked it, and then she set in bath and began
 washing from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the
 tire and stiffness out of my limbs. as soon as she had done washing me
 and anointing with oil, she arrayed in good cloak and shirt and
 led to richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a
 footstool also under my feet. maid servant then brought water in a
 beautiful golden ewer and poured it into silver basin for to wash
 my hands, and she drew clean table beside me; an upper servant
 brought bread and offered many things of what there was in the
 house, and then circe bade eat, but i would not, and sat without
 heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.
 
“when circe saw sitting there without eating, and in great grief,
 she came to and said, ‘ulysses, why do you sit like that as though
 you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and
 drink? is it that you are still suspicious? you ought not to be, for i
 have already sworn solemnly that i will not hurt you.’
 
“and i said, ‘circe, man with any sense of what is right can think
 of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his
 friends free and let him see them. if you want to eat and drink, you
 must free my men and bring them to that i may see them with my own
 eyes.’
 
“when i had said this she went straight through the court with her wand
 in her hand and opened the pigstye doors. my men came out like so many
 prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and
 anointed each with second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad
 drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than
 they were before, and much taller and better looking. they knew at
 once, seized each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the
 whole house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, and
 circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to and said,
 ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, go back at once to the where you
 have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. then, hide all
 your ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with
 your men.’
 
“i agreed to this, so i went back to the shore, and found the men
 at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. when they saw the
 silly blubbering fellows began frisking round as calves break out
 and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be
 milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds
 with their lowing. they seemed as glad to see as though they had got
 back to their own rugged ithaca, where they had been born and bred.
 ‘sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see you back
 as though we had got safe home to ithaca; but tell us all about the
 fate of our comrades.’
 
“i spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘we must draw our ship on to
 the land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave;
 then come with all of you as fast as you can to circe’s house, where
 you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great
 abundance.’
 
“on this the men would have come with at once, but eurylochus tried
 to hold them back and said, ‘alas, poor wretches that we are, what will
 become of us? rush not on your ruin by going to the house of circe, who
 will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to
 keep guard over her house. remember how the cyclops treated us when our
 comrades went inside his cave, and ulysses with them. it was all
 through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.’
 
“when i heard him i was in two minds whether or to draw the keen
 blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his
 being near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and
 said, ‘sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the
 ship, but take the rest of us with you to circe’s house.’
 
“on this we all went inland, and eurylochus was not left behind after
 all, but came on too, for was frightened by the severe reprimand
 that i had given him.
 
“meanwhile circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind
 were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them
 woollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all
 comfortably at dinner in her house. as soon as the men saw each other
 face to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud
 till the whole palace rang again. thereon circe came up to and said,
 ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; i
 know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have
 fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so
 stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and
 hearty as you were when you left ithaca; for at present you are
 weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the
 hardships you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no
 more cheerfulness left in you.’
 
“thus did she speak and we assented. we stayed with circe for whole
 twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. but
 when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had
 come round, my men called apart and said, ‘sir, it is time you began
 to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your
 house and native country at all.’
 
“thus did they speak and i assented. thereon through the livelong day
 to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but
 when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down
 to sleep in the covered cloisters. i, however, after i had got into bed
 with circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what
 i had got to say. ‘circe,’ said i, ‘please to keep the promise you made
 about furthering on my homeward voyage. i want to get back and so
 do my men, they are always pestering with their complaints as soon
 as ever your back is turned.’
 
“and the goddess answered, ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, you shall
 none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is
 another journey which you have got to take before you can sail
 homewards. you must go to the house of hades and of dread proserpine to
 consult the ghost of the blind theban prophet teiresias, whose reason
 is still unshaken. to him alone has proserpine left his understanding
 even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.’
 
“i was dismayed when i heard this. i sat up in bed and wept, and would
 gladly have lived longer to see the light of the sun, but presently
 when i was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, i said, ‘and who
 shall guide upon this voyage—for the house of hades is port that
 ship can reach.’
 
“‘you will want guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set your
 white sails, sit quite still, and the north wind will blow you there of
 itself. when your ship has traversed the waters of oceanus, you will
 reach the fertile shore of proserpine’s country with its groves of tall
 poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your
 ship upon the shore of oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of
 hades. you will find it near the place where the rivers pyriphlegethon
 and cocytus (which is branch of the river styx) flow into acheron,
 and you will see rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run
 into one another.
 
“‘when you have reached this spot, as i now tell you, dig trench a
 cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a
 drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then
 wine, and in the third place water—sprinkling white barley meal over
 the whole. moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble
 ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to ithaca you will
 sacrifice barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the
 pyre with good things. more particularly you must promise that
 teiresias shall have black sheep all to himself, the finest in all
 your flocks.
 
“‘when you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer
 them ram and black ewe, bending their heads towards erebus; but
 yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the
 river. on this, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you must
 tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and
 offer them as burnt sacrifice with prayers to hades and to
 proserpine. then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any
 other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before teiresias
 shall have answered your questions. the seer will presently come to
 you, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are to make,
 and how you are to sail the so as to reach your home.’
 
“it was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me
 in my shirt and cloak. as for herself she threw beautiful light
 gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with golden girdle
 round her waist, and she covered her head with mantle. then i went
 about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to
 each of them man by man: ‘you must not lie sleeping here any longer,’
 said i to them, ‘we must be going, for circe has told all about it.’
 and on this they did as i bade them.
 
“even so, however, i did not get them away without misadventure. we had
 with us certain youth named elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or
 courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the
 rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. when heard the
 noise of the men bustling about, jumped up on sudden and forgot
 all about coming down by the main staircase, so tumbled right off
 the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of
 hades.
 
“when i had got the men together i said to them, ‘you think you are
 about to start home again, but circe has explained to that instead
 of this, we have got to go to the house of hades and proserpine to
 consult the ghost of the theban prophet teiresias.’
 
“the men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on
 the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend
 matters by crying. when we reached the shore, weeping and lamenting
 our fate, circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard
 by the ship. she passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,
 for who can see the comings and goings of god, if the god does not
 wish to be seen?
 



book xi
 

the visit to the dead.88
 

“then, when we had got down to the shore we drew our ship into the
 water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on
 board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.
 circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us fair wind that blew
 dead aft and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well
 filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear and let her
 go as the wind and helmsman headed her. all day long her sails were
 full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down
 and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the
 river oceanus, where lie the land and city of the cimmerians who live
 enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce
 neither at his rising nor as goes down again out of the heavens, but
 the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. when we got there
 we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the
 waters of oceanus till we came to the place of which circe had told us.
 
“here perimedes and eurylochus held the victims, while i drew my sword
 and dug the trench cubit each way. i made drink-offering to all the
 dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with
 water, and i sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying
 earnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when i
 got back to ithaca i would sacrifice barren heifer for them, the best
 i had, and would load the pyre with good things. i also particularly
 promised that teiresias should have black sheep to himself, the best
 in all my flocks. when i had prayed sufficiently to the dead, i cut the
 throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon
 the ghosts came trooping up from erebus—brides,89 young bachelors, old
 men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave
 men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched
 with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench
 with strange kind of screaming sound that made turn pale with
 fear. when i saw them coming i told the men to be quick and flay the
 carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and
 at the same time to repeat prayers to hades and to proserpine; but i
 sat where i was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor feckless
 ghosts come near the blood till teiresias should have answered my
 questions.
 
“the first ghost that came was that of my comrade elpenor, for had
 not yet been laid beneath the earth. we had left his body unwaked and
 unburied in circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do. i was
 very sorry for him, and cried when i saw him: ‘elpenor,’ said i, ‘how
 did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? you have got here
 on foot quicker than i have with my ship.’
 
“‘sir,’ answered with groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own
 unspeakable drunkenness. i was lying asleep on the top of circe’s
 house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase
 but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to
 the house of hades. and now i beseech you by all those whom you have
 left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father
 who brought you up when you were child, and by telemachus who is the
 one hope of your house, do what i shall now ask you. i know that when
 you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the aeaean
 island. do not go thence leaving unwaked and unburied behind you, or
 i may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn with whatever armour i
 have, build barrow for on the shore, that may tell people in
 days to come what poor unlucky fellow i was, and plant over my grave
 the oar i used to row with when i was yet alive and with my messmates.’
 and i said, ‘my poor fellow, i will do all that you have asked of me.’
 
“thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, i on the
 one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
 of my comrade saying all this to from the other side. then came the
 ghost of my dead mother anticlea, daughter to autolycus. i had left her
 alive when i set out for troy and was moved to tears when i saw her,
 but even so, for all my sorrow i would not let her come near the blood
 till i had asked my questions of teiresias.
 
“then came also the ghost of theban teiresias, with his golden sceptre
 in his hand. knew and said, ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, why,
 poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the
 dead in this sad place? stand back from the trench and withdraw your
 sword that i may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’
 
“so i drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when had drank of
 the blood began with his prophecy.
 
“‘you want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will
 make this hard for you. i do not think that you will escape the eye of
 neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
 blinded his son. still, after much suffering you may get home if you
 can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
 thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging
 to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. if you leave these
 flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet
 after much hardship reach ithaca; but if you harm them, then i forewarn
 you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. even though
 you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all
 your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your
 house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring
 your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to
 your wife.
 
“‘when you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
 after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you
 must take well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a
 country where the people have never heard of the and do not even
 mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and
 oars that are as the wings of ship. i will give you this certain
 token which cannot escape your notice. wayfarer will meet you and
 will say it must be winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
 shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a
 ram, bull, and boar to neptune.90 then go home and offer hecatombs
 to all the gods in heaven one after the other. as for yourself, death
 shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very
 gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people
 shall bless you. all that i have said will come true].’91
 
“‘this,’ i answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell and
 tell and tell true, i see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she
 is sitting by the blood without saying word, and though i am her own
 she does not remember and speak to me; tell me, sir, how i can
 make her know me.’
 
“‘that,’ said he, ‘i can soon do. any ghost that you let taste of the
 blood will talk with you like reasonable being, but if you do not let
 them have any blood they will go away again.’
 
“on this the ghost of teiresias went back to the house of hades, for
 his prophecyings had now been spoken, but i sat still where i was until
 my mother came up and tasted the blood. then she knew at once and
 spoke fondly to me, saying, ‘my son, how did you come down to this
 abode of darkness while you are still alive? it is hard thing for the
 living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and
 terrible waters, and there is oceanus, which man can cross on foot,
 but must have good ship to take him. are you all this time trying
 to find your way home from troy, and have you never yet got back to
 ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’
 
“‘mother,’ said i, ‘i was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
 the theban prophet teiresias. i have never yet been near the achaean
 land nor set foot on my native country, and i have had nothing but one
 long series of misfortunes from the very first day that i set out with
 agamemnon for ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the trojans.
 but tell me, and tell true, in what way did you die? did you have a
 long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you gentle easy passage to
 eternity? tell also about my father, and the whom i left behind
 me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold
 of it, who thinks that i shall not return to claim it? tell again
 what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with
 my and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she
 could and married again?’
 
“my mother answered, ‘your wife still remains in your house, but she is
 in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
 and day. one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
 telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. has to entertain
 largely, as of course must, considering his position as a
 magistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at his
 old place in the country and never goes near the town. has no
 comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter sleeps on the floor in
 front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in
 summer, when the warm weather comes on again, lies out in the
 vineyard on bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground. he
 grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more
 and more as grows older. as for my own end it was in this wise:
 heaven did not take swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was
 i attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out
 and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force
 of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93
 
“then i tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.
 thrice i sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
 time she flitted from my embrace as it were dream or phantom, and
 being touched to the quick i said to her, ‘mother, why do you not stay
 still when i would embrace you? if we could throw our arms around one
 another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
 the house of hades; does proserpine want to lay still further load of
 grief upon by mocking with phantom only?’
 
“‘my son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
 proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when
 they are dead. the sinews longer hold the flesh and bones together;
 these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has
 left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were dream. now,
 however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all
 these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’
 
“thus did we converse, and anon proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
 wives and daughters of all the most famous men. they gathered in crowds
 about the blood, and i considered how i might question them severally.
 in the end i deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
 hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
 once. so they came up one after the other, and each one as i questioned
 her told her race and lineage.
 
“the first i saw was tyro. she was daughter of salmoneus and wife of
 cretheus the of aeolus.94 she fell in love with the river enipeus
 who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. once when she
 was taking walk by his side as usual, neptune, disguised as her
 lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and huge blue wave
 arched itself like mountain over them to hide both woman and god,
 whereon loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in deep slumber.
 when the god had accomplished the deed of love, took her hand in his
 own and said, ‘tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods
 are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve
 months. take great care of them. i am neptune, so now go home, but hold
 your tongue and do not tell any one.’
 
“then dived under the sea, and she in due course bore pelias and
 neleus, who both of them served jove with all their might. pelias was a
 great breeder of sheep and lived in iolcus, but the other lived in
 pylos. the rest of her children were by cretheus, namely, aeson,
 pheres, and amythaon, who was mighty warrior and charioteer.
 
“next to her i saw antiope, daughter to asopus, who could boast of
 having slept in the arms of even jove himself, and who bore him two
 sons amphion and zethus. these founded thebes with its seven gates, and
 built wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not
 hold thebes till they had walled it.
 
“then i saw alcmena, the wife of amphitryon, who also bore to jove
 indomitable hercules; and megara who was daughter to great king creon,
 and married the redoubtable of amphitryon.
 
“i also saw fair epicaste mother of king oedipodes whose awful lot it
 was to marry her own without suspecting it. married her after
 having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to
 the world; whereon remained king of thebes, in great grief for the
 spite the gods had borne him; but epicaste went to the house of the
 mighty jailor hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging
 spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother—to his ruing bitterly
 thereafter.
 
“then i saw chloris, whom neleus married for her beauty, having given
 priceless presents for her. she was youngest daughter to amphion of
 iasus and king of minyan orchomenus, and was queen in pylos. she bore
 nestor, chromius, and periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
 lovely woman pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but neleus
 would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of iphicles from
 the grazing grounds of phylace, and this was hard task. the only man
 who would undertake to raid them was certain excellent seer,95 but
 the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle
 caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when full year had
 passed and the same season came round again, iphicles set him at
 liberty, after had expounded all the oracles of heaven. thus, then,
 was the will of jove accomplished.
 
“and i saw leda the wife of tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
 castor breaker of horses, and pollux the mighty boxer. both these
 heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a
 special dispensation of jove, they die and come to life again, each one
 of them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of
 gods.
 
“after her i saw iphimedeia wife of aloeus who boasted the embrace of
 neptune. she bore two sons otus and ephialtes, but both were short
 lived. they were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
 and the best looking, orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
 were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. they
 threatened to make war with the gods in olympus, and tried to set mount
 ossa on the top of mount olympus, and mount pelion on the top of ossa,
 that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if
 they had been grown up, but apollo, of leto, killed both of them,
 before they had got so much as sign of hair upon their cheeks or
 chin.
 
“then i saw phaedra, and procris, and fair ariadne daughter of the
 magician minos, whom theseus was carrying off from crete to athens, but
 did not enjoy her, for before could do so diana killed her in the
 island of dia on account of what bacchus had said against her.
 
“i also saw maera and clymene and hateful eriphyle, who sold her own
 husband for gold. but it would take all night if i were to name
 every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom i saw, and
 it is time for to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or
 here. as for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it.”
 
here ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
 throughout the covered cloister. then arete said to them:—
 
“what do you think of this man, phaeacians? is not tall and good
 looking, and is not clever? true, is my own guest, but all of you
 share in the distinction. do not be in hurry to send him away, nor
 niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need,
 for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance.”
 
then spoke the aged hero echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
 them, “my friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to us
 is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;
 but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with king
 alcinous.”
 
“the thing shall be done,” exclaimed alcinous, “as surely as i still
 live and reign over the phaeacians. our guest is indeed very anxious to
 get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
 by which time i shall be able to get together the whole sum that i mean
 to give him. as regards his escort it will be matter for you all, and
 mine above all others as the chief person among you.”
 
and ulysses answered, “king alcinous, if you were to bid to stay
 here for whole twelve months, and then speed on my way, loaded
 with your noble gifts, i should obey you gladly and it would redound
 greatly to my advantage, for i should return fuller-handed to my own
 people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me
 when i get back to ithaca.”
 
“ulysses,” replied alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any idea
 that you are charlatan or swindler. i know there are many people
 going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see
 through them, but there is style about your language which assures me
 of your good disposition. moreover you have told the story of your own
 misfortunes, and those of the argives, as though you were practiced
 bard; but tell me, and tell true, whether you saw any of the mighty
 heroes who went to troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
 there. the evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed
 time—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for i could stay here
 listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell
 us of your adventures.”
 
“alcinous,” answered ulysses, “there is time for making speeches, and
 time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, i will not
 refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades
 who did not fall fighting with the trojans, but perished on their
 return, through the treachery of wicked woman.
 
“when proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the
 ghost of agamemnon of atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by
 those who had perished with him in the house of aegisthus. as soon as
 had tasted the blood, knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out
 his arms towards to embrace me; but had strength nor substance
 any more, and i too wept and pitied him as i beheld him. ‘how did you
 come by your death,’ said i, ‘king agamemnon? did neptune raise his
 winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies
 make an end of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or
 sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wives
 and city?’
 
“‘ulysses,’ answered, ‘noble of laertes, i was not lost at sea
 in any storm of neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch upon the
 mainland, but aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of between
 them. asked to his house, feasted me, and then butchered most
 miserably as though i were fat beast in slaughter house, while all
 around my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding
 breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. you
 must have seen numbers of men killed either in general engagement, or
 in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the
 way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
 loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. i
 heard priam’s daughter cassandra scream as clytemnestra killed her
 close beside me. i lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body,
 and raised my hands to kill the slut of murderess, but she slipped
 away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when i was
 dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as
 woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. fancy
 murdering her own husband! i thought i was going to be welcomed home by
 my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought
 disgrace on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the good
 ones.’
 
“and i said, ‘in truth jove has hated the house of atreus from first to
 last in the matter of their women’s counsels. see how many of us fell
 for helen’s sake, and now it seems that clytemnestra hatched mischief
 against you too during your absence.’
 
“‘be sure, therefore,’ continued agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendly
 even with your own wife. do not tell her all that you know perfectly
 well yourself. tell her part only, and keep your own counsel about
 the rest. not that your wife, ulysses, is likely to murder you, for
 penelope is very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. we
 left her young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for
 troy. this child doubt is now grown up happily to man’s estate,96
 and and his father will have joyful meeting and embrace one
 another as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not
 even allow the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed ere i
 could do so. furthermore i say—and lay my saying to your heart—do not
 tell people when you are bringing your ship to ithaca, but steal a
 march upon them, for after all this there is trusting women. but now
 tell me, and tell true, can you give any news of my orestes?
 is in orchomenus, or at pylos, or is at sparta with menelaus—for
 i presume that is still living.’
 
“and i said, ‘agamemnon, why do you ask me? i do not know whether your
 is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not
 know.’
 
“as we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the
 ghost of achilles came up to us with patroclus, antilochus, and ajax
 who was the finest and goodliest man of all the danaans after the son
 of peleus. the fleet descendant of aeacus knew and spoke piteously,
 saying, ‘ulysses, noble of laertes, what deed of daring will you
 undertake next, that you venture down to the house of hades among us
 silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour more?’
 
“and i said, ‘achilles, of peleus, foremost champion of the
 achaeans, i came to consult teiresias, and see if could advise me
 about my return home to ithaca, for i have never yet been able to get
 near the achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
 in trouble all the time. as for you, achilles, one was ever yet so
 fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by
 all us argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you
 are great prince among the dead. do not, therefore, take it so much
 to heart even if you are dead.’
 
“‘say not word,’ answered, ‘in death’s favour; i would rather be a
 paid servant in poor man’s house and be above ground than king of
 kings among the dead. but give news about my son; is gone to the
 wars and will be great soldier, or is this not so? tell also if
 you have heard anything about my father peleus—does still rule among
 the myrmidons, or do they show him respect throughout hellas and
 phthia now that is old and his limbs fail him? could i but stand by
 his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that i had when i
 killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of troy—could i but be as
 i then was and go even for short time to my father’s house, any one
 who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’
 
“‘i have heard nothing,’ i answered, ‘of peleus, but i can tell you all
 about your neoptolemus, for i took him in my own ship from scyros
 with the achaeans. in our councils of war before troy was always
 first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. nestor and i were the
 only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
 plain of troy, would never remain with the body of his men, but
 would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. many man
 did kill in battle—i cannot name every single one of those whom he
 slew while fighting on the side of the argives, but will only say how
 killed that valiant hero eurypylus of telephus, who was the
 handsomest man i ever saw except memnon; many others also of the
 ceteians fell around him by reason of woman’s bribes. moreover, when
 all the bravest of the argives went inside the horse that epeus had
 made, and it was left to to settle when we should either open the
 door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and
 chief men among the danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every
 limb, i never once saw him turn pale nor wipe tear from his cheek; he
 was all the time urging to break out from the horse—grasping the
 handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury
 against the foe. yet when we had sacked the city of priam got his
 handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the
 fortune of war) without wound upon him, neither from thrown spear
 nor in close combat, for the rage of mars is matter of great chance.’
 
“when i had told him this, the ghost of achilles strode off across a
 meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what i had said concerning the
 prowess of his son.
 
“the ghosts of other dead men stood near and told each his own
 melancholy tale; but that of ajax of telamon alone held aloof—still
 angry with for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour
 of achilles. thetis had offered it as prize, but the trojan prisoners
 and minerva were the judges. would that i had never gained the day in
 such contest, for it cost the life of ajax, who was foremost of all
 the danaans after the of peleus, alike in stature and prowess.
 
“when i saw him i tried to pacify him and said, ‘ajax, will you not
 forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
 hateful armour still rankle with you? it cost us argives dear enough to
 lose such tower of strength as you were to us. we mourned you as much
 as we mourned achilles of peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid
 on anything but on the spite which jove bore against the danaans, for
 it was this that made him counsel your destruction—come hither,
 therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what i can
 tell you.’
 
“he would not answer, but turned away to erebus and to the other
 ghosts; nevertheless, i should have made him talk to in spite of his
 being so angry, or i should have gone on talking to him,97 only that
 there were still others among the dead whom i desired to see.
 
“then i saw minos of jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
 sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
 and standing round him in the spacious house of hades, to learn his
 sentences upon them.
 
“after him i saw huge orion in meadow full of asphodel driving the
 ghosts of the wild beasts that had killed upon the mountains, and he
 had great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.
 
“and i saw tityus of gaia stretched upon the plain and covering
 some nine acres of ground. two vultures on either side of him were
 digging their beaks into his liver, and kept on trying to beat them
 off with his hands, but could not; for had violated jove’s mistress
 leto as she was going through panopeus on her way to pytho.
 
“i saw also the dreadful fate of tantalus, who stood in lake that
 reached his chin; was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
 reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it
 dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parched
 by the spite of heaven. there were tall trees, moreover, that shed
 their fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and
 juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to
 take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.
 
“and i saw sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
 with both his hands. with hands and feet tried to roll it up to the
 top of the hill, but always, just before could roll it over on to
 the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless
 stone98 would come thundering down again on to the plain. then would
 begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and
 the steam rose after him.
 
“after him i saw mighty hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he
 is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely hebe to wife,
 who is daughter of jove and juno. the ghosts were screaming round him
 like scared birds flying all whithers. looked black as night with
 his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around
 as though ever on the point of taking aim. about his breast there was a
 wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears,
 wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle,
 and death. the man who made that belt, do what might, would never be
 able to make another like it. hercules knew at once when saw me,
 and spoke piteously, saying, ‘my poor ulysses, noble of laertes,
 are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that i did when i was
 above ground? i was of jove, but i went through an infinity of
 suffering, for i became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a low
 fellow who set all manner of labours. once sent here to fetch
 the hell-hound—for did not think could find anything harder for
 than this, but i got the hound out of hades and brought him to him,
 for mercury and minerva helped me.’
 
“on this hercules went down again into the house of hades, but i stayed
 where i was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
 and i should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom i
 would fain have seen—theseus and pirithous—glorious children of the
 gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round and uttered such
 appalling cries, that i was panic stricken lest proserpine should send
 up from the house of hades the head of that awful monster gorgon. on
 this i hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at
 once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
 whereon the ship went down the stream of the river oceanus. we had to
 row at first, but presently fair wind sprang up.
 



book xii
 

the sirens, scylla and charybdis, the cattle of the sun.
 

“after we were clear of the river oceanus, and had got out into the
 open sea, we went on till we reached the aeaean island where there is
 dawn and sun-rise as in other places. we then drew our ship on to the
 sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and
 waited till day should break.
 
“then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, i sent
 some men to circe’s house to fetch the body of elpenor. we cut firewood
 from wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we
 had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. when
 his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised cairn, set a
 stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that had
 been used to row with.
 
“while we were doing all this, circe, who knew that we had got back
 from the house of hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she
 could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and
 wine. then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘you have done bold
 thing in going down alive to the house of hades, and you will have died
 twice, to other people’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the
 day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow
 morning. in the meantime i will tell ulysses about your course, and
 will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from
 misadventure either by land or sea.’
 
“we agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day
 to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on
 dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the
 ship. then circe took by the hand and bade be seated away from
 the others, while she reclined by my side and asked all about our
 adventures.
 
“‘so far so good,’ said she, when i had ended my story, ‘and now pay
 attention to what i am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, will
 recall it to your recollection. first you will come to the sirens who
 enchant all who come near them. if any one unwarily draws in too close
 and hears the singing of the sirens, his wife and children will never
 welcome him home again, for they sit in green field and warble him to
 death with the sweetness of their song. there is great heap of dead
 men’s bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.
 therefore pass these sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax that
 none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you
 may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on cross piece half
 way up the mast,99 and they must lash the rope’s ends to the mast
 itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. if you beg and
 pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.
 
“‘when your crew have taken you past these sirens, i cannot give you
 coherent directions100 as to which of two courses you are to take; i
 will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them
 for yourself. on the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against
 which the deep blue waves of amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the
 blessed gods call these rocks the wanderers. here not even bird may
 pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to father jove,
 but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and father jove has
 to send another to make up their number; ship that ever yet came to
 these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire
 are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. the only
 vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous argo on her way
 from the house of aetes, and she too would have gone against these
 great rocks, only that juno piloted her past them for the love she bore
 to jason.
 
“‘of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a
 dark cloud. this never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not
 even in summer and early autumn. man though had twenty hands and
 twenty feet could get foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer
 up, as smooth as though it had been polished. in the middle of it there
 is large cavern, looking west and turned towards erebus; you must
 take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the
 stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. inside it scylla sits and
 yelps with voice that you might take to be that of young hound, but
 in truth she is dreadful monster and one—not even god—could face
 her without being terror-struck. she has twelve mis-shapen feet, and
 six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck
 she has frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very
 close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in moment,
 and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and
 peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any
 larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which
 amphitrite teems. ship ever yet got past her without losing some
 men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off man in
 each mouth.
 
“‘you will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close
 together that there is not more than bow-shot between them. [a large
 fig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
 whirlpool of charybdis. three times in the day does she vomit forth her
 waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not
 there when she is sucking, for if you are, neptune himself could not
 save you; you must hug the scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
 can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’
 
“‘is there way,’ said i, ‘of escaping charybdis, and at the same
 time keeping scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’
 
“‘you dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to
 fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even
 by the immortals. for scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
 extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. there is help for it; your best
 chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle
 about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you
 with second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of
 your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out
 lustily to crataiis who is scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will then
 stop her from making second raid upon you.’
 
“‘you will now come to the thrinacian island, and here you will see
 many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven
 herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
 flock. they do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they
 are tended by the goddesses phaethusa and lampetie, who are children of
 the sun-god hyperion by neaera. their mother when she had borne them
 and had done suckling them sent them to the thrinacian island, which
 was long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocks
 and herds. if you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but
 getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach ithaca; but if you
 harm them, then i forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and
 of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will
 return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’
 
“here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
 whereon she returned inland. i then went on board and told my men to
 loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took
 their places, and began to smite the grey with their oars.
 presently the great and cunning goddess circe befriended us with fair
 wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails
 well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, and
 let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.
 
“then, being much troubled in mind, i said to my men, ‘my friends, it
 is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies
 that circe has made me, i will therefore tell you about them, so that
 whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. first she said
 we were to keep clear of the sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully
 in field of flowers; but she said i might hear them myself so long as
 one else did. therefore, take and bind to the crosspiece half
 way up the mast; bind as i stand upright, with bond so fast that i
 cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mast
 itself. if i beg and pray you to set free, then bind more tightly
 still.’
 
“i had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached
 the island of the two sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.
 then all of sudden it fell dead calm; there was not breath of wind
 nor ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed
 them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam
 they raised in rowing. meanwhile i look large wheel of wax and cut it
 up small with my sword. then i kneaded the wax in my strong hands till
 it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of
 the sun-god of hyperion. then i stopped the ears of all my men, and
 they bound hands and feet to the mast as i stood upright on the
 cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. when we had got within
 earshot of the land, and the ship was going at good rate, the sirens
 saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.
 
“‘come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned ulysses, honour to the achaean name,
 and listen to our two voices. one ever sailed past us without
 staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and who listens
 will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the
 ills that the gods laid upon the argives and trojans before troy, and
 can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’
 
“they sang these words most musically, and as i longed to hear them
 further i made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me
 free; but they quickened their stroke, and eurylochus and perimedes
 bound with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of
 the sirens’ voices. then my men took the wax from their ears and
 unbound me.
 
“immediately after we had got past the island i saw great wave from
 which spray was rising, and i heard loud roaring sound. the men were
 so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea
 resounded with the rushing of the waters,103 but the ship stayed where
 it was, for the men had left off rowing. i went round, therefore, and
 exhorted them man by man not to lose heart.
 
“‘my friends,’ said i, ‘this is not the first time that we have been in
 danger, and we are in nothing like so bad case as when the cyclops
 shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved
 us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. now,
 therefore, let us all do as i say, trust in jove and row on with might
 and main. as for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them,
 for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming
 rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over
 yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’
 
“so they did as i told them; but i said nothing about the awful monster
 scylla, for i knew the men would not go on rowing if i did, but would
 huddle together in the hold. in one thing only did i disobey circe’s
 strict instructions—i put on my armour. then seizing two strong spears
 i took my stand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that i expected
 first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much
 harm; but i could not make her out anywhere, though i strained my eyes
 with looking the gloomy rock all over and over.
 
“then we entered the straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand
 was scylla, and on the other dread charybdis kept sucking up the salt
 water. as she vomited it up, it was like the water in cauldron when
 it is boiling over upon great fire, and the spray reached the top of
 the rocks on either side. when she began to suck again, we could see
 the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made deafening
 sound as it broke against the rocks. we could see the bottom of the
 whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wits
 ends for fear. while we were taken up with this, and were expecting
 each moment to be our last, scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and
 snatched up my six best men. i was looking at once after both ship and
 men, and in moment i saw their hands and feet ever so high above me,
 struggling in the air as scylla was carrying them off, and i heard them
 call out my name in one last despairing cry. as fisherman, seated,
 spear in hand, upon some jutting rock104 throws bait into the water to
 deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox’s horn with
 which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he
 catches them one by one—even so did scylla land these panting creatures
 on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they
 screamed and stretched out their hands to in their mortal agony.
 this was the most sickening sight that i saw throughout all my voyages.
 
“when we had passed the [wandering] rocks, with scylla and terrible
 charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the
 goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun hyperion. while still at
 in my ship i could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the
 yards, and the sheep bleating. then i remembered what the blind theban
 prophet teiresias had told me, and how carefully aeaean circe had
 warned to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. so being much
 troubled i said to the men, ‘my men, i know you are hard pressed, but
 listen while i tell you the prophecy that teiresias made me, and how
 carefully aeaean circe warned to shun the island of the blessed
 sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.
 head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’
 
“the men were in despair at this, and eurylochus at once gave an
 insolent answer. ‘ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are very
 strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron,
 and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you
 will not let them land and cook themselves good supper upon this
 island, but bid them put out to and go faring fruitlessly on
 through the watches of the flying night. it is by night that the winds
 blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one of
 those sudden squalls spring up from south west or west, which so often
 wreck vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? now,
 therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper here
 hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put
 out to sea.’
 
“thus spoke eurylochus, and the men approved his words. i saw that
 heaven meant us mischief and said, ‘you force to yield, for you
 are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his
 solemn oath that if meet with herd of cattle or large flock of
 sheep, will not be so mad as to kill single head of either, but
 will be satisfied with the food that circe has given us.’
 
“they all swore as i bade them, and when they had completed their oath
 we made the ship fast in harbour that was near stream of fresh
 water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. as soon as
 they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their
 poor comrades whom scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them
 weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into sound sleep.
 
“in the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their
 places, jove raised great gale of wind that flew hurricane so that
 land and were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out
 of the heavens. when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn,
 appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into cave wherein
 the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and i called the men
 together in council.
 
“‘my friends,’ said i, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let us
 mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it;
 for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives
 ear to everything.’ and again they promised that they would obey.
 
“for whole month the wind blew steadily from the south, and there was
 other wind, but only south and east.105 as long as corn and wine
 held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,
 however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to
 go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking
 whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. one
 day, therefore, i went up inland that i might pray heaven to show me
 some means of getting away. when i had gone far enough to be clear of
 all my men, and had found place that was well sheltered from the
 wind, i washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in olympus till by
 and by they sent off into sweet sleep.
 
“meanwhile eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘listen
 to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. all deaths are bad enough but there
 is none so bad as famine. why should not we drive in the best of these
 cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? if we ever get
 back to ithaca, we can build fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it
 with every kind of ornament; if, however, is determined to sink our
 ship out of revenge for these horned cattle, and the other gods are of
 the same mind, i for one would rather drink salt water once for all and
 have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such desert
 island as this is.’
 
“thus spoke eurylochus, and the men approved his words. now the cattle,
 so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men,
 therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them
 saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of
 barley-meal, for there was barley left. when they had done praying
 they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the
 thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some
 pieces of raw meat on top of them. they had wine with which to make
 drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept
 pouring on little water from time to time while the inward meats were
 being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had
 tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces
 upon the spits.
 
“by this time my deep sleep had left me, and i turned back to the ship
 and to the shore. as i drew near i began to smell hot roast meat,
 so i groaned out prayer to the immortal gods. ‘father jove,’ i
 exclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you
 have done cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me;
 see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’
 
“meanwhile lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had
 been killing his cows, whereon flew into great rage, and said to
 the immortals, ‘father jove, and all you other gods who live in
 everlasting bliss, i must have vengeance on the crew of ulysses’ ship:
 they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing i
 loved to look upon, whether i was going up heaven or down again. if
 they do not square accounts with about my cows, i will go down to
 hades and shine there among the dead.’
 
“‘sun,’ said jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over
 the fruitful earth. i will shiver their ship into little pieces with a
 bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’
 
“i was told all this by calypso, who said she had heard it from the
 mouth of mercury.
 
“as soon as i got down to my ship and to the shore i rebuked each
 one of the men separately, but we could see way out of it, for the
 cows were dead already. and indeed the gods began at once to show signs
 and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and
 the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether
 cooked or raw, kept on making noise just as cows do.
 
“for six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon
 them, but when jove the of saturn had added seventh day, the fury
 of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts,
 spread sail, and put out to sea. as soon as we were well away from the
 island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the of saturn raised
 black cloud over our ship, and the grew dark beneath it. we did
 not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by a
 terrific squall from the west that snapped the forestays of the mast so
 that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the bottom
 of the vessel. the mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the
 ship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and
 fell overboard as though were diving, with more life left in
 him.
 
“then jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and
 round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck
 it. the men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water
 round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently
 deprived them of all chance of getting home again.
 
“i stuck to the ship till the knocked her sides from her keel
 (which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the
 direction of the keel; but there was backstay of stout ox-thong still
 hanging about it, and with this i lashed the mast and keel together,
 and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to
 take me.
 
“[the gale from the west had now spent its force, and the wind got into
 the south again, which frightened lest i should be taken back to the
 terrible whirlpool of charybdis. this indeed was what actually
 happened, for i was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise
 had reached the rock of scylla, and the whirlpool. she was then sucking
 down the salt water,106 but i was carried aloft toward the fig
 tree, which i caught hold of and clung on to like bat. i could not
 plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a
 long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too
 high, too vast, and too far apart for to reach them; so i hung
 patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft
 again—and very long while it seemed. jury-man is not more glad to
 get home to supper, after having been long detained in court by
 troublesome cases, than i was to see my raft beginning to work its way
 out of the whirlpool again. at last i let go with my hands and feet,
 and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to which i then got,
 and began to row with my hands. as for scylla, the father of gods and
 men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise i should have
 certainly been lost.107
 
“hence i was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the
 gods stranded on the ogygian island, where dwells the great and
 powerful goddess calypso. she took in and was kind to me, but i need
 say more about this, for i told you and your noble wife all about it
 yesterday, and i hate saying the same thing over and over again.”
 



book xiii
 

ulysses leaves scheria and returns to ithaca.
 

thus did speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
 cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently alcinous
 began to speak.
 
“ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house i doubt not you
 will get home without further misadventure matter how much you have
 suffered in the past. to you others, however, who come here night after
 night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, i would insist
 as follows. our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought
 gold,108 and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;
 let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a
 large tripod and cauldron. we will recoup ourselves by the levy of a
 general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the
 burden of such handsome present.”
 
every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his
 own abode. when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared they
 hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.
 alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the
 ship’s benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers.
 then they went to the house of alcinous to get dinner, and he
 sacrificed bull for them in honour of jove who is the lord of all.
 they set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which
 the inspired bard, demodocus, who was favourite with every one, sang
 to them; but ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as
 though to hasten his setting, for was longing to be on his way. as
 one who has been all day ploughing fallow field with couple of oxen
 keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he
 may go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so
 did ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and at once said to the
 phaeacians, addressing himself more particularly to king alcinous:
 
“sir, and all of you, farewell. make your drink-offerings and send me
 on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving
 an escort, and making presents, which heaven grant that i may
 turn to good account; may i find my admirable wife living in peace
 among friends,109 and may you whom i leave behind give satisfaction
 to your wives and children;110 may heaven vouchsafe you every good
 grace, and may evil thing come among your people.”
 
thus did speak. his hearers all of them approved his saying and
 agreed that should have his escort inasmuch as had spoken
 reasonably. alcinous therefore said to his servant, “pontonous, mix
 some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer prayer to
 father jove, and speed our guest upon his way.”
 
pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others
 each from his own seat made drink-offering to the blessed gods that
 live in heaven, but ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands
 of queen arete.
 
“farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age and
 death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. i now take
 my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and
 with king alcinous.”
 
as spoke crossed the threshold, and alcinous sent man to
 conduct him to his ship and to the shore. arete also sent some
 maidservants with him—one with clean shirt and cloak, another to
 carry his strong box, and third with corn and wine. when they got to
 the water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with
 all the meat and drink; but for ulysses they spread rug and linen
 sheet on deck that might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship.
 then too went on board and lay down without word, but the crew
 took every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone
 to which it had been bound. thereon, when they began rowing out to sea,
 ulysses fell into deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.111
 
the ship bounded forward on her way as four in hand chariot flies
 over the course when the horses feel the whip. her prow curvetted as it
 were the neck of stallion, and great wave of dark blue water
 seethed in her wake. she held steadily on her course, and even a
 falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. thus,
 then, she cut her way through the water, carrying one who was as
 cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of
 all that had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves
 of the weary sea.
 
when the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show,
 the ship drew near to land.112 now there is in ithaca haven of the
 old merman phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line
 of the and shut the harbour in. these shelter it from the storms of
 wind and that rage outside, so that, when once within it, ship
 may lie without being even moored. at the head of this harbour there is
 large olive tree, and at great distance fine overarching cavern
 sacred to the nymphs who are called naiads.113 there are mixing bowls
 within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. moreover,
 there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of
 purple—very curious to see—and at all times there is water within
 it. it has two entrances, one facing north by which mortals can go down
 into the cave, while the other comes from the south and is more
 mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken
 by the gods.
 
into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the
 place.114 she had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length
 on to the shore;115 when, however, they had landed, the first thing
 they did was to lift ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the
 ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. then they took
 out the presents which minerva had persuaded the phaeacians to give him
 when was setting out on his voyage homewards. they put these all
 together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear
 some passer by116 might come and steal them before ulysses awoke; and
 then they made the best of their way home again.
 
but neptune did not forget the threats with which had already
 threatened ulysses, so took counsel with jove. “father jove,” said
 he, “i shall longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods,
 if mortals like the phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show
 such small regard for me. i said i would let ulysses get home when he
 had suffered sufficiently. i did not say that should never get home
 at all, for i knew you had already nodded your head about it, and
 promised that should do so; but now they have brought him in ship
 fast asleep and have landed him in ithaca after loading him with more
 magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than would ever
 have brought back from troy, if had had his share of the spoil and
 got home without misadventure.”
 
and jove answered, “what, lord of the earthquake, are you talking
 about? the gods are by means wanting in respect for you. it would be
 monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. as
 regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and
 treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal
 with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please.”
 
“i should have done so at once,” replied neptune, “if i were not
 anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, i
 should like to wreck the phaeacian ship as it is returning from its
 escort. this will stop them from escorting people in future; and i
 should also like to bury their city under huge mountain.”
 
“my good friend,” answered jove, “i should recommend you at the very
 moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,
 to turn it into rock near the land and looking like ship. this will
 astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the
 mountain.”
 
when earth-encircling neptune heard this went to scheria where the
 phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid
 way, had got close in. then went up to it, turned it into stone, and
 drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.
 after this went away.
 
the phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn
 towards his neighbour, saying, “bless my heart, who is it that can have
 rooted the ship in the just as she was getting into port? we could
 see the whole of her only moment ago.”
 
this was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and alcinous
 said, “i remember now the old prophecy of my father. said that
 neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the
 sea, and would one day wreck phaeacian ship as it was returning from
 an escort, and bury our city under high mountain. this was what my
 old father used to say, and now it is all coming true.117 now therefore
 let us all do as i say; in the first place we must leave off giving
 people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice
 twelve picked bulls to neptune that may have mercy upon us, and not
 bury our city under the high mountain.” when the people heard this they
 were afraid and got ready the bulls.
 
thus did the chiefs and rulers of the phaeacians pray to king neptune,
 standing round his altar; and at the same time118 ulysses woke up once
 more upon his own soil. had been so long away that did not know
 it again; moreover, jove’s daughter minerva had made it foggy day, so
 that people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell
 him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and
 friends recognising him119 until had taken his revenge upon the
 wicked suitors. everything, therefore, seemed quite different to
 him—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the
 goodly trees, appeared all changed as started up and looked upon his
 native land. so smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and
 cried aloud despairingly.
 
“alas,” exclaimed, “among what manner of people am i fallen? are
 they savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? where shall i put
 all this treasure, and which way shall i go? i wish i had staid over
 there with the phaeacians; or i could have gone to some other great
 chief who would have been good to and given an escort. as it is i
 do not know where to put my treasure, and i cannot leave it here for
 fear somebody else should get hold of it. in good truth the chiefs and
 rulers of the phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have
 left in the wrong country; they said they would take back to
 ithaca and they have not done so: may jove the protector of suppliants
 chastise them, for watches over everybody and punishes those who do
 wrong. still, i suppose i must count my goods and see if the crew have
 gone off with any of them.”
 
counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his
 clothes, but there was nothing missing; still kept grieving about
 not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore of
 the sounding bewailing his hard fate. then minerva came up to him
 disguised as young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a
 good cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her
 comely feet and held javelin in her hand. ulysses was glad when he
 saw her, and went straight up to her.
 
“my friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom i have met with in
 this country; i salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposed
 towards me. protect these my goods, and myself too, for i embrace your
 knees and pray to you as though you were god. tell me, then, and tell
 truly, what land and country is this? who are its inhabitants? am i
 on an island, or is this the board of some continent?”
 
minerva answered, “stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come
 from somewhere long way off, not to know what country this is. it is
 very celebrated place, and everybody knows it east and west. it is
 rugged and not good driving country, but it is by means bad
 island for what there is of it. it grows any quantity of corn and also
 wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also and
 goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places
 where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of ithaca is known
 even as far as troy, which i understand to be long way off from this
 achaean country.”
 
ulysses was glad at finding himself, as minerva told him, in his own
 country, and began to answer, but did not speak the truth, and
 made up lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.
 
“i heard of ithaca,” said he, “when i was in crete beyond the seas, and
 now it seems i have reached it with all these treasures. i have left as
 much more behind for my children, but am flying because i killed
 orsilochus of idomeneus, the fleetest runner in crete. i killed him
 because wanted to rob of the spoils i had got from troy with so
 much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves of
 the weary sea; said i had not served his father loyally at troy as
 vassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so i lay in wait
 for him with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him as
 was coming into town from the country. it was very dark night and
 nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that i had killed him, but
 as soon as i had done so i went to ship and besought the owners, who
 were phoenicians, to take on board and set in pylos or in elis
 where the epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them.
 they meant guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we
 sailed on till we came hither by night. it was all we could do to get
 inside the harbour, and none of us said word about supper though we
 wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were.
 i was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of
 the ship, and placed them beside where i was lying upon the sand.
 then they sailed away to sidonia, and i was left here in great distress
 of mind.”
 
such was his story, but minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.
 then she took the form of woman, fair, stately, and wise, “he must be
 indeed shifty lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in all
 manner of craft even though you had god for your antagonist. dare
 devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not
 drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are
 in your own country again? we will say more, however, about this,
 for we can both of us deceive upon occasion—you are the most
 accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while i for
 diplomacy and subtlety have equal among the gods. did you not know
 jove’s daughter minerva—me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch
 over you in all your troubles, and who made the phaeacians take so
 great liking to you? and now, again, i am come here to talk things
 over with you, and help you to hide the treasure i made the phaeacians
 give you; i want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your
 own house; you have got to face them, but tell one, neither man nor
 woman, that you have come home again. bear everything, and put up with
 every man’s insolence, without word.”
 
and ulysses answered, “a man, goddess, may know great deal, but you
 are so constantly changing your appearance that when meets you it is
 hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. this much,
 however, i know exceedingly well; you were very kind to as long as
 we achaeans were fighting before troy, but from the day on which we
 went on board ship after having sacked the city of priam, and heaven
 dispersed us—from that day, minerva, i saw more of you, and cannot
 ever remember your coming to my ship to help in difficulty; i had
 to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered from evil and i
 reached the city of the phaeacians, where you encouraged and took me
 into the town.120 and now, i beseech you in your father’s name, tell me
 the truth, for i do not believe i am really back in ithaca. i am in
 some other country and you are mocking and deceiving in all you
 have been saying. tell then truly, have i really got back to my own
 country?”
 
“you are always taking something of that sort in your head,” replied
 minerva, “and that is why i cannot desert you in your afflictions; you
 are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. any one but yourself on returning
 from so long voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife and
 children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or
 hearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife, who
 remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having peace night or
 day for the tears she sheds on your behalf. as for my not coming near
 you, i was never uneasy about you, for i was certain you would get back
 safely though you would lose all your men, and i did not wish to
 quarrel with my uncle neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded
 his son.121 i will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land,
 and you will then perhaps believe me. this is the haven of the old
 merman phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of
 it; [near it is the cave sacred to the naiads;122 here too is the
 overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable
 hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain neritum.”
 
as she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. then
 ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed
 the bounteous soil; lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs,
 saying, “naiad nymphs, daughters of jove, i made sure that i was never
 again to see you, now therefore i greet you with all loving
 salutations, and i will bring you offerings as in the old days, if
 jove’s redoubtable daughter will grant life, and bring my to
 manhood.”
 
“take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined minerva,
 “let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where
 they will be quite safe. let us see how we can best manage it all.”
 
therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding
 places, while ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and
 good clothing which the phaeacians had given him. they stowed
 everything carefully away, and minerva set stone against the door of
 the cave. then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and
 consulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.
 
“ulysses,” said minerva, “noble of laertes, think how you can lay
 hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your
 house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents
 to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and
 sending encouraging messages123 to every one of them, but meaning the
 very opposite of all she says.”
 
and ulysses answered, “in good truth, goddess, it seems i should have
 come to much the same bad end in my own house as agamemnon did, if you
 had not given such timely information. advise how i shall best
 avenge myself. stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as
 on the day when we loosed troy’s fair diadem from her brow. help now
 as you did then, and i will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess,
 will be with me.”
 
“trust for that,” said she, “i will not lose sight of you when once
 we set about it, and i imagine that some of those who are devouring
 your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and
 brains. i will begin by disguising you so that human being shall
 know you; i will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your
 yellow hair; i will clothe you in garment that shall fill all who see
 it with loathing; i will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an
 unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the
 whom you left behind you. then go at once to the swineherd who is
 in charge of your pigs; has been always well affected towards you,
 and is devoted to penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his
 pigs near the rock that is called raven124 by the fountain arethusa,
 where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their
 manner. stay with him and find out how things are going, while i
 proceed to sparta and see your son, who is with menelaus at lacedaemon,
 where has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive.”125
 
“but why,” said ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all about
 it? did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship
 while others are eating up his estate?”
 
minerva answered, “never mind about him, i sent him that might be
 well spoken of for having gone. is in sort of difficulty, but is
 staying quite comfortably with menelaus, and is surrounded with
 abundance of every kind. the suitors have put out to and are lying
 in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before can get home. i do
 not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are
 now eating up your estate will first find grave themselves.”
 
as she spoke minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with
 wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over
 his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine
 ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of wrap about him,
 and tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave
 him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with
 staff and wallet all in holes, with twisted thong for him to
 sling it over his shoulder.
 
when the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess
 went straight to lacedaemon to fetch telemachus.
 



book xiv
 

ulysses in the hut with eumaeus.
 

ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
 wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till reached the
 place where minerva had said that would find the swineherd, who was
 the most thrifty servant had. found him sitting in front of his
 hut, which was by the yards that had built on site which could be
 seen from far. had made them spacious126 and fair to see, with a
 free run for the pigs all round them; had built them during his
 master’s absence, of stones which had gathered out of the ground,
 without saying anything to penelope or laertes, and had fenced them
 on top with thorn bushes. outside the yard had run strong fence of
 oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside had
 built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. there were
 fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the
 boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kept
 on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best had
 continually. there were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the
 herdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always
 with them. the swineherd was at that moment cutting out pair of
 sandals127 from good stout ox hide. three of his men were out herding
 the pigs in one place or another, and had sent the fourth to town
 with boar that had been forced to send the suitors that they might
 sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.
 
when the hounds saw ulysses they set up furious barking and flew at
 him, but ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of
 the stick that had in his hand: still, would have been torn by
 them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,
 rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off
 by shouting and throwing stones at them. then said to ulysses, “old
 man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you
 would have got into trouble. the gods have given quite enough
 worries without that, for i have lost the best of masters, and am in
 continual grief on his account. i have to attend swine for other people
 to eat, while he, if yet lives to see the light of day, is starving
 in some distant land. but come inside, and when you have had your fill
 of bread and wine, tell where you come from, and all about your
 misfortunes.”
 
on this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
 strewed good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of
 this threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he
 used to sleep by night. ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,
 and said “may jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your
 heart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have received
 me.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “stranger, though still
 poorer man should come here, it would not be right for to insult
 him, for all strangers and beggars are from jove. you must take what
 you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
 young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for
 heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good
 to and given something of my own—a house, piece of land, good
 looking wife, and all else that liberal master allows servant who
 has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as
 they have mine in the situation which i hold. if my master had grown
 old here would have done great things by me, but is gone, and i
 wish that helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been
 the death of many good man. it was this matter that took my master to
 ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the trojans in the cause of
 king agamemnon.”
 
as spoke bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
 the young sucking pigs were penned. picked out two which brought
 back with him and sacrificed. singed them, cut them up, and spitted
 them; when the meat was cooked brought it all in and set it before
 ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon ulysses sprinkled it over
 with white barley meal. the swineherd then mixed wine in bowl of
 ivy-wood, and taking seat opposite ulysses told him to begin.
 
“fall to, stranger,” said he, “on dish of servant’s pork. the fat
 pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or
 scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and
 respect those who do what is lawful and right. even the fierce
 freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and jove gives them
 their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got home
 again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but
 some god seems to have told these people that ulysses is dead and gone;
 they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their
 offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force,
 without fear or stint. not day or night comes out of heaven, but they
 sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his
 wine, for was exceedingly rich. other great man either in ithaca
 or on the mainland is as rich as was; had as much as twenty men
 put together. i will tell you what had. there are twelve herds of
 cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also
 twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him
 twelve widely spreading herds of goats. here in ithaca runs even
 large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the
 charge of excellent goat herds. each one of these sends the suitors the
 best goat in the flock every day. as for myself, i am in charge of the
 pigs that you see here, and i have to keep picking out the best i have
 and sending it to them.”
 
this was his story, but ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
 without word, brooding his revenge. when had eaten enough and was
 satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which usually drank,
 filled it with wine, and gave it to ulysses, who was pleased, and said
 as took it in his hands, “my friend, who was this master of yours
 that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
 me? you say perished in the cause of king agamemnon; tell who he
 was, in case i may have met with such person. jove and the other gods
 know, but i may be able to give you news of him, for i have travelled
 much.”
 
eumaeus answered, “old man, traveller who comes here with news will
 get ulysses’ wife and to believe his story. nevertheless, tramps in
 want of lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a
 word of truth; every one who finds his way to ithaca goes to my
 mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes
 much of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the
 time as women will when they have lost their husbands. and you too, old
 man, for shirt and cloak would doubtless make up very pretty
 story. but the wolves and birds of prey have long since torn ulysses to
 pieces, or the fishes of the have eaten him, and his bones are
 lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; is dead and gone,
 and bad business it is for all his friends—for especially; go
 where i may i shall never find so good master, not even if i were to
 go home to my mother and father where i was bred and born. i do not so
 much care, however, about my parents now, though i should dearly like
 to see them again in my own country; it is the loss of ulysses that
 grieves most; i cannot speak of him without reverence though is
 here longer, for was very fond of me, and took such care of me
 that wherever may be i shall always honour his memory.”
 
“my friend,” replied ulysses, “you are very positive, and very hard of
 belief about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless i will not
 merely say, but will swear, that is coming. do not give anything
 for my news till has actually come, you may then give shirt and
 cloak of good wear if you will. i am in great want, but i will not take
 anything at all till then, for i hate man, even as i hate hell fire,
 who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. i swear by king jove, by the
 rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of ulysses to which i have now
 come, that all will surely happen as i have said it will. ulysses will
 return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
 beginning of the next will be here to do vengeance on all those who
 are ill treating his wife and son.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “old man, you will neither
 get paid for bringing good news, nor will ulysses ever come home; drink
 your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. do not keep
 on reminding of all this; it always pains when any one speaks
 about my honoured master. as for your oath we will let it alone, but i
 only wish may come, as do penelope, his old father laertes, and his
 telemachus. i am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his;
 was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be worse man,
 face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has
 been unsettling his mind, so has gone off to pylos to try and get
 news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as is
 coming home, in the hope of leaving the house of arceisius without a
 name in ithaca. but let us say more about him, and leave him to be
 taken, or else to escape if the of saturn holds his hand over him
 to protect him. and now, old man, tell your own story; tell also,
 for i want to know, who you are and where you come from. tell of
 your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew
 brought you to ithaca, and from what country they professed to come—for
 you cannot have come by land.”
 
and ulysses answered, “i will tell you all about it. if there were meat
 and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do
 but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, i could easily
 talk on for whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of
 the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.
 
“i am by birth cretan; my father was well to do man, who had many
 sons born in marriage, whereas i was the of slave whom had
 purchased for concubine; nevertheless, my father castor of hylax
 (whose lineage i claim, and who was held in the highest honour among
 the cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put
 on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock.
 when, however, death took him to the house of hades, his sons divided
 his estate and cast lots for their shares, but to they gave a
 holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled to marry
 into rich family, for i was not given to bragging, or shirking on the
 field of battle. it is all over now; still, if you look at the straw
 you can see what the ear was, for i have had trouble enough and to
 spare. mars and minerva made doughty in war; when i had picked my
 men to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade i never gave death so much
 as thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear all whom i
 could overtake. such was i in battle, but i did not care about farm
 work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring up children. my
 delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows—things that most
 men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and another
 another, and this was what i was most naturally inclined to. before the
 achaeans went to troy, nine times was i in command of men and ships on
 foreign service, and i amassed much wealth. i had my pick of the spoil
 in the first instance, and much more was allotted to later on.
 
“my house grew apace and i became great man among the cretans, but
 when jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many
 perished, the people required and idomeneus to lead their ships to
 troy, and there was way out of it, for they insisted on our doing
 so. there we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked
 the city of priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. then it
 was that jove devised evil against me. i spent but one month happily
 with my children, wife, and property, and then i conceived the idea of
 making descent on egypt, so i fitted out fine fleet and manned it.
 i had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. for six days i
 and my men made feast, and i found them many victims both for sacrifice
 to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board
 and set sail from crete with fair north wind behind us though we were
 going down river. nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had
 sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the
 wind and steersmen took them. on the fifth day we reached the river
 aegyptus; there i stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay
 by them and keep guard over them while i sent out scouts to reconnoitre
 from every point of vantage.
 
“but the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and
 ravaged the land of the egyptians, killing the men, and taking their
 wives and children captive. the alarm was soon carried to the city, and
 when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the
 plain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of
 armour. then jove spread panic among my men, and they would longer
 face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. the egyptians
 killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for
 them. jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and i wish i had died
 then and there in egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for
 me—i took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand;
 then i went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his knees and
 kissed them, whereon spared my life, bade get into his chariot,
 and took weeping to his own home. many made at with their ashen
 spears and tried to kill in their fury, but the king protected me,
 for feared the wrath of jove the protector of strangers, who
 punishes those who do evil.
 
“i stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
 egyptians, for they all gave something; but when it was now going on
 for eight years there came certain phoenician, cunning rascal, who
 had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me
 over into going with him to phoenicia, where his house and his
 possessions lay. i stayed there for whole twelve months, but at the
 end of that time when months and days had gone by till the same season
 had come round again, set on board ship bound for libya, on a
 pretence that i was to take cargo along with him to that place, but
 really that might sell as slave and take the money i fetched. i
 suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for i could not
 help it.
 
“the ship ran before fresh north wind till we had reached the sea
 that lies between crete and libya; there, however, jove counselled
 their destruction, for as soon as we were well out from crete and could
 see nothing but and sky, raised black cloud over our ship and
 the grew dark beneath it. then jove let fly with his thunderbolts
 and the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and
 brimstone as the lightning struck it. the men fell all into the sea;
 they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so
 many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of
 getting home again. i was all dismayed. jove, however, sent the ship’s
 mast within my reach, which saved my life, for i clung to it, and
 drifted before the fury of the gale. nine days did i drift but in the
 darkness of the tenth night great wave bore on to the thesprotian
 coast. there pheidon king of the thesprotians entertained hospitably
 without charging anything at all—for his found when i was
 nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon raised by the hand,
 took to his father’s house and gave clothes to wear.
 
“there it was that i heard news of ulysses, for the king told had
 entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while was on his
 homeward journey. showed also the treasure of gold, and wrought
 iron that ulysses had got together. there was enough to keep his family
 for ten generations, so much had left in the house of king pheidon.
 but the king said ulysses had gone to dodona that might learn jove’s
 mind from the god’s high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
 absence should return to ithaca openly, or in secret. moreover the
 king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as
 did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,
 that should take him to his own country. sent off however before
 ulysses returned, for there happened to be thesprotian ship sailing
 for the wheat-growing island of dulichium, and told those in charge
 of her to be sure and take safely to king acastus.
 
“these men hatched plot against that would have reduced to the
 very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from
 land they resolved on selling as slave. they stripped of the
 shirt and cloak that i was wearing, and gave instead the tattered
 old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they
 reached the tilled lands of ithaca, and there they bound with a
 strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by
 the side. but the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn
 my rags over my head i slid down the rudder into the sea, where i
 struck out and swam till i was well clear of them, and came ashore near
 thick wood in which i lay concealed. they were very angry at my
 having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they
 thought it was further use and went back to their ship. the gods,
 having hidden thus easily, then took to good man’s door—for it
 seems that i am not to die yet awhile.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “poor unhappy stranger, i
 have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but
 that part about ulysses is not right; and you will never get to
 believe it. why should man like you go about telling lies in this
 way? i know all about the return of my master. the gods one and all of
 them detest him, or they would have taken him before troy, or let him
 die with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done;
 for then the achaeans would have built mound over his ashes and his
 would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have
 spirited him away we know not whither.
 
“as for i live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to
 the town unless when penelope sends for on the arrival of some news
 about ulysses. then they all sit round and ask questions, both those
 who grieve over the king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it because
 they can eat up his property without paying for it. for my own part i
 have never cared about asking anyone else since the time when i was
 taken in by an aetolian, who had killed man and come long way till
 at last reached my station, and i was very kind to him. said he
 had seen ulysses with idomeneus among the cretans, refitting his ships
 which had been damaged in gale. said ulysses would return in the
 following summer or autumn with his men, and that would bring back
 much wealth. and now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has
 brought you to my door, do not try to flatter in this way with vain
 hopes. it is not for any such reason that i shall treat you kindly, but
 only out of respect for jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and
 pitying you.”
 
ulysses answered, “i see that you are of an unbelieving mind; i have
 given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a
 bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. if your master
 comes home, give cloak and shirt of good wear, and send to
 dulichium where i want to go; but if does not come as i say will,
 set your men on to me, and tell them to throw from yonder precipice,
 as warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies.”
 
“and pretty figure i should cut then,” replied eumaeus, “both now and
 hereafter, if i were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and
 showing you hospitality. i should have to say my prayers in good
 earnest if i did; but it is just supper time and i hope my men will
 come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper.”
 
thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the
 pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a
 tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. but
 eumaeus called to his men and said, “bring in the best pig you have,
 that i may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of
 him ourselves. we have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs,
 while others reap the fruit of our labour.”
 
on this began chopping firewood, while the others brought in fine
 fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. eumaeus did not
 forget the gods, for was man of good principles, so the first
 thing did was to cut bristles from the pig’s face and throw them
 into the fire, praying to all the gods as did so that ulysses might
 return home again. then clubbed the pig with billet of oak which
 had kept back when was chopping the firewood, and stunned it,
 while the others slaughtered and singed it. then they cut it up, and
 eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the
 fat; these sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers;
 they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits
 and roasted them till they were done; when they had taken them off the
 spits they threw them on to the dresser in heap. the swineherd, who
 was most equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. he
 made seven portions; one of these set apart for mercury the of
 maia and the nymphs, praying to them as did so; the others dealt
 out to the men man by man. gave ulysses some slices cut lengthways
 down the loin as mark of especial honour, and ulysses was much
 pleased. “i hope, eumaeus,” said he, “that jove will be as well
 disposed towards you as i am, for the respect you are showing to an
 outcast like myself.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “eat, my good fellow, and
 enjoy your supper, such as it is. god grants this, and withholds that,
 just as thinks right, for can do whatever chooses.”
 
as spoke cut off the first piece and offered it as burnt
 sacrifice to the immortal gods; then made them drink-offering, put
 the cup in the hands of ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
 mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man
 on his own account from among the taphians during his master’s absence,
 and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
 to his mistress or laertes. they then laid their hands upon the good
 things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and
 drink, mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all
 went to bed after having made hearty supper.
 
now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was moon. it
 poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the west, which
 is wet quarter, so ulysses thought would see whether eumaeus, in
 the excellent care took of him, would take off his own cloak and
 give it him, or make one of his men give him one. “listen to me,” said
 he, “eumaeus and the rest of you; when i have said prayer i will tell
 you something. it is the wine that makes talk in this way; wine will
 make even wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and
 dance and say many word that had better leave unspoken; still, as
 i have begun, i will go on. would that i were still young and strong as
 when we got up an ambuscade before troy. menelaus and ulysses were the
 leaders, but i was in command also, for the other two would have it so.
 when we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath
 our armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood
 that grew about the swamp. it came on to freeze with north wind
 blowing; the snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields
 were coated thick with rime. the others had all got cloaks and shirts,
 and slept comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders,
 but i had carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that i
 should be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and
 shield. when the night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted
 their places, i nudged ulysses who was close to with my elbow, and
 at once gave his ear.
 
“‘ulysses,’ said i, ‘this cold will be the death of me, for i have no
 cloak; some god fooled into setting off with nothing on but my
 shirt, and i do not know what to do.’
 
“ulysses, who was as crafty as was valiant, hit upon the following
 plan:
 
“‘keep still,’ said in low voice, ‘or the others will hear you.’
 then raised his head on his elbow.
 
“‘my friends,’ said he, ‘i have had dream from heaven in my sleep. we
 are long way from the ships; i wish some one would go down and tell
 agamemnon to send us up more men at once.’
 
“on this thoas of andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
 to the ships, whereon i took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
 till morning. would that i were still young and strong as i was in
 those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give cloak
 both out of good will and for the respect due to brave soldier; but
 now people look down upon because my clothes are shabby.”
 
and eumaeus answered, “old man, you have told us an excellent story,
 and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
 present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
 that stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow
 morning you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for
 we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has
 only one. when ulysses’ comes home again will give you both
 cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go.”
 
with this got up and made bed for ulysses by throwing some
 goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. here
 ulysses lay down, and eumaeus covered him over with great heavy cloak
 that kept for change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.
 
thus did ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. but the
 swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so got ready to
 go outside, and ulysses was glad to see that looked after his
 property during his master’s absence. first slung his sword over his
 brawny shoulders and put on thick cloak to keep out the wind. also
 took the skin of large and well fed goat, and javelin in case of
 attack from men or dogs. thus equipped went to his rest where the
 pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
 the north wind.
 



book xv
 

minerva summons telemachus from lacedaemon—he meets with theoclymenus
 at pylos and brings him to ithaca—on landing goes to the hut of
 eumaeus.
 

but minerva went to the fair city of lacedaemon to tell ulysses’ son
 that was to return at once. she found him and pisistratus sleeping
 in the forecourt of menelaus’s house; pisistratus was fast asleep, but
 telemachus could get rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
 father, so minerva went close up to him and said:
 
“telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer,
 nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they
 will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a
 fool’s errand. ask menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to
 find your excellent mother still there when you get back. her father
 and brothers are already urging her to marry eurymachus, who has given
 her more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his
 wedding presents. i hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the
 house in spite of you, but you know what women are—they always want to
 do the best they can for the man who marries them, and never give
 another thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their
 father either when is dead and done with. go home, therefore, and
 put everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you
 have, until it shall please heaven to send you wife of your own. let
 tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. the
 chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the strait128
 between ithaca and samos, and they mean to kill you before you can
 reach home. i do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely
 that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a
 grave themselves. sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from
 the islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send
 you fair wind. as soon as you get to ithaca send your ship and men on
 to the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge
 of your pigs; is well disposed towards you, stay with him,
 therefore, for the night, and then send him to penelope to tell her
 that you have got back safe from pylos.”
 
then she went back to olympus; but telemachus stirred pisistratus with
 his heel to rouse him, and said, “wake up pisistratus, and yoke the
 horses to the chariot, for we must set off home.”129
 
but pisistratus said, “no matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
 in the dark. it will be morning soon; wait till menelaus has brought
 his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good
 bye to us in the usual way. so long as lives guest should never
 forget host who has shown him kindness.”
 
as spoke day began to break, and menelaus, who had already risen,
 leaving helen in bed, came towards them. when telemachus saw him put
 on his shirt as fast as could, threw great cloak over his
 shoulders, and went out to meet him. “menelaus,” said he, “let go
 back now to my own country, for i want to get home.”
 
and menelaus answered, “telemachus, if you insist on going i will not
 detain you. i do not like to see host either too fond of his guest or
 too rude to him. moderation is best in all things, and not letting a
 man go when wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he
 would like to stay. one should treat guest well as long as is in
 the house and speed him when wants to leave it. wait, then, till i
 can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have
 yourself seen them. i will tell the women to prepare sufficient
 dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
 more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out
 on such long journey. if, moreover, you have fancy for making a
 tour in hellas or in the peloponnese, i will yoke my horses, and will
 conduct you myself through all our principal cities. one will send
 us away empty handed; every one will give us something—a bronze tripod,
 couple of mules, or gold cup.”
 
“menelaus,” replied telemachus, “i want to go home at once, for when i
 came away i left my property without protection, and fear that while
 looking for my father i shall come to ruin myself, or find that
 something valuable has been stolen during my absence.”
 
when menelaus heard this immediately told his wife and servants to
 prepare sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. at
 this moment eteoneus joined him, for lived close by and had just got
 up; so menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he
 at once did. then menelaus went down into his fragrant store room,130
 not alone, but helen went too, with megapenthes. when reached the
 place where the treasures of his house were kept, selected double
 cup, and told his megapenthes to bring also silver mixing bowl.
 meanwhile helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses
 which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was
 largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered
 like star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. 131 then they all
 came back through the house again till they got to telemachus, and
 menelaus said, “telemachus, may jove, the mighty husband of juno, bring
 you safely home according to your desire. i will now present you with
 the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. it is a
 mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold,
 and it is the work of vulcan. phaedimus king of the sidonians made a
 present of it in the course of visit that i paid him while i was on
 my return home. i should like to give it to you.”
 
with these words placed the double cup in the hands of telemachus,
 while megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before
 him. hard by stood lovely helen with the robe ready in her hand.
 
“i too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as keepsake from
 the hand of helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
 till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go
 back rejoicing to your own country and to your home.”
 
so saying she gave the robe over to him and received it gladly. then
 pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as
 did so. presently menelaus took telemachus and pisistratus into the
 house, and they both of them sat down to table. maid servant brought
 them water in beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into silver
 basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew clean table beside
 them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good
 things of what there was in the house. eteoneus carved the meat and
 gave them each their portions, while megapenthes poured out the wine.
 then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them,
 but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink telemachus and
 pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot.
 they drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing
 gatehouse of the outer court, and menelaus came after them with a
 golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they might make a
 drink-offering before they set out. stood in front of the horses and
 pledged them, saying, “farewell to both of you; see that you tell
 nestor how i have treated you, for was as kind to as any father
 could be while we achaeans were fighting before troy.”
 
“we will be sure, sir,” answered telemachus, “to tell him everything as
 soon as we see him. i wish i were as certain of finding ulysses
 returned when i get back to ithaca, that i might tell him of the very
 great kindness you have shown and of the many beautiful presents i
 am taking with me.”
 
as was thus speaking bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with a
 great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm
 yard—and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. it
 came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front
 of the horses. when they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took
 comfort within them, whereon pisistratus said, “tell me, menelaus, has
 heaven sent this omen for us or for you?”
 
menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to
 make, but helen was too quick for him and said, “i will read this
 matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as i doubt not that it
 will come to pass. the eagle came from the mountain where it was bred
 and has its nest, and in like manner ulysses, after having travelled
 far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge—if indeed is
 not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors.”
 
“may jove so grant it,” replied telemachus, “if it should prove to be
 so, i will make vows to you as though you were god, even when i am at
 home.”
 
as spoke lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
 through the town towards the open country. they swayed the yoke upon
 their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
 darkness was over all the land. then they reached pherae, where diocles
 lived who was of ortilochus, the of alpheus. there they passed
 the night and were treated hospitably. when the child of morning,
 rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
 places in the chariot. they drove out through the inner gateway and
 under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. then pisistratus lashed
 his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came
 to pylos, and then telemachus said:
 
“pisistratus, i hope you will promise to do what i am going to ask you.
 you know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both
 of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely;
 do not, therefore, take past my ship, but leave there, for if i
 go to your father’s house will try to keep in the warmth of his
 good will towards me, and i must go home at once.”
 
pisistratus thought how should do as was asked, and in the end he
 deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put menelaus’s
 beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. then
 said, “go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before i
 can reach home to tell my father. i know how obstinate is, and am
 sure will not let you go; will come down here to fetch you, and
 will not go back without you. but will be very angry.”
 
with this drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the pylians
 and soon reached his home, but telemachus called the men together and
 gave his orders. “now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order on
 board the ship, and let us set out home.”
 
thus did speak, and they went on board even as had said. but as
 telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to minerva in
 the ship’s stern, there came to him man from distant country, a
 seer, who was flying from argos because had killed man. was
 descended from melampus, who used to live in pylos, the land of sheep;
 was rich and owned great house, but was driven into exile by
 the great and powerful king neleus. neleus seized his goods and held
 them for whole year, during which was close prisoner in the
 house of king phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of
 the daughter of neleus and because was haunted by great sorrow
 that dread erinys had laid upon him. in the end, however, escaped
 with his life, drove the cattle from phylace to pylos, avenged the
 wrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of neleus to his
 brother. then left the country and went to argos, where it was
 ordained that should reign over much people. there married,
 established himself, and had two famous sons antiphates and mantius.
 antiphates became father of oicleus, and oicleus of amphiaraus, who was
 dearly loved both by jove and by apollo, but did not live to old
 age, for was killed in thebes by reason of woman’s gifts. his sons
 were alcmaeon and amphilochus. mantius, the other of melampus, was
 father to polypheides and cleitus. aurora, throned in gold, carried off
 cleitus for his beauty’s sake, that might dwell among the immortals,
 but apollo made polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now
 that amphiaraus was dead. quarrelled with his father and went to
 live in hyperesia, where remained and prophesied for all men.
 
his son, theoclymenus, it was who now came up to telemachus as was
 making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. “friend,” said he, “now
 that i find you sacrificing in this place, i beseech you by your
 sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, i pray you
 also by your own head and by those of your followers tell the truth
 and nothing but the truth. who and whence are you? tell also of your
 town and parents.”
 
telemachus said, “i will answer you quite truly. i am from ithaca, and
 my father is ulysses, as surely as that ever lived. but has come
 to some miserable end. therefore i have taken this ship and got my crew
 together to see if i can hear any news of him, for has been away a
 long time.”
 
“i too,” answered theoclymenus, “am an exile, for i have killed man
 of my own race. has many brothers and kinsmen in argos, and they
 have great power among the argives. i am flying to escape death at
 their hands, and am thus doomed to be wanderer on the face of the
 earth. i am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that
 they may not kill me, for i know they are in pursuit.”
 
“i will not refuse you,” replied telemachus, “if you wish to join us.
 come, therefore, and in ithaca we will treat you hospitably according
 to what we have.”
 
on this received theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck of
 the ship. went on board and sat in the stern, bidding theoclymenus
 sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. telemachus told them
 to catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. they set
 the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast
 with the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of
 twisted ox hide. minerva sent them fair wind that blew fresh and
 strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible. thus then
 they passed by crouni and chalcis.
 
presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. the vessel
 made quick passage to pheae and thence on to elis, where the epeans
 rule. telemachus then headed her for the flying islands,132 wondering
 within himself whether should escape death or should be taken
 prisoner.
 
meanwhile ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the
 hut, and the men supped with them. as soon as they had had to eat and
 drink, ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he
 would continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the
 station or pack him off to the city; so said:
 
“eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow i want to go away and begin begging
 about the town, so as to be more trouble to you or to your men. give
 your advice therefore, and let have good guide to go with me
 and show the way. i will go the round of the city begging as i needs
 must, to see if any one will give drink and piece of bread. i
 should like also to go to the house of ulysses and bring news of her
 husband to queen penelope. i could then go about among the suitors and
 see if out of all their abundance they will give dinner. i should
 soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. listen and
 believe when i tell you that by the blessing of mercury who gives grace
 and good name to the works of all men, there is one living who would
 make more handy servant than i should—to put fresh wood on the fire,
 chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that
 poor men have to do for their betters.”
 
the swineherd was very much disturbed when heard this. “heaven help
 me,” exclaimed, “what ever can have put such notion as that into
 your head? if you go near the suitors you will be undone to a
 certainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. they
 would never think of taking man like you for servant. their
 servants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and
 shirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables
 are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. stay
 where you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; i do not mind your
 being here, more do any of the others, and when telemachus comes
 home will give you shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you
 want to go.”
 
ulysses answered, “i hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to
 me, for having saved from going about and getting into trouble;
 there is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men
 have once got low down in the world they will go through great deal
 on behalf of their miserable bellies. since, however, you press to
 stay here and await the return of telemachus, tell about ulysses’
 mother, and his father whom left on the threshold of old age when he
 set out for troy. are they still living or are they already dead and in
 the house of hades?”
 
“i will tell you all about them,” replied eumaeus, “laertes is still
 living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,
 for is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also
 about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him
 more than anything else did. she came to an unhappy end133 through
 sorrow for her son: may friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by
 come to such an end as she did. as long as she was still living,
 though she was always grieving, i used to like seeing her and asking
 her how she did, for she brought up along with her daughter ctimene,
 the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she
 made little difference between us. when, however, we both grew up, they
 sent ctimene to same and received splendid dowry for her. as for me,
 my mistress gave good shirt and cloak with pair of sandals for
 my feet, and sent off into the country, but she was just as fond of
 as ever. this is all over now. still it has pleased heaven to
 prosper my work in the situation which i now hold. i have enough to eat
 and drink, and can find something for any respectable stranger who
 comes here; but there is getting kind word or deed out of my
 mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked people.
 servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have talk with her;
 they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and
 something too to take back with them into the country. this is what
 will keep servants in good humour.”
 
ulysses answered, “then you must have been very little fellow,
 eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.
 tell me, and tell true, was the city in which your father and mother
 lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you
 were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for
 whatever your master gave them?”
 
“stranger,” replied eumaeus, “as regards your question: sit still, make
 yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. the nights are
 now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and
 sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time,
 too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes
 to go to bed let him leave us and do so; can then take my master’s
 pigs out when has done breakfast in the morning. we too will sit
 here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories
 about our misfortunes; for when man has suffered much, and been
 buffeted about in the world, takes pleasure in recalling the memory
 of sorrows that have long gone by. as regards your question, then, my
 tale is as follows:
 
“you may have heard of an island called syra that lies over above
 ortygia,134 where the land begins to turn round and look in another
 direction.135 it is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good,
 with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine
 and wheat. dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any
 sickness, but when they grow old apollo comes with diana and kills them
 with his painless shafts. it contains two communities, and the whole
 country is divided between these two. my father ctesius of ormenus,
 man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.
 
“now to this place there came some cunning traders from phoenicia (for
 the phoenicians are great mariners) in ship which they had freighted
 with gewgaws of all kinds. there happened to be phoenician woman in
 my father’s house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant;
 these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near
 their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that woman can
 resist, matter how good she may be by nature. the man who had
 seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on this
 she told him her father’s name. ‘i come from sidon,’ said she, ‘and am
 daughter to arybas, man rolling in wealth. one day as i was coming
 into the town from the country, some taphian pirates seized and took
 here over the sea, where they sold to the man who owns this
 house, and gave them their price for me.’
 
“the man who had seduced her then said, ‘would you like to come along
 with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
 they are both alive and are said to be well off.’
 
“‘i will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men will first swear a
 solemn oath that you will do harm by the way.’
 
“they all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their
 oath the woman said, ‘hush; and if any of your men meets in the
 street or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one
 should go and tell my master, in which case would suspect something.
 would put in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep
 your own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can,
 and send word when you have done loading. i will bring as much gold
 as i can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that i can
 do towards paying my fare. i am nurse to the of the good man of the
 house, funny little fellow just able to run about. i will carry him
 off in your ship, and you will get great deal of money for him if you
 take him and sell him in foreign parts.’
 
“on this she went back to the house. the phoenicians stayed whole
 year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,
 and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the
 woman. their messenger, very cunning fellow, came to my father’s
 house bringing necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and
 while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and
 bargaining about it, made sign quietly to the woman and then went
 back to the ship, whereon she took by the hand and led out of the
 house. in the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with the
 cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in
 attendance on him; these were now all gone to meeting of the public
 assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the
 bosom of her dress, while i followed her, for i knew better. the sun
 was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as
 fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the phoenician ship
 was lying. when they had got on board they sailed their ways over the
 sea, taking us with them, and jove sent then fair wind; six days did
 we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day diana struck the
 woman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as though she were
 gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the
 seals and fishes, and i was left all sorrowful and alone. presently the
 winds and waves took the ship to ithaca, where laertes gave sundry of
 his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever i came to set eyes upon
 this country.”
 
ulysses answered, “eumaeus, i have heard the story of your misfortunes
 with the most lively interest and pity, but jove has given you good as
 well as evil, for in spite of everything you have good master, who
 sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead good
 life, whereas i am still going about begging my way from city to city.”
 
thus did they converse, and they had only very little time left for
 sleep, for it was soon daybreak. in the mean time telemachus and his
 crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast,
 and rowed the ship into the harbour.136 they cast out their mooring
 stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the shore,
 mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. as soon as they had had enough
 to eat and drink telemachus said, “take the ship on to the town, but
 leave here, for i want to look after the herdsmen on one of my
 farms. in the evening, when i have seen all i want, i will come down to
 the city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble i will give
 you all good dinner with meat and wine.” 137
 
then theoclymenus said, “and what, my dear young friend, is to become
 of me? to whose house, among all your chief men, am i to repair? or
 shall i go straight to your own house and to your mother?”
 
“at any other time,” replied telemachus, “i should have bidden you go
 to my own house, for you would find want of hospitality; at the
 present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for i
 shall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show
 herself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper
 chamber, out of their way; but i can tell you man whose house you can
 go to—i mean eurymachus the of polybus, who is held in the highest
 estimation by every one in ithaca. is much the best man and the most
 persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and
 trying to take ulysses’ place. jove, however, in heaven alone knows
 whether or they will come to bad end before the marriage takes
 place.”
 
as was speaking bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk, apollo’s
 messenger. it held dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore
 them off,138 fell to the ground midway between telemachus and the ship.
 on this theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
 “telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not fly on your right hand
 without having been sent there by some god. as soon as i saw it i knew
 it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there
 will be house in ithaca more royal than your own.”
 
“i wish it may prove so,” answered telemachus. “if it does, i will show
 you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet
 you will congratulate you.”
 
then said to his friend piraeus, “piraeus, of clytius, you have
 throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve of all those who
 have accompanied to pylos; i wish you would take this stranger to
 your own house and entertain him hospitably till i can come for him.”
 
and piraeus answered, “telemachus, you may stay away as long as you
 please, but i will look after him for you, and shall find lack of
 hospitality.”
 
as spoke went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose
 the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. but telemachus
 bound on his sandals, and took long and doughty spear with head of
 sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. then they loosed the
 hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city as
 they had been told to do, while telemachus strode on as fast as he
 could, till reached the homestead where his countless herds of swine
 were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so
 devoted servant to his master.
 



book xvi
 

ulysses reveals himself to telemachus.
 

meanwhile ulysses and the swineherd had lit fire in the hut and were
 were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out
 with the pigs. when telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but
 fawned upon him, so ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing
 that the dogs did not bark, said to eumaeus:
 
“eumaeus, i hear footsteps; i suppose one of your men or some one of
 your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and
 not barking.”
 
the words were hardly out of his mouth before his stood at the
 door. eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which was mixing
 wine fell from his hands, as made towards his master. kissed his
 head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. father could not
 be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old
 age, after ten years’ absence in foreign country and after having
 gone through much hardship. embraced him, kissed him all over as
 though had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:
 
“so you are come, telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. when i
 heard you had gone to pylos i made sure i was never going to see you
 any more. come in, my dear child, and sit down, that i may have good
 look at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into
 the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town
 generally. i suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the
 suitors are doing.”
 
“so be it, old friend,” answered telemachus, “but i am come now because
 i want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her old
 home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of
 ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs.”
 
“she is still at the house,” replied eumaeus, “grieving and breaking
 her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually.”
 
as spoke took telemachus’ spear, whereon crossed the stone
 threshold and came inside. ulysses rose from his seat to give him place
 as entered, but telemachus checked him; “sit down, stranger,” said
 he, “i can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay
 it for me.”
 
ulysses went back to his own place, and eumaeus strewed some green
 brushwood on the floor and threw sheepskin on top of it for
 telemachus to sit upon. then the swineherd brought them platters of
 cold meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he
 filled the bread baskets with bread as fast as could. mixed wine
 also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing ulysses. then they
 laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon
 as they had had enough to eat and drink telemachus said to eumaeus,
 “old friend, where does this stranger come from? how did his crew bring
 him to ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly did not come here by
 land.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “my son, i will tell you the
 real truth. says is cretan, and that has been great
 traveller. at this moment is running away from thesprotian ship,
 and has taken refuge at my station, so i will put him into your hands.
 do whatever you like with him, only remember that is your
 suppliant.”
 
“i am very much distressed,” said telemachus, “by what you have just
 told me. how can i take this stranger into my house? i am as yet young,
 and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. my
 mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look
 after the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her
 husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man
 of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most
 advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station i
 will find him cloak and shirt of good wear, with sword and sandals,
 and will send him wherever wants to go. or if you like you can keep
 him here at the station, and i will send him clothes and food that he
 may be burden on you and on your men; but i will not have him go
 near the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat
 him in way that would greatly grieve me; matter how valiant man
 may be can do nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong
 for him.”
 
then ulysses said, “sir, it is right that i should say something
 myself. i am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent
 way in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such man as you
 are. tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god
 set your people against you? may you not complain of your brothers—for
 it is to these that man may look for support, however great his
 quarrel may be? i wish i were as young as you are and in my present
 mind; if i were to ulysses, or, indeed, ulysses himself, i would
 rather some one came and cut my head off, but i would go to the house
 and be the bane of every one of these men.139 if they were too many for
 me—i being single-handed—i would rather die fighting in my own house
 than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly
 maltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an
 unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to purpose
 for an end that shall never be accomplished.”
 
and telemachus answered, “i will tell you truly everything. there is no
 enmity between and my people, nor can i complain of brothers, to
 whom man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. jove
 has made us race of only sons. laertes was the only of arceisius,
 and ulysses only of laertes. i am myself the only of ulysses
 who left behind him when went away, so that i have never been of
 any use to him. hence it comes that my house is in the hands of
 numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands,
 dulichium, same, zacynthus, as also all the principal men of ithaca
 itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my
 mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor
 yet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and
 before long will do so with myself into the bargain. the issue,
 however, rests with heaven. but do you, old friend eumaeus, go at once
 and tell penelope that i am safe and have returned from pylos. tell it
 to herself alone, and then come back here without letting any one else
 know, for there are many who are plotting mischief against me.”
 
“i understand and heed you,” replied eumaeus; “you need instruct no
 further, only as i am going that way say whether i had not better let
 poor laertes know that you are returned. used to superintend the
 work on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about ulysses, and he
 would eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me
 that from the day on which you set out for pylos has neither eaten
 nor drunk as ought to do, nor does look after his farm, but sits
 weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones.”
 
“more’s the pity,” answered telemachus, “i am sorry for him, but we
 must leave him to himself just now. if people could have everything
 their own way, the first thing i should choose would be the return of
 my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again,
 and do not turn out of your way to tell laertes. tell my mother to send
 one of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it
 from her.”
 
thus did urge the swineherd; eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,
 bound them to his feet, and started for the town. minerva watched him
 well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a
 woman—fair, stately, and wise. she stood against the side of the entry,
 and revealed herself to ulysses, but telemachus could not see her, and
 knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen
 by everybody. ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not
 bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.
 she nodded her head and motioned to ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon
 left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the
 yards. then she said to him:
 
“ulysses, noble of laertes, it is now time for you to tell your
 son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the
 destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. i will not be
 long in joining you, for i too am eager for the fray.”
 
as she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. first she threw a
 fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him
 younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,
 filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. then she
 went away and ulysses came back inside the hut. his was astounded
 when saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear might be looking
 upon god.
 
“stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from what you were
 moment or two ago. you are dressed differently and your colour is not
 the same. are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? if
 so, be propitious to till i can make you due sacrifice and offerings
 of wrought gold. have mercy upon me.”
 
and ulysses said, “i am god, why should you take for one? i am
 your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the
 hands of lawless men.”
 
as spoke kissed his son, and tear fell from his cheek on to the
 ground, for had restrained all tears till now. but telemachus could
 not yet believe that it was his father, and said:
 
“you are not my father, but some god is flattering with vain hopes
 that i may grieve the more hereafter; mortal man could of himself
 contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young
 at moment’s notice, unless god were with him. second ago you were
 old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from
 heaven.”
 
ulysses answered, “telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably
 astonished at my being really here. there is other ulysses who will
 come hereafter. such as i am, it is i, who after long wandering and
 much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country.
 what you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess minerva, who
 does with whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. at one
 moment she makes like beggar, and the next i am young man with
 good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in
 heaven to make any man look either rich or poor.”
 
as spoke sat down, and telemachus threw his arms about his father
 and wept. they were both so much moved that they cried aloud like
 eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their
 half fledged young by peasants. thus piteously did they weep, and the
 sun would have gone down upon their mourning if telemachus had not
 suddenly said, “in what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you
 to ithaca? of what nation did they declare themselves to be—for you
 cannot have come by land?”
 
“i will tell you the truth, my son,” replied ulysses. “it was the
 phaeacians who brought here. they are great sailors, and are in the
 habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. they took
 over the while i was fast asleep, and landed in ithaca, after
 giving many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. these things by
 heaven’s mercy are lying concealed in cave, and i am now come here on
 the suggestion of minerva that we may consult about killing our
 enemies. first, therefore, give list of the suitors, with their
 number, that i may learn who, and how many, they are. i can then turn
 the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole
 body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us.”
 
to this telemachus answered, “father, i have always heard of your
 renown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a
 very great one: i am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot
 stand against many and brave ones. there are not ten suitors only, nor
 twice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at
 once. there are fifty-two chosen youths from dulichium, and they have
 six servants; from same there are twenty-four; twenty young achaeans
 from zacynthus, and twelve from ithaca itself, all of them well born.
 they have with them servant medon, bard, and two men who can carve
 at table. if we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to
 rue your coming, and your revenge. see whether you cannot think of some
 one who would be willing to come and help us.”
 
“listen to me,” replied ulysses, “and think whether minerva and her
 father jove may seem sufficient, or whether i am to try and find some
 one else as well.”
 
“those whom you have named,” answered telemachus, “are couple of good
 allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power
 over both gods and men.”
 
“these two,” continued ulysses, “will not keep long out of the fray,
 when the suitors and we join fight in my house. now, therefore, return
 home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.
 later on the swineherd will bring to the city disguised as a
 miserable old beggar. if you see them ill treating me, steel your heart
 against my sufferings; even though they drag feet foremost out of
 the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently
 trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to
 you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. furthermore i say, and
 lay my saying to your heart; when minerva shall put it in my mind, i
 will nod my head to you, and on seeing do this you must collect all
 the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.
 make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say
 that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as
 it is longer what it was when ulysses went away, but has become
 soiled and begrimed with soot. add to this more particularly that you
 are afraid jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that
 they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and
 wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. but
 leave sword and spear apiece for yourself and me, and couple of
 oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; jove and
 minerva will then soon quiet these people. there is also another
 matter; if you are indeed my and my blood runs in your veins, let
 one know that ulysses is within the house—neither laertes, nor yet
 the swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even penelope herself. let
 you and exploit the women alone, and let us also make trial of some
 other of the men servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is
 against us.”
 
“father,” replied telemachus, “you will come to know by and by, and
 when you do you will find that i can keep your counsel. i do not think,
 however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us.
 think it over. it will take us long time to go the round of the farms
 and exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your
 estate with impunity and without compunction. prove the women by all
 means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but i am not in
 favour of going round and trying the men. we can attend to that later
 on, if you really have some sign from jove that will support you.”
 
thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought
 telemachus and his crew from pylos had reached the town of ithaca. when
 they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land;
 their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all
 the presents at the house of clytius. then they sent servant to tell
 penelope that telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the
 ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
 this servant and eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the
 same errand of going to tell penelope. when they reached the house, the
 servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting
 women, “your son, madam, is now returned from pylos”; but eumaeus went
 close up to penelope, and said privately all that her had bidden
 him tell her. when had given his message left the house with its
 outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.
 
the suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went
 outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a
 council near the main entrance. eurymachus, of polybus, was the
 first to speak.
 
“my friends,” said he, “this voyage of telemachus’s is very serious
 matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. now, however,
 let us draw ship into the water, and get crew together to send
 after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can.”
 
had hardly done speaking when amphinomus turned in his place and saw
 the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and
 putting by their oars; so laughed, and said to the others, “we need
 not send them any message, for they are here. some god must have told
 them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her.”
 
on this they rose and went to the water side. the crew then drew the
 ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they
 went up in body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any
 one old or young sit along with them, and antinous, of eupeithes,
 spoke first.
 
“good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved this man from
 destruction. we kept succession of scouts upon the headlands all day
 long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but
 waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and
 killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. let us
 consider how we can make an end of him. must not escape us; our
 affair is never likely to come off while is alive, for is very
 shrewd, and public feeling is by means all on our side. we must make
 haste before can call the achaeans in assembly; will lose time
 in doing so, for will be furious with us, and will tell all the
 world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. the people
 will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they
 do us hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. let us try
 and lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the
 road hither. then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his
 mother and the man who marries her have the house. if this does not
 please you, and you wish telemachus to live on and hold his father’s
 property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this
 way, but must make our offers to penelope each from his own house, and
 she can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it
 is to win her.”
 
they all held their peace until amphinomus rose to speak. was the
 of nisus, who was to king aretias, and was foremost among
 all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of
 dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to penelope
 than that of any of the other suitors, for was man of good natural
 disposition. “my friends,” said he, speaking to them plainly and in all
 honestly, “i am not in favour of killing telemachus. it is heinous
 thing to kill one who is of noble blood. let us first take counsel of
 the gods, and if the oracles of jove advise it, i will both help to
 kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they
 dissuade us, i would have you hold your hands.”
 
thus did speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose
 forthwith and went to the house of ulysses, where they took their
 accustomed seats.
 
then penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. she
 knew of the plot against telemachus, for the servant medon had
 overheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to
 the court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
 stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister
 holding veil before her face, and rebuked antinous saying:
 
“antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best
 speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in ithaca, but you are
 nothing of the kind. madman, why should you try to compass the death of
 telemachus, and take heed of suppliants, whose witness is jove
 himself? it is not right for you to plot thus against one another. do
 you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the
 people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some taphian
 pirates and plundered the thesprotians who were at peace with us? they
 wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything had, but ulysses
 stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour
 his property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his
 wife and trying to kill his son. leave off doing so, and stop the
 others also.”
 
to this eurymachus of polybus answered, “take heart, queen penelope
 daughter of icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
 the man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon
 your telemachus, while i yet live to look upon the face of the
 earth. i say—and it shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddened
 with his blood; for many time has ulysses taken on his knees, held
 wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
 therefore telemachus is much the dearest friend i have, and has nothing
 to fear from the hands of us suitors. of course, if death comes to him
 from the gods, cannot escape it.” said this to quiet her, but in
 reality was plotting against telemachus.
 
then penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till minerva
 shed sleep over her eyes. in the evening eumaeus got back to ulysses
 and his son, who had just sacrificed young pig of year old and were
 helping one another to get supper ready; minerva therefore came up to
 ulysses, turned him into an old man with stroke of her wand, and clad
 him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might
 recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell penelope.
 
telemachus was the first to speak. “so you have got back, eumaeus,”
 said he. “what is the news of the town? have the suitors returned, or
 are they still waiting over yonder, to take on my way home?”
 
“i did not think of asking about that,” replied eumaeus, “when i was in
 the town. i thought i would give my message and come back as soon as i
 could. i met man sent by those who had gone with you to pylos, and he
 was the first to tell the news to your mother, but i can say what i saw
 with my own eyes; i had just got on to the crest of the hill of mercury
 above the town when i saw ship coming into harbour with number of
 men in her. they had many shields and spears, and i thought it was the
 suitors, but i cannot be sure.”
 
on hearing this telemachus smiled to his father, but so that eumaeus
 could not see him.
 
then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they
 ate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. as
 soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest
 and enjoyed the boon of sleep.
 



book xvii
 

telemachus and his mother meet—ulysses and eumaeus come down to the
 town, and ulysses is insulted by melanthius—he is recognised by the dog
 argos—he is insulted and presently struck by antinous with a
 stool—penelope desires that shall be sent to her.
 

when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, telemachus
 bound on his sandals and took strong spear that suited his hands, for
 wanted to go into the city. “old friend,” said to the swineherd,
 “i will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will
 never leave off grieving till she has seen me. as for this unfortunate
 stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who
 will give him drink and piece of bread. i have trouble enough of my
 own, and cannot be burdened with other people. if this makes him angry
 so much the worse for him, but i like to say what i mean.”
 
then ulysses said, “sir, i do not want to stay here; beggar can
 always do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give
 him something. i am too old to care about remaining here at the beck
 and call of master. therefore let this man do as you have just told
 him, and take to the town as soon as i have had warm by the fire,
 and the day has got little heat in it. my clothes are wretchedly
 thin, and this frosty morning i shall be perished with cold, for you
 say the city is some way off.”
 
on this telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge
 upon the suitors. when reached home stood his spear against a
 bearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister
 itself, and went inside.
 
nurse euryclea saw him long before any one else did. she was putting
 the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to
 him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and
 shoulders with their kisses. penelope came out of her room looking like
 diana or venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son. she
 kissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, “light of my eyes,”
 she cried as she spoke fondly to him, “so you are come home again; i
 made sure i was never going to see you any more. to think of your
 having gone off to pylos without saying anything about it or obtaining
 my consent. but come, tell what you saw.”
 
“do not scold me, mother,” answered telemachus, “nor vex me, seeing
 what narrow escape i have had, but wash your face, change your dress,
 go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs
 to all the gods if jove will only grant us our revenge upon the
 suitors. i must now go to the place of assembly to invite stranger
 who has come back with from pylos. i sent him on with my crew, and
 told piraeus to take him home and look after him till i could come for
 him myself.”
 
she heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, and
 vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only
 vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors.
 
telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—not
 alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. minerva endowed him with a
 presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as went
 by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths
 and malice in their hearts; but avoided them, and went to sit with
 mentor, antiphus, and halitherses, old friends of his father’s house,
 and they made him tell them all that had happened to him. then piraeus
 came up with theoclymenus, whom had escorted through the town to the
 place of assembly, whereon telemachus at once joined them. piraeus was
 first to speak: “telemachus,” said he, “i wish you would send some of
 your women to my house to take away the presents menelaus gave you.”
 
“we do not know, piraeus,” answered telemachus, “what may happen. if
 the suitors kill in my own house and divide my property among them,
 i would rather you had the presents than that any of those people
 should get hold of them. if on the other hand i managed to kill them, i
 shall be much obliged if you will kindly bring my presents.”
 
with these words took theoclymenus to his own house. when they got
 there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the
 baths, and washed themselves. when the maids had washed and anointed
 them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at
 table. maid servant then brought them water in beautiful golden
 ewer, and poured it into silver basin for them to wash their hands;
 and she drew clean table beside them. an upper servant brought them
 bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
 opposite them sat penelope, reclining on couch by one of the
 bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. then they laid their hands
 on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
 enough to eat and drink penelope said:
 
“telemachus, i shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which
 i have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day ulysses set out
 for troy with the sons of atreus. you failed, however, to make it clear
 to before the suitors came back to the house, whether or you had
 been able to hear anything about the return of your father.”
 
“i will tell you then truth,” replied her son. “we went to pylos and
 saw nestor, who took to his house and treated as hospitably as
 though i were of his own who had just returned after long
 absence; so also did his sons; but said had not heard word from
 any human being about ulysses, whether was alive or dead. sent
 me, therefore, with chariot and horses to menelaus. there i saw
 helen, for whose sake so many, both argives and trojans, were in
 heaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer. menelaus asked what it was that
 had brought to lacedaemon, and i told him the whole truth, whereon
 said, ‘so, then, these cowards would usurp brave man’s bed? hind
 might as well lay her new-born young in the lair of lion, and then go
 off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell. the lion, when he
 comes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair of them, and
 so will ulysses with these suitors. by father jove, minerva, and
 apollo, if ulysses is still the man that was when wrestled with
 philomeleides in lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the greeks
 cheered him—if is still such, and were to come near these suitors,
 they would have short shrift and sorry wedding. as regards your
 question, however, i will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the
 old man of the told me, so much will i tell you in full. said he
 could see ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the
 nymph calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and could not reach his
 home, for had ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ this
 was what menelaus told me, and when i had heard his story i came away;
 the gods then gave fair wind and soon brought safe home again.”
 
with these words moved the heart of penelope. then theoclymenus said
 to her:
 
“madam, wife of ulysses, telemachus does not understand these things;
 listen therefore to me, for i can divine them surely, and will hide
 nothing from you. may jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the
 rites of hospitality, with that hearth of ulysses to which i now come,
 that ulysses himself is even now in ithaca, and, either going about the
 country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds
 and preparing day of reckoning for the suitors. i saw an omen when i
 was on the ship which meant this, and i told telemachus about it.”
 
“may it be even so,” answered penelope; “if your words come true, you
 shall have such gifts and such good will from that all who see you
 shall congratulate you.”
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or
 aiming with spears at mark on the levelled ground in front of the
 house, and behaving with all their old insolence. but when it was now
 time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the
 town from all the country round, 140 with their shepherds as usual,
 then medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them
 at table, said, “now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport,
 so come inside that we may get dinner ready. dinner is not bad thing,
 at dinner time.”
 
they left their sports as told them, and when they were within the
 house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then
 sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and heifer, all of them fat and
 well grown.141 thus they made ready for their meal. in the meantime
 ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the
 swineherd said, “stranger, i suppose you still want to go to town
 to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part i should have
 liked you to stay here as station hand, but i must do as my master
 tells me, or will scold later on, and scolding from one’s
 master is very serious thing. let us then be off, for it is now broad
 day; it will be night again directly and then you will find it
 colder.”142
 
“i know, and understand you,” replied ulysses; “you need say more.
 let us be going, but if you have stick ready cut, let have it to
 walk with, for you say the road is very rough one.”
 
as spoke threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,
 by the cord from which it hung, and eumaeus gave him stick to his
 liking. the two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs
 and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his
 master followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as he
 leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. when they had
 got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached
 the fountain from which the citizens drew their water. this had been
 made by ithacus, neritus, and polyctor. there was grove of
 water-loving poplars planted in circle all round it, and the clear
 cold water came down to it from rock high up,143 while above the
 fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used
 to sacrifice. here melanthius of dolius overtook them as was
 driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors’
 dinner, and there were two shepherds with him. when saw eumaeus and
 ulysses reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, which
 made ulysses very angry.
 
“there you go,” cried he, “and precious pair you are. see how heaven
 brings birds of the same feather to one another. where, pray, master
 swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? it would make any
 one sick to see such creature at table. fellow like this never won
 prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his
 shoulders against every man’s door post, and begging, not for swords
 and cauldrons144 like man, but only for few scraps not worth
 begging for. if you would give him to for hand on my station, he
 might do to clean out the folds, or bring bit of sweet feed to the
 kids, and could fatten his thighs as much as pleased on whey; but
 has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he
 will do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his
 insatiable belly. i say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if goes
 near ulysses’ house will get his head broken by the stools they will
 fling at him, till they turn him out.”
 
on this, as passed, gave ulysses kick on the hip out of pure
 wantonness, but ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path.
 for moment doubted whether or to fly at melanthius and kill him
 with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he
 resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the
 swineherd looked straight at melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his
 hands and praying to heaven as did so.
 
“fountain nymphs,” cried, “children of jove, if ever ulysses burned
 you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my
 prayer that heaven may send him home. would soon put an end to the
 swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting
 people—gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin
 through bad shepherding.”
 
then melanthius the goatherd answered, “you ill conditioned cur, what
 are you talking about? some day or other i will put you on board ship
 and take you to foreign country, where i can sell you and pocket the
 money you will fetch. i wish i were as sure that apollo would strike
 telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as i
 am that ulysses will never come home again.”
 
with this left them to come on at their leisure, while went
 quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. when got
 there went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite
 eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. the servants
 brought him portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread
 before him that might eat. presently ulysses and the swineherd came
 up to the house and stood by it, amid sound of music, for phemius was
 just beginning to sing to the suitors. then ulysses took hold of the
 swineherd’s hand, and said:
 
“eumaeus, this house of ulysses is very fine place. matter how far
 you go, you will find few like it. one building keeps following on
 after another. the outer court has wall with battlements all round
 it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be
 hard matter to take it by force of arms. i perceive, too, that there
 are many people banqueting within it, for there is smell of roast
 meat, and i hear sound of music, which the gods have made to go along
 with feasting.”
 
then eumaeus said, “you have perceived aright, as indeed you generally
 do; but let us think what will be our best course. will you go inside
 first and join the suitors, leaving here behind you, or will you
 wait here and let go in first? but do not wait long, or some one may
 see you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. consider
 this matter i pray you.”
 
and ulysses answered, “i understand and heed. go in first and leave me
 here where i am. i am quite used to being beaten and having things
 thrown at me. i have been so much buffeted about in war and by that
 i am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. but man cannot
 hide away the cravings of hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives
 much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted
 out to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people.”
 
as they were thus talking, dog that had been lying asleep raised his
 head and pricked up his ears. this was argos, whom ulysses had bred
 before setting out for troy, but had never had any work out of him.
 in the old days used to be taken out by the young men when they went
 hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone
 was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in
 front of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away to
 manure the great close; and was full of fleas. as soon as saw
 ulysses standing there, dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but he
 could not get close up to his master. when ulysses saw the dog on the
 other side of the yard, dashed tear from his eyes without eumaeus
 seeing it, and said:
 
“eumaeus, what noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap:
 his build is splendid; is as fine fellow as looks, or is he
 only one of those dogs that come begging about table, and are kept
 merely for show?”
 
“this hound,” answered eumaeus, “belonged to him who has died in far
 country. if were what was when ulysses left for troy, would
 soon show you what could do. there was not wild beast in the
 forest that could get away from him when was once on its tracks. but
 now has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and
 the women take care of him. servants never do their work when their
 master’s hand is longer over them, for jove takes half the goodness
 out of man when makes slave of him.”
 
as spoke went inside the buildings to the cloister where the
 suitors were, but argos died as soon as had recognised his master.
 
telemachus saw eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him
 to come and sit beside him; so looked about and saw seat lying
 near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he
 picked it up, brought it to telemachus’s table, and sat down opposite
 him. then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from
 the bread-basket.
 
immediately afterwards ulysses came inside, looking like poor
 miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in
 rags. sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors
 leading from the outer to the inner court, and against bearing-post
 of cypress-wood which the carpenter had skilfully planed, and had made
 to join truly with rule and line. telemachus took whole loaf from the
 bread-basket, with as much meat as could hold in his two hands, and
 said to eumaeus, “take this to the stranger, and tell him to go the
 round of the suitors, and beg from them; beggar must not be
 shamefaced.”
 
so eumaeus went up to him and said, “stranger, telemachus sends you
 this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for
 beggars must not be shamefaced.”
 
ulysses answered, “may king jove grant all happiness to telemachus, and
 fulfil the desire of his heart.”
 
then with both hands took what telemachus had sent him, and laid it
 on the dirty old wallet at his feet. went on eating it while the
 bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as left off. the
 suitors applauded the bard, whereon minerva went up to ulysses and
 prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that
 might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the
 bad; but come what might she was not going to save single one of
 them. ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right,
 and stretched out his hands to beg as though were real beggar.
 some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another
 who was and where came from; whereon the goatherd melanthius
 said, “suitors of my noble mistress, i can tell you something about
 him, for i have seen him before. the swineherd brought him here, but i
 know nothing about the man himself, nor where comes from.”
 
on this antinous began to abuse the swineherd. “you precious idiot,” he
 cried, “what have you brought this man to town for? have we not tramps
 and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? do you think
 it small thing that such people gather here to waste your master’s
 property—and must you needs bring this man as well?”
 
and eumaeus answered, “antinous, your birth is good but your words
 evil. it was doing of mine that came here. who is likely to
 invite stranger from foreign country, unless it be one of those who
 can do public service as seer, healer of hurts, carpenter, or a
 bard who can charm us with his singing? such men are welcome all the
 world over, but one is likely to ask beggar who will only worry
 him. you are always harder on ulysses’ servants than any of the other
 suitors are, and above all on me, but i do not care so long as
 telemachus and penelope are alive and here.”
 
but telemachus said, “hush, do not answer him; antinous has the
 bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and makes the others worse.”
 
then turning to antinous said, “antinous, you take as much care of
 my interests as though i were your son. why should you want to see this
 stranger turned out of the house? heaven forbid; take something and
 give it him yourself; i do not grudge it; i bid you take it. never mind
 my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but i know you
 will not do what i say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself
 than of giving them to other people.”
 
“what do you mean, telemachus,” replied antinous, “by this swaggering
 talk? if all the suitors were to give him as much as i will, would
 not come here again for another three months.”
 
as spoke drew the stool on which rested his dainty feet from
 under the table, and made as though would throw it at ulysses, but
 the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet with
 bread and meat; was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold
 and eat what the suitors had given him, but first went up to
 antinous and said:
 
“sir, give something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you
 seem to be chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be
 the better giver, and i will tell far and wide of your bounty. i too
 was rich man once, and had fine house of my own; in those days i
 gave to many tramp such as i now am, matter who might be nor
 what wanted. i had any number of servants, and all the other things
 which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it
 pleased jove to take all away from me. sent with band of roving
 robbers to egypt; it was long voyage and i was undone by it. i
 stationed my ships in the river aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them
 and keep guard over them, while i sent out scouts to reconnoitre from
 every point of vantage.
 
“but the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and
 ravaged the land of the egyptians, killing the men, and taking their
 wives and children captives. the alarm was soon carried to the city,
 and when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till
 the plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam
 of armour. then jove spread panic among my men, and they would no
 longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. the
 egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced
 labour for them; as for myself, they gave to friend who met them,
 to take to cyprus, dmetor by name, of iasus, who was great man in
 cyprus. thence i am come hither in state of great misery.”
 
then antinous said, “what god can have sent such pestilence to plague
 us during our dinner? get out, into the open part of the court,145 or i
 will give you egypt and cyprus over again for your insolence and
 importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given you
 lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be free
 with other people’s property when there is plenty of it.”
 
on this ulysses began to move off, and said, “your looks, my fine sir,
 are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would
 not spare poor man so much as pinch of salt, for though you are in
 another man’s, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you
 to give him even piece of bread.”
 
this made antinous very angry, and scowled at him saying, “you shall
 pay for this before you get clear of the court.” with these words he
 threw footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near
 the top of his back. ulysses stood firm as rock and the blow did not
 even stagger him, but shook his head in silence as brooded on his
 revenge. then went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying
 his well filled wallet at his feet.
 
“listen to me,” cried, “you suitors of queen penelope, that i may
 speak even as i am minded. man knows neither ache nor pain if gets
 hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and
 even so antinous has hit while in the service of my miserable belly,
 which is always getting people into trouble. still, if the poor have
 gods and avenging deities at all, i pray them that antinous may come to
 bad end before his marriage.”
 
“sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off
 elsewhere,” shouted antinous. “if you say more i will have you dragged
 hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you
 alive.”
 
the other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young
 men said, “antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a
 tramp: it will be worse for you if should turn out to be some
 god—and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as
 people from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do
 amiss and who righteously.”146
 
thus said the suitors, but antinous paid them heed. meanwhile
 telemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to his
 father, and though tear fell from him, shook his head in silence
 and brooded on his revenge.
 
now when penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the
 banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “would that apollo
 would so strike you, antinous,” and her waiting woman eurynome
 answered, “if our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would
 ever again see the sun rise.” then penelope said, “nurse,147 i hate
 every single one of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but i
 hate antinous like the darkness of death itself. poor unfortunate
 tramp has come begging about the house for sheer want. every one else
 has given him something to put in his wallet, but antinous has hit him
 on the right shoulder-blade with footstool.”
 
thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in the
 meantime ulysses was getting his dinner. then she called for the
 swineherd and said, “eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, i
 want to see him and ask him some questions. seems to have travelled
 much, and may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “if these achaeans, madam,
 would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his
 adventures. i had him three days and three nights with in my hut,
 which was the first place reached after running away from his ship,
 and has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. if had
 been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips
 all hearers hang entranced, i could not have been more charmed as i sat
 in my hut and listened to him. says there is an old friendship
 between his house and that of ulysses, and that comes from crete
 where the descendants of minos live, after having been driven hither
 and thither by every kind of misfortune; also declares that has
 heard of ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the
 thesprotians, and that is bringing great wealth home with him.”
 
“call him here, then,” said penelope, “that i too may hear his story.
 as for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they
 will, for they have nothing to fret about. their corn and wine remain
 unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while
 they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen,
 sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a
 thought to the quantity of wine they drink. estate can stand such
 recklessness, for we have now ulysses to protect us. if were to
 come again, and his would soon have their revenge.”
 
as she spoke telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house
 resounded with it. penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to
 eumaeus, “go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my sneezed
 just as i was speaking? this can only mean that all the suitors are
 going to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape. furthermore
 i say, and lay my saying to your heart: if i am satisfied that the
 stranger is speaking the truth i shall give him shirt and cloak of
 good wear.”
 
when eumaeus heard this went straight to ulysses and said, “father
 stranger, my mistress penelope, mother of telemachus, has sent for you;
 she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her
 about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the
 truth, she will give you shirt and cloak, which are the very things
 that you are most in want of. as for bread, you can get enough of that
 to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those give
 that will.”
 
“i will tell penelope,” answered ulysses, “nothing but what is strictly
 true. i know all about her husband, and have been partner with him in
 affliction, but i am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel
 suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. just now,
 moreover, as i was going about the house without doing any harm, man
 gave blow that hurt very much, but neither telemachus nor any
 one else defended me. tell penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait
 till sundown. let her give seat close up to the fire, for my
 clothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for you have seen them
 ever since i first asked you to help me—she can then ask about the
 return of her husband.”
 
the swineherd went back when heard this, and penelope said as she
 saw him cross the threshold, “why do you not bring him here, eumaeus?
 is afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is shy of coming
 inside the house at all? beggars should not be shamefaced.”
 
to this you answered, swineherd eumaeus, “the stranger is quite
 reasonable. is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one
 else would do. asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much
 better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can
 hear him and talk to him as you will.”
 
“the man is fool,” answered penelope, “it would very likely be as he
 says, for there are such abominable people in the whole world as
 these men are.”
 
when she had done speaking eumaeus went back to the suitors, for had
 explained everything. then went up to telemachus and said in his ear
 so that none could overhear him, “my dear sir, i will now go back to
 the pigs, to see after your property and my own business. you will look
 to what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of
 danger, for there are many who bear you ill will. may jove bring them
 to bad end before they do us mischief.”
 
“very well,” replied telemachus, “go home when you have had your
 dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are to
 sacrifice for the day. leave the rest to heaven and me.”
 
on this eumaeus took his seat again, and when had finished his
 dinner left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and
 went back to his pigs. as for the suitors, they presently began to
 amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on
 towards evening.
 



book xviii
 

the fight with irus—ulysses warns amphinomus—penelope gets presents
 from the suitors—the braziers—ulysses rebukes eurymachus.
 

now there came certain common tramp who used to go begging all over
 the city of ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and
 drunkard. this man had strength nor stay in him, but was great
 hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him,
 was arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him irus,148 because
 used to run errands for any one who would send him. as soon as he
 came began to insult ulysses, and to try and drive him out of his
 own house.
 
“be off, old man,” cried, “from the doorway, or you shall be dragged
 out neck and heels. do you not see that they are all giving the
 wink, and wanting to turn you out by force, only i do not like to do
 so? get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.”
 
ulysses frowned on him and said, “my friend, i do you manner of
 harm; people give you great deal, but i am not jealous. there is room
 enough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me
 things that are not yours to give. you seem to be just such another
 tramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by and
 by. do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will incense
 me, and old though i am, i shall cover your mouth and chest with blood.
 i shall have more peace tomorrow if i do, for you will not come to the
 house of ulysses any more.”
 
irus was very angry and answered, “you filthy glutton, you run on
 trippingly like an old fish-fag. i have good mind to lay both hands
 about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar’s
 tusks. get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and
 look on. you will never be able to fight one who is so much younger
 than yourself.”
 
thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front
 of the doorway,149 and when antinous saw what was going on laughed
 heartily and said to the others, “this is the finest sport that you
 ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house. the
 stranger and irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us set
 them on to do so at once.”
 
the suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged
 tramps. “listen to me,” said antinous, “there are some goats’ paunches
 down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set
 aside for supper; who is victorious and proves himself to be the
 better man shall have his pick of the lot; shall be free of our
 table and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all.”
 
the others all agreed, but ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,
 “sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his
 own against young one; but my irrepressible belly urges on, though
 i know it can only end in my getting drubbing. you must swear,
 however that none of you will give foul blow to favour irus and
 secure him the victory.”
 
they swore as told them, and when they had completed their oath
 telemachus put in word and said, “stranger, if you have mind to
 settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here.
 whoever strikes you will have to fight more than one. i am host, and
 the other chiefs, antinous and eurymachus, both of them men of
 understanding, are of the same mind as i am.”
 
every one assented, and ulysses girded his old rags about his loins,
 thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his
 mighty arms; but minerva came up to him and made his limbs even
 stronger still. the suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one
 would turn towards his neighbour saying, “the stranger has brought such
 thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left of
 irus.”
 
irus began to be very uneasy as heard them, but the servants girded
 him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such
 fright that his limbs were all of tremble. antinous scolded him and
 said, “you swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all
 if you are afraid of such an old broken down creature as this tramp is.
 i say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if beats you and proves
 himself the better man, i shall pack you off on board ship to the
 mainland and send you to king echetus, who kills every one that comes
 near him. will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your
 entrails for the dogs to eat.”
 
this frightened irus still more, but they brought him into the middle
 of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. then ulysses
 considered whether should let drive so hard at him as to make an end
 of him then and there, or whether should give him lighter blow
 that should only knock him down; in the end deemed it best to give
 the lighter blow for fear the achaeans should begin to suspect who he
 was. then they began to fight, and irus hit ulysses on the right
 shoulder; but ulysses gave irus blow on the neck under the ear that
 broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his
 mouth; fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on
 the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of
 laughter, as ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him
 into the outer court as far as the gate-house. there propped him up
 against the wall and put his staff in his hands. “sit here,” said he,
 “and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are pitiful creature, and if you
 try to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still
 worse.”
 
then threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his
 shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon
 the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and
 saluting him, “may jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant you
 whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this
 insatiable tramp. we will take him over to the mainland presently, to
 king echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.”
 
ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and antinous set great goat’s
 paunch before him filled with blood and fat. amphinomus took two loaves
 out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as did
 so in golden goblet of wine. “good luck to you,” said, “father
 stranger, you are very badly off at present, but i hope you will have
 better times by and by.”
 
to this ulysses answered, “amphinomus, you seem to be man of good
 understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose you are. i
 have heard your father well spoken of; is nisus of dulichium, man
 both brave and wealthy. they tell you are his son, and you appear to
 be considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what i am
 saying. man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon
 earth. as long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, thinks
 that shall come to harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods
 bring sorrow upon him, bears it as needs must, and makes the best
 of it; for god almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. i know
 all about it, for i was rich man once, and did much wrong in the
 stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my
 brothers would support me; therefore let man fear god in all things
 always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
 vain glory. consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see
 how they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of
 one who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence.
 nay, will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that
 you may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once is here
 the suitors and will not part bloodlessly.”
 
with these words made drink-offering, and when had drunk put
 the gold cup again into the hands of amphinomus, who walked away
 serious and bowing his head, for foreboded evil. but even so did
 not escape destruction, for minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand
 of telemachus. so took his seat again at the place from which had
 come.
 
then minerva put it into the mind of penelope to show herself to the
 suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win
 still further honour from her and husband. so she feigned mocking
 laugh and said, “eurynome, i have changed my mind, and have fancy to
 show myself to the suitors although i detest them. i should like also
 to give my hint that had better not have anything more to do
 with them. they speak fairly enough but they mean mischief.”
 
“my dear child,” answered eurynome, “all that you have said is true, go
 and tell your about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your
 face. do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is
 not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for telemachus, whom
 you always prayed that you might live to see with beard, is already
 grown up.”
 
“i know, eurynome,” replied penelope, “that you mean well, but do not
 try and persuade to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me
 of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
 autonoe and hippodamia that i want them. they must be with when i am
 in the cloister; i am not going among the men alone; it would not be
 proper for to do so.”
 
on this the old woman150 went out of the room to bid the maids go to
 their mistress. in the meantime minerva bethought her of another
 matter, and sent penelope off into sweet slumber; so she lay down on
 her couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. then the goddess shed
 grace and beauty over her that all the achaeans might admire her. she
 washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that venus wears when she
 goes dancing with the graces; she made her taller and of more
 commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn
 ivory. when minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids
 came in from the women’s room and woke penelope with the sound of their
 talking.
 
“what an exquisitely delicious sleep i have been having,” said she, as
 she passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. i wish
 diana would let die so sweetly now at this very moment, that i might
 longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who
 possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man
 among the achaeans.”
 
with these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
 attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
 stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
 holding veil before her face, and with staid maid servant on either
 side of her. as they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
 became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed might
 win her for his own bed fellow.
 
“telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “i fear you are longer
 so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. when you were younger
 you had greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown
 up, though stranger to look at you would take you for the of a
 well to do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by
 means what it should be. what is all this disturbance that has been
 going on, and how came you to allow stranger to be so disgracefully
 ill-treated? what would have happened if had suffered serious injury
 while suppliant in our house? surely this would have been very
 discreditable to you.”
 
“i am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” replied
 telemachus, “i understand all about it and know when things are not as
 they should be, which i could not do when i was younger; i cannot,
 however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. first one and then
 another of these wicked people here keeps driving out of my mind,
 and i have one to stand by me. after all, however, this fight
 between irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it
 to do, for the stranger got the best of it. i wish father jove,
 minerva, and apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers
 of yours, some inside the house and some out; and i wish they might all
 be as limp as irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. see
 how nods his head like drunken man; has had such thrashing
 that cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever
 that may be, for has strength left in him.”
 
thus did they converse. eurymachus then came up and said, “queen
 penelope, daughter of icarius, if all the achaeans in iasian argos
 could see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your
 house by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the
 whole world both as regards personal beauty and strength of
 understanding.”
 
to this penelope replied, “eurymachus, heaven robbed of all my
 beauty whether of face or figure when the argives set sail for troy and
 my dear husband with them. if were to return and look after my
 affairs, i should both be more respected and show better presence to
 the world. as it is, i am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
 which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. my husband foresaw it all,
 and when was leaving home took my right wrist in his hand—‘wife,’
 said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home from troy, for the
 trojans fight well both with bow and spear. they are excellent also at
 fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of fight sooner
 than this. i know not, therefore, whether heaven will send back to
 you, or whether i may not fall over there at troy. in the meantime do
 you look after things here. take care of my father and mother as at
 present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our son
 growing beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your present
 home.’ this is what said and now it is all coming true. night will
 come when i shall have to yield myself to marriage which i detest,
 for jove has taken from all hope of happiness. this further grief,
 moreover, cuts to the very heart. you suitors are not wooing me
 after the custom of my country. when men are courting woman who they
 think will be good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when
 they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen
 and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her
 magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people’s property
 without paying for it.”
 
this was what she said, and ulysses was glad when heard her trying
 to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words
 which knew she did not mean.
 
then antinous said, “queen penelope, daughter of icarius, take as many
 presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is
 not well to refuse present; but we will not go about our business nor
 stir from where we are, till you have married the best man among us
 whoever may be.”
 
the others applauded what antinous had said, and each one sent his
 servant to bring his present. antinous’s man returned with large and
 lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. it had twelve beautifully
 made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. eurymachus
 immediately brought her magnificent chain of gold and amber beads
 that gleamed like sunlight. eurydamas’s two men returned with some
 earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most
 beautifully; while king pisander of polyctor gave her necklace of
 the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her beautiful
 present of some kind.
 
then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought
 the presents after her. meanwhile the suitors took to singing and
 dancing, and stayed till evening came. they danced and sang till it
 grew dark; they then brought in three braziers151 to give light, and
 piled them up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit
 torches from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. then
 ulysses said:
 
“maids, servants of ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the
 queen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick
 wool. i will hold the light for all these people. they may stay till
 morning, but shall not beat me, for i can stand great deal.”
 
the maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty melantho
 began to gibe at him contemptuously. she was daughter to dolius, but
 had been brought up by penelope, who used to give her toys to play
 with, and looked after her when she was child; but in spite of all
 this she showed consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and
 used to misconduct herself with eurymachus, with whom she was in love.
 
“poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of your mind? go and
 sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering
 here. are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters—so
 many of them too? has the wine been getting into your head, or do you
 always babble in this way? you seem to have lost your wits because you
 beat the tramp irus; take care that better man than does not come
 and cudgel you about the head till pack you bleeding out of the
 house.”
 
“vixen,” replied ulysses, scowling at her, “i will go and tell
 telemachus what you have been saying, and will have you torn limb
 from limb.”
 
with these words scared the women, and they went off into the body
 of the house. they trembled all over, for they thought would do as
 said. but ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding
 up torches and looking at the people—brooding the while on things that
 should surely come to pass.
 
but minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their
 insolence, for she wanted ulysses to become even more bitter against
 them; she therefore set eurymachus of polybus on to gibe at him,
 which made the others laugh. “listen to me,” said he, “you suitors of
 queen penelope, that i may speak even as i am minded. it is not for
 nothing that this man has come to the house of ulysses; i believe the
 light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head—for
 his hair is all gone, every bit of it.”
 
then turning to ulysses said, “stranger, will you work as servant,
 if i send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? can you
 build stone fence, or plant trees? i will have you fed all the year
 round, and will find you in shoes and clothing. will you go, then? not
 you; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had
 rather fill your belly by going round the country begging.”
 
“eurymachus,” answered ulysses, “if you and i were to work one against
 the other in early summer when the days are at their longest—give a
 good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will last
 the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing
 grass is about. or if you will plough against me, let us each take a
 yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance:
 turn into four acre field, and see whether you or i can drive the
 straighter furrow. if, again, war were to break out this day, give a
 shield, couple of spears and helmet fitting well upon my
 temples—you would find foremost in the fray, and would cease your
 gibes about my belly. you are insolent and cruel, and think yourself a
 great man because you live in little world, and that bad one. if
 ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but
 you will find them narrow when you try to fly through them.”
 
eurymachus was furious at all this. scowled at him and cried, “you
 wretch, i will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me,
 and in public too. has the wine been getting into your head or do you
 always babble in this way? you seem to have lost your wits because you
 beat the tramp irus.” with this caught hold of footstool, but
 ulysses sought protection at the knees of amphinomus of dulichium, for
 was afraid. the stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and
 knocked him down: the man fell with cry flat on his back, and his
 wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. the suitors in the covered
 cloister were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his
 neighbour, saying, “i wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad
 luck to him, for all the trouble gives us. we cannot permit such
 disturbance about beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we
 shall have more pleasure at our banquet.”
 
on this telemachus came forward and said, “sirs, are you mad? can you
 not carry your meat and your liquor decently? some evil spirit has
 possessed you. i do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had
 your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better.”
 
the suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
 but amphinomus the of nisus, who was to aretias, said, “do not
 let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make answer.
 neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of ulysses’
 servants. let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we
 may make them and go home to our rest. as for the stranger, let us
 leave telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that has
 come.”
 
thus did speak, and his saying pleased them well, so mulius of
 dulichium, servant to amphinomus, mixed them bowl of wine and water
 and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their
 drink-offerings to the blessed gods: then, when they had made their
 drink-offerings and had drunk each one as was minded, they took
 their several ways each of them to his own abode.
 



book xix
 

telemachus and ulysses remove the armour—ulysses interviews
 penelope—euryclea washes his feet and recognises the scar on his
 leg—penelope tells her dream to ulysses.
 

ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with
 minerva’s help might be able to kill the suitors. presently said
 to telemachus, “telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it
 down inside. make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have
 removed it. say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the
 smoke, inasmuch as it is longer what it was when ulysses went away,
 but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. add to this more
 particularly that you are afraid jove may set them on to quarrel over
 their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may
 disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes
 tempts people to use them.”
 
telemachus approved of what his father had said, so called nurse
 euryclea and said, “nurse, shut the women up in their room, while i
 take the armour that my father left behind him down into the store
 room. one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all
 smirched with soot during my own boyhood. i want to take it down where
 the smoke cannot reach it.”
 
“i wish, child,” answered euryclea, “that you would take the management
 of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the
 property yourself. but who is to go with you and light you to the
 store-room? the maids would have done so, but you would not let them.”
 
“the stranger,” said telemachus, “shall show light; when people
 eat my bread they must earn it, matter where they come from.”
 
euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
 then ulysses and his made all haste to take the helmets, shields,
 and spears inside; and minerva went before them with gold lamp in her
 hand that shed soft and brilliant radiance, whereon telemachus said,
 “father, my eyes behold great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,
 crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with a
 flaming fire. surely there is some god here who has come down from
 heaven.”
 
“hush,” answered ulysses, “hold your peace and ask questions, for
 this is the manner of the gods. get you to your bed, and leave here
 to talk with your mother and the maids. your mother in her grief will
 ask all sorts of questions.”
 
on this telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner
 court, to the room in which always slept. there lay in his bed
 till morning, while ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the
 means whereby with minerva’s help might be able to kill the suitors.
 
then penelope came down from her room looking like venus or diana, and
 they set her seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the
 fire in her accustomed place. it had been made by icmalius and had a
 footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered
 with thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the
 women’s room to join her. they set about removing the tables at which
 the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was
 left, with the cups from which they had drunk. they emptied the embers
 out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light
 and heat; but melantho began to rail at ulysses second time and said,
 “stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all
 night and spying upon the women? be off, you wretch, outside, and eat
 your supper there, or you shall be driven out with firebrand.”
 
ulysses scowled at her and answered, “my good woman, why should you be
 so angry with me? is it because i am not clean, and my clothes are all
 in rags, and because i am obliged to go begging about after the manner
 of tramps and beggars generally? i too was rich man once, and had a
 fine house of my own; in those days i gave to many tramp such as i
 now am, matter who might be nor what wanted. i had any number
 of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well
 and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased jove to take all away from
 me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and
 place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have care lest you
 get out of favour with your mistress, and lest ulysses should come
 home, for there is still chance that may do so. moreover, though
 be dead as you think is, yet by apollo’s will has left son
 behind him, telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids
 in the house, for is now longer in his boyhood.”
 
penelope heard what was saying and scolded the maid, “impudent
 baggage,” said she, “i see how abominably you are behaving, and you
 shall smart for it. you knew perfectly well, for i told you myself,
 that i was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for
 whose sake i am in such continual sorrow.”
 
then she said to her head waiting woman eurynome, “bring seat with a
 fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while tells his story,
 and listens to what i have to say. i wish to ask him some questions.”
 
eurynome brought the seat at once and set fleece upon it, and as soon
 as ulysses had sat down penelope began by saying, “stranger, i shall
 first ask you who and whence are you? tell of your town and
 parents.”
 
“madam,” answered ulysses, “who on the face of the whole earth can dare
 to chide with you? your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself;
 you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the
 monarch over great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and
 barley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs,
 and the abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people
 do good deeds under him. nevertheless, as i sit here in your house, ask
 some other question and do not seek to know my race and family, or
 you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. i am
 full of heaviness, but i ought not to sit weeping and wailing in
 another person’s house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually.
 i shall have one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me,
 and saying that my eyes swim with tears because i am heavy with wine.”
 
then penelope answered, “stranger, heaven robbed of all beauty,
 whether of face or figure, when the argives set sail for troy and my
 dear husband with them. if were to return and look after my affairs
 i should be both more respected and should show better presence to
 the world. as it is, i am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
 which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. the chiefs from all our
 islands—dulichium, same, and zacynthus, as also from ithaca itself, are
 wooing against my will and are wasting my estate. i can therefore
 show attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say
 that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-hearted
 about ulysses. they want to marry again at once, and i have to
 invent stratagems in order to deceive them. in the first place heaven
 put it in my mind to set up great tambour-frame in my room, and to
 begin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. then i said to
 them, ‘sweethearts, ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press to
 marry again immediately; wait—for i would not have my skill in
 needlework perish unrecorded—till i have finished making pall for the
 hero laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him.
 is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if is laid out
 without pall.’ this was what i said, and they assented; whereon i
 used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night i would
 unpick the stitches again by torch light. i fooled them in this way for
 three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and i was
 now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been
 accomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed to
 the suitors, who broke in upon and caught me; they were very angry
 with me, so i was forced to finish my work whether i would or no. and
 now i do not see how i can find any further shift for getting out of
 this marriage. my parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my
 chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for
 is now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able
 to look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an
 excellent disposition. still, notwithstanding all this, tell who you
 are and where you come from—for you must have had father and mother of
 some sort; you cannot be the of an oak or of rock.”
 
then ulysses answered, “madam, wife of ulysses, since you persist in
 asking about my family, i will answer, matter what it costs me:
 people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as i
 have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. nevertheless, as
 regards your question i will tell you all you ask. there is fair and
 fruitful island in mid-ocean called crete; it is thickly peopled and
 there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many different
 languages which overlap one another, for there are achaeans, brave
 eteocretans, dorians of three-fold race, and noble pelasgi. there is a
 great town there, cnossus, where minos reigned who every nine years had
 conference with jove himself.152 minos was father to deucalion, whose
 i am, for deucalion had two sons idomeneus and myself. idomeneus
 sailed for troy, and i, who am the younger, am called aethon; my
 brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the
 two; hence it was in crete that i saw ulysses and showed him
 hospitality, for the winds took him there as was on his way to troy,
 carrying him out of his course from cape malea and leaving him in
 amnisus off the cave of ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to
 enter and could hardly find shelter from the winds that were then
 raging. as soon as got there went into the town and asked for
 idomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but idomeneus had
 already set sail for troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so i took
 him to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for i had
 abundance of everything. moreover, i fed the men who were with him with
 barley meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and
 oxen for them to sacrifice to their heart’s content. they stayed with
 twelve days, for there was gale blowing from the north so strong
 that one could hardly keep one’s feet on land. i suppose some
 unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the
 wind dropped, and they got away.”
 
many plausible tale did ulysses further tell her, and penelope wept
 as she listened, for her heart was melted. as the snow wastes upon the
 mountain tops when the winds from south east and west have breathed
 upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so
 did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time
 sitting by her side. ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but he
 kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much as
 quiver, so cunningly did restrain his tears. then, when she had
 relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: “now,
 stranger, i shall put you to the test and see whether or you really
 did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. tell me,
 then, how was dressed, what kind of man was to look at, and so
 also with his companions.”
 
“madam,” answered ulysses, “it is such long time ago that i can
 hardly say. twenty years are come and gone since left my home, and
 went elsewhither; but i will tell you as well as i can recollect.
 ulysses wore mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened
 by gold brooch with two catches for the pin. on the face of this
 there was device that shewed dog holding spotted fawn between his
 fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. every one
 marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the
 dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was
 struggling convulsively to escape.153 as for the shirt that wore
 next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an
 onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women
 who beheld it. furthermore i say, and lay my saying to your heart, that
 i do not know whether ulysses wore these clothes when left home, or
 whether one of his companions had given them to him while was on his
 voyage; or possibly some one at whose house was staying made him a
 present of them, for was man of many friends and had few equals
 among the achaeans. i myself gave him sword of bronze and beautiful
 purple mantle, double lined, with shirt that went down to his feet,
 and i sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. had a
 servant with him, little older than himself, and i can tell you what
 was like; his shoulders were hunched,154 was dark, and had
 thick curly hair. his name was eurybates, and ulysses treated him with
 greater familiarity than did any of the others, as being the most
 like-minded with himself.”
 
penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable
 proofs that ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found
 relief in tears she said to him, “stranger, i was already disposed to
 pity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my
 house. it was i who gave ulysses the clothes you speak of. i took them
 out of the store room and folded them up myself, and i gave him also
 the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. alas! i shall never welcome him
 home again. it was by an ill fate that ever set out for that
 detested city whose very name i cannot bring myself even to mention.”
 
then ulysses answered, “madam, wife of ulysses, do not disfigure
 yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though i can
 hardly blame you for doing so. woman who has loved her husband and
 borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even
 though were worse man than ulysses, who they say was like god.
 still, cease your tears and listen to what i can tell you. i will hide
 nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that i have lately
 heard of ulysses as being alive and on his way home; is among the
 thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that has
 begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were
 lost as they were leaving the thrinacian island, for jove and the
 sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the
 sun-god’s cattle, and they were all drowned to man. but ulysses stuck
 to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the
 phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him
 as though had been god, giving him many presents, and wishing to
 escort him home safe and sound. in fact ulysses would have been here
 long ago, had not thought better to go from land to land gathering
 wealth; for there is man living who is so wily as is; there is no
 one can compare with him. pheidon king of the thesprotians told all
 this, and swore to me—making drink-offerings in his house as did
 so—that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would
 take ulysses to his own country. sent off first, for there
 happened to be thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island
 of dulichium, but showed all the treasure ulysses had got
 together, and had enough lying in the house of king pheidon to keep
 his family for ten generations; but the king said ulysses had gone to
 dodona that might learn jove’s mind from the high oak tree, and know
 whether after so long an absence should return to ithaca openly or
 in secret. so you may know is safe and will be here shortly; is
 close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer;
 nevertheless i will confirm my words with an oath, and call jove who is
 the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of
 ulysses to which i have now come, that all i have spoken shall surely
 come to pass. ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end
 of this moon and the beginning of the next will be here.”
 
“may it be even so,” answered penelope; “if your words come true you
 shall have such gifts and such good will from that all who see you
 shall congratulate you; but i know very well how it will be. ulysses
 will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
 as that ulysses ever was, there are now longer any such masters in
 the house as was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them
 on their way home. and now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make
 him bed on couch with rugs and blankets, that may be warm and
 quiet till morning. then, at day break wash him and anoint him again,
 that may sit in the cloister and take his meals with telemachus. it
 shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil
 to him; like it or not, shall have more to do in this house. for
 how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or i am superior to
 others of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if i let
 you dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad? men live but for a
 little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill
 so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they
 are dead, but that is righteous and deals righteously, the people
 tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call him blessed.”
 
ulysses answered, “madam, i have foresworn rugs and blankets from the
 day that i left the snowy ranges of crete to go on shipboard. i will
 lie as i have lain on many sleepless night hitherto. night after
 night have i passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for
 morning. nor, again, do i like having my feet washed; i shall not let
 any of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you
 have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble
 as i have, i will allow her to wash them.”
 
to this penelope said, “my dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet
 came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such
 admirable propriety as you do. there happens to be in the house most
 respectable old woman—the same who received my poor dear husband in her
 arms the night was born, and nursed him in infancy. she is very
 feeble now, but she shall wash your feet.” “come here,” said she,
 “euryclea, and wash your master’s age-mate; i suppose ulysses’ hands
 and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of
 us dreadfully fast.”
 
on these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began
 to weep and made lamentation saying, “my dear child, i cannot think
 whatever i am to do with you. i am certain one was ever more
 god-fearing than yourself, and yet jove hates you. one in the whole
 world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs
 when you prayed you might come to green old age yourself and see your
 grow up to take after you: yet see how has prevented you alone
 from ever getting back to your own home. i have doubt the women in
 some foreign palace which ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all
 these sluts here have been gibing at you. i do not wonder at your not
 choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have
 insulted you; i will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as penelope
 has said that i am to do so; i will wash them both for penelope’s sake
 and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of
 compassion in my mind; and let say this moreover, which pray attend
 to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before
 now, but i make bold to say that one ever yet came who was so like
 ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.”
 
“those who have seen us both,” answered ulysses, “have always said we
 were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.”
 
then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his
 feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath
 was warm enough. ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long turned away
 from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold
 of his leg she would recognise certain scar which it bore, whereon
 the whole truth would come out. and indeed as soon as she began washing
 her master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by
 wild boar when was hunting on mt. parnassus with his excellent
 grandfather autolycus—who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer
 in the whole world—and with the sons of autolycus. mercury himself had
 endowed him with this gift, for used to burn the thigh bones of
 goats and kids to him, so took pleasure in his companionship. it
 happened once that autolycus had gone to ithaca and had found the child
 of his daughter just born. as soon as had done supper euryclea set
 the infant upon his knees and said, “autolycus, you must find name
 for your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.”
 
“son-in-law and daughter,” replied autolycus, “call the child thus: i
 am highly displeased with large number of people in one place and
 another, both men and women; so name the child ‘ulysses,’ or the child
 of anger. when grows up and comes to visit his mother’s family on
 mt. parnassus, where my possessions lie, i will make him present and
 will send him on his way rejoicing.”
 
ulysses, therefore, went to parnassus to get the presents from
 autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.
 his grandmother amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his
 head, and both his beautiful eyes, while autolycus desired his sons to
 get dinner ready, and they did as told them. they brought in five
 year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints;
 these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them;
 they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. thus
 through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and
 every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the
 sun set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of
 sleep.
 
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, the sons of
 autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and ulysses went too.
 they climbed the wooded slopes of parnassus and soon reached its breezy
 upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields,
 fresh-risen from the slow still currents of oceanus, they came to a
 mountain dell. the dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the
 beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of autolycus,
 among whom was ulysses, close behind the dogs, and had long spear
 in his hand. here was the lair of huge boar among some thick
 brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it,
 nor could the sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick
 with fallen leaves. the boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and the
 hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he
 rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay
 with fire flashing from his eyes. ulysses was the first to raise his
 spear and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick
 for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a
 gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone. as for the boar,
 ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went
 right through him, so that fell groaning in the dust until the life
 went out of him. the sons of autolycus busied themselves with the
 carcass of the boar, and bound ulysses’ wound; then, after saying a
 spell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. but
 when autolycus and his sons had thoroughly healed ulysses, they made
 him some splendid presents, and sent him back to ithaca with much
 mutual good will. when got back, his father and mother were rejoiced
 to see him, and asked him all about it, and how had hurt himself to
 get the scar; so told them how the boar had ripped him when was
 out hunting with autolycus and his sons on mt. parnassus.
 
as soon as euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well
 hold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. the leg
 fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the
 water was spilt on the ground; euryclea’s eyes between her joy and her
 grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught
 ulysses by the beard and said, “my dear child, i am sure you must be
 ulysses himself, only i did not know you till i had actually touched
 and handled you.”
 
as she spoke she looked towards penelope, as though wanting to tell her
 that her dear husband was in the house, but penelope was unable to look
 in that direction and observe what was going on, for minerva had
 diverted her attention; so ulysses caught euryclea by the throat with
 his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,
 “nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed at your own
 breast, now that after twenty years of wandering i am at last come to
 my own home again? since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to
 recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say word about it to any
 one else in the house, for if you do i tell you—and it shall surely
 be—that if heaven grants to take the lives of these suitors, i will
 not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when i am killing the other
 women.”
 
“my child,” answered euryclea, “what are you talking about? you know
 very well that nothing can either bend or break me. i will hold my
 tongue like stone or piece of iron; furthermore let say, and lay
 my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into
 your hand, i will give you list of the women in the house who have
 been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless.”
 
and ulysses answered, “nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; i am
 well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your
 tongue and leave everything to heaven.”
 
as said this euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water,
 for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and
 anointed him with oil, ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm
 himself, and hid the scar under his rags. then penelope began talking
 to him and said:
 
“stranger, i should like to speak with you briefly about another
 matter. it is indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep
 in spite of sorrow. as for myself, heaven has given life of such
 unmeasurable woe, that even by day when i am attending to my duties and
 looking after the servants, i am still weeping and lamenting during the
 whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, i lie
 awake thinking, and my heart becomes prey to the most incessant and
 cruel tortures. as the dun nightingale, daughter of pandareus, sings in
 the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many a
 plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own
 child itylus, of king zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in
 its uncertainty whether i ought to stay with my here, and safeguard
 my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard
 to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is
 not now time for to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing
 and making such magnificent presents. as long as my was still
 young, and unable to understand, would not hear of my leaving my
 husband’s house, but now that is full grown begs and prays to
 do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his
 property. listen, then, to dream that i have had and interpret it for
 if you can. i have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out of
 trough,155 and of which i am exceedingly fond. i dreamed that great
 eagle came swooping down from mountain, and dug his curved beak into
 the neck of each of them till had killed them all. presently he
 soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;
 whereon i wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so
 piteously was i grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. then he
 came back again, and perching on projecting rafter spoke to with
 human voice, and told to leave off crying. ‘be of good courage,’ he
 said, ‘daughter of icarius; this is dream, but vision of good omen
 that shall surely come to pass. the geese are the suitors, and i am no
 longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who
 will bring these suitors to disgraceful end.’ on this i woke, and
 when i looked out i saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as
 usual.”
 
“this dream, madam,” replied ulysses, “can admit but of one
 interpretation, for had not ulysses himself told you how it shall be
 fulfilled? the death of the suitors is portended, and not one single
 one of them will escape.”
 
and penelope answered, “stranger, dreams are very curious and
 unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come
 true. there are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies
 proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. those that come
 through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn
 mean something to those that see them. i do not think, however, that my
 own dream came through the gate of horn, though i and my should be
 most thankful if it proves to have done so. furthermore i say—and lay
 my saying to your heart—the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened
 day that is to sever from the house of ulysses, for i am about to
 hold tournament of axes. my husband used to set up twelve axes in the
 court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which ship is
 built; would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the
 whole twelve. i shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and
 whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow
 through all the twelve axes, him will i follow, and quit this house of
 my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. but even so, i
 doubt not that i shall remember it in my dreams.”
 
then ulysses answered, “madam, wife of ulysses, you need not defer your
 tournament, for ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow,
 handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron.”
 
to this penelope said, “as long, sir, as you will sit here and talk to
 me, i can have desire to go to bed. still, people cannot do
 permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on
 earth time for all things. i will therefore go upstairs and recline
 upon that couch which i have never ceased to flood with my tears from
 the day ulysses set out for the city with hateful name.”
 
she then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her
 maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till minerva
 shed sweet sleep over her eyelids.
 



book xx
 

ulysses cannot sleep—penelope’s prayer to diana—the two signs from
 heaven—eumaeus and philoetius arrive—the suitors dine—ctesippus throws
 an ox’s foot at ulysses—theoclymenus foretells disaster and leaves the
 house.
 

ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on the
 top of which threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten,
 and eurynome156 threw cloak over him after had laid himself down.
 there, then, ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which he
 should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the
 habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling
 and laughing with one another. this made ulysses very angry, and he
 doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and
 there, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors.
 his heart growled within him, and as bitch with puppies growls and
 shows her teeth when she sees stranger, so did his heart growl with
 anger at the evil deeds that were being done: but beat his breast
 and said, “heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day
 when the terrible cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in
 silence till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made
 sure of being killed.”
 
thus chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
 tossed about as one who turns paunch full of blood and fat in front
 of hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that
 may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did turn himself
 about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he
 was, should contrive to kill so large body of men as the wicked
 suitors. but by and by minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of
 woman, and hovered over his head saying, “my poor unhappy man, why do
 you lie awake in this way? this is your house: your wife is safe inside
 it, and so is your who is just such young man as any father may
 be proud of.”
 
“goddess,” answered ulysses, “all that you have said is true, but i am
 in some doubt as to how i shall be able to kill these wicked suitors
 single handed, seeing what number of them there always are. and there
 is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. supposing
 that with jove’s and your assistance i succeed in killing them, i must
 ask you to consider where i am to escape to from their avengers when it
 is all over.”
 
“for shame,” replied minerva, “why, any one else would trust worse
 ally than myself, even though that ally were only mortal and less
 wise than i am. am i not goddess, and have i not protected you
 throughout in all your troubles? i tell you plainly that even though
 there were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you
 should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you.
 but go to sleep; it is very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you
 shall be out of your troubles before long.”
 
as she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to
 olympus.
 
while ulysses was thus yielding himself to very deep slumber that
 eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
 up in her bed began to cry. when she had relieved herself by weeping
 she prayed to diana saying, “great goddess diana, daughter of jove,
 drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch
 up and bear through paths of darkness till it drop into the
 mouths of over-flowing oceanus, as it did the daughters of pandareus.
 the daughters of pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods
 killed them, so they were left orphans. but venus took care of them,
 and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. juno taught them to
 excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; diana gave them an
 imposing presence, and minerva endowed them with every kind of
 accomplishment; but one day when venus had gone up to olympus to see
 jove about getting them married (for well does know both what shall
 happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and
 spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread erinyes. even so i
 wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide from mortal sight,
 or that fair diana might strike me, for i would fain go even beneath
 the sad earth if i might do so still looking towards ulysses only, and
 without having to yield myself to worse man than was. besides, no
 matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so
 long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in
 slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me
 even in my dreams. this very night methought there was one lying by my
 side who was like ulysses as was when went away with his host,
 and i rejoiced, for i believed that it was dream, but the very truth
 itself.”
 
on this the day broke, but ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and
 it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by
 his side. then gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which had
 lain, and set them on seat in the cloister, but took the bullock’s
 hide out into the open. lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,
 saying “father jove, since you have seen fit to bring over land and
 to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me,
 give sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are
 now waking within the house, and let have another sign of some kind
 from outside.”
 
thus did pray. jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up
 among the clouds from the splendour of olympus, and ulysses was glad
 when heard it. at the same time within the house, miller-woman
 from hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another
 sign. there were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind
 wheat and barley which are the staff of life. the others had ground
 their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet
 finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard
 the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.
 “father jove,” said she, “you, who rule over heaven and earth, you have
 thundered from clear sky without so much as cloud in it, and this
 means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of your poor
 servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that the
 suitors dine in the house of ulysses. they have worn out with labour
 of grinding meal for them, and i hope they may never have another
 dinner anywhere at all.”
 
ulysses was glad when heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’s
 speech, and by the thunder, for knew they meant that should
 avenge himself on the suitors.
 
then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
 telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. girded his sword about
 his shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a
 doughty spear with point of sharpened bronze; then went to the
 threshold of the cloister and said to euryclea, “nurse, did you make
 the stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let
 him shift for himself?—for my mother, good woman though she is, has a
 way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting
 others who are in reality much better men.”
 
“do not find fault child,” said euryclea, “when there is one to find
 fault with. the stranger sat and drank his wine as long as liked:
 your mother did ask him if would take any more bread and said he
 would not. when wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make
 one for him, but said was such wretched outcast that would
 not sleep on bed and under blankets; insisted on having an
 undressed bullock’s hide and some sheepskins put for him in the
 cloister and i threw cloak over him myself.”157
 
then telemachus went out of the court to the place where the achaeans
 were meeting in assembly; had his spear in his hand, and was not
 alone, for his two dogs went with him. but euryclea called the maids
 and said, “come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and
 sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the
 seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with wet sponge; clean out
 the mixing-jugs and the cups, and go for water from the fountain at
 once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early, for
 it is feast day.”
 
thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
 went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to
 work about the house. the men who were in attendance on the suitors
 also came up and began chopping firewood. by and by the women returned
 from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three
 best pigs could pick out. these let feed about the premises, and
 then said good-humouredly to ulysses, “stranger, are the suitors
 treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?”
 
“may heaven,” answered ulysses, “requite to them the wickedness with
 which they deal high-handedly in another man’s house without any sense
 of shame.”
 
thus did they converse; meanwhile melanthius the goatherd came up, for
 too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he
 had two shepherds with him. they tied the goats up under the gatehouse,
 and then melanthius began gibing at ulysses. “are you still here,
 stranger,” said he, “to pester people by begging about the house? why
 can you not go elsewhere? you and i shall not come to an understanding
 before we have given each other taste of our fists. you beg without
 any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the
 achaeans, as well as here?”
 
ulysses made answer, but bowed his head and brooded. then third
 man, philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in barren heifer and
 some goats. these were brought over by the boatmen who are there to
 take people over when any one comes to them. so philoetius made his
 heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to
 the swineherd. “who, swineherd,” said he, “is this stranger that is
 lately come here? is one of your men? what is his family? where does
 come from? poor fellow, looks as if had been some great man,
 but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it so
 pleases them.”
 
as spoke went up to ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
 “good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be very
 poorly off now, but i hope you will have better times by and by. father
 jove, of all gods you are the most malicious. we are your own children,
 yet you show us mercy in all our misery and afflictions. sweat
 came over when i saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he
 reminds of ulysses, who i fear is going about in just such rags as
 this man’s are, if indeed is still among the living. if is
 already dead and in the house of hades, then, alas! for my good master,
 who made his stockman when i was quite young among the
 cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; one could have done
 better with them than i have, for they have bred like ears of corn;
 nevertheless i have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who
 take heed to his though is in the house, and fear not the
 wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide ulysses’ property
 among them because has been away so long. i have often thought—only
 it would not be right while his is living—of going off with the
 cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still
 harder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds. my
 position is intolerable, and i should long since have run away and put
 myself under the protection of some other chief, only that i believe my
 poor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of
 the house.”
 
“stockman,” answered ulysses, “you seem to be very well-disposed
 person, and i can see that you are man of sense. therefore i will
 tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath. by jove, the chief of
 all gods, and by that hearth of ulysses to which i am now come, ulysses
 shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
 shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here.”
 
“if jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you should
 see how i would do my very utmost to help him.”
 
and in like manner eumaeus prayed that ulysses might return home.
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile the suitors were hatching plot to
 murder telemachus: but bird flew near them on their left hand—an
 eagle with dove in its talons. on this amphinomus said, “my friends,
 this plot of ours to murder telemachus will not succeed; let us go to
 dinner instead.”
 
the others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the
 benches and seats. they sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
 heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
 they mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every
 man his cup, while philoetius handed round the bread in the bread
 baskets, and melanthius poured them out their wine. then they laid
 their hands upon the good things that were before them.
 
telemachus purposely made ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that
 was paved with stone;158 gave him shabby looking seat at little
 table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought to
 him, with his wine in gold cup. “sit there,” said he, “and drink your
 wine among the great people. i will put stop to the gibes and blows
 of the suitors, for this is public house, but belongs to ulysses,
 and has passed from him to me. therefore, suitors, keep your hands and
 your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief.”
 
the suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his
 speech; then antinous said, “we do not like such language but we will
 put up with it, for telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. if
 jove had let us we should have put stop to his brave talk ere now.”
 
thus spoke antinous, but telemachus heeded him not. meanwhile the
 heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the
 achaeans gathered under the shady grove of apollo.
 
then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man
 his portion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited at
 table gave ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for
 telemachus had told them to do so.
 
but minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their
 insolence, for she wanted ulysses to become still more bitter against
 them. now there happened to be among them ribald fellow, whose name
 was ctesippus, and who came from same. this man, confident in his great
 wealth, was paying court to the wife of ulysses, and said to the
 suitors, “hear what i have to say. the stranger has already had as
 large portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor
 reasonable to ill-treat any guest of telemachus who comes here. i will,
 however, make him present on my own account, that may have
 something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of ulysses’
 servants.”
 
as spoke picked up heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in which
 it lay, and threw it at ulysses, but ulysses turned his head little
 aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly sardinian fashion159 as did
 so, and it hit the wall, not him. on this telemachus spoke fiercely to
 ctesippus, “it is good thing for you,” said he, “that the stranger
 turned his head so that you missed him. if you had hit him i should
 have run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to
 see about getting you buried rather than married in this house. so let
 have more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for i am grown up
 now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,
 instead of being the child that i have been heretofore. i have long
 seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: i have
 put up with this, for one man is match for many, but do no
 further violence. still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; i would far
 rather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after day—guests
 insulted, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an
 unseemly way.”
 
they all held their peace till at last agelaus of damastor said,
 “no one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it,
 for it is quite reasonable. leave off, therefore, ill-treating the
 stranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house; i
 would say, however, friendly word to telemachus and his mother, which
 i trust may commend itself to both. ‘as long,’ i would say, ‘as you had
 ground for hoping that ulysses would one day come home, one could
 complain of your waiting and suffering160 the suitors to be in your
 house. it would have been better that should have returned, but it
 is now sufficiently clear that will never do so; therefore talk all
 this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,
 and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. thus you will
 yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink
 in peace, while your mother will look after some other man’s house, not
 yours.’”
 
to this telemachus answered, “by jove, agelaus, and by the sorrows of
 my unhappy father, who has either perished far from ithaca, or is
 wandering in some distant land, i throw obstacles in the way of my
 mother’s marriage; on the contrary i urge her to choose whomsoever she
 will, and i will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but i dare
 not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her own
 wishes. heaven forbid that i should do this.”
 
minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
 their wits wandering; but they were laughing with forced laughter.
 their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and
 their hearts were heavy with forebodings. theoclymenus saw this and
 said, “unhappy men, what is it that ails you? there is shroud of
 darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with
 tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
 drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are
 full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted
 out of heaven, and blighting gloom is over all the land.”
 
thus did speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. eurymachus
 then said, “this stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
 servants, turn him out into the streets, since finds it so dark
 here.”
 
but theoclymenus said, “eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
 i have eyes, ears, and pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an
 understanding mind. i will take these out of the house with me, for i
 see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are
 insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of ulysses will be
 able to escape.”
 
left the house as spoke, and went back to piraeus who gave him
 welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
 telemachus by laughing at the strangers. one insolent fellow said to
 him, “telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
 importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has skill
 for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here
 is another fellow who is setting himself up as prophet. let me
 persuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and
 send them off to the sicels to sell for what they will bring.”
 
telemachus gave him heed, but sat silently watching his father,
 expecting every moment that would begin his attack upon the suitors.
 
meanwhile the daughter of icarius, wise penelope, had had rich seat
 placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear
 what every one was saying. the dinner indeed had been prepared amid
 much merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had
 sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing
 can be conceived more gruesome than the meal which goddess and a
 brave man were soon to lay before them—for they had brought their doom
 upon themselves.
 



book xxi
 

the trial of the axes, during which ulysses reveals himself to eumaeus
 and philoetius
 

minerva now put it in penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their
 skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
 as means of bringing about their destruction. she went upstairs and
 got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had handle of
 ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of
 the house, where her husband’s treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought
 iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of
 deadly arrows that had been given him by friend whom had met in
 lacedaemon—iphitus the of eurytus. the two fell in with one another
 in messene at the house of ortilochus, where ulysses was staying in
 order to recover debt that was owing from the whole people; for the
 messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from ithaca, and had
 sailed away with them and with their shepherds. in quest of these
 ulysses took long journey while still quite young, for his father and
 the other chieftains sent him on mission to recover them. iphitus had
 gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that had
 lost, and the mule foals that were running with them. these mares were
 the death of him in the end, for when went to the house of jove’s
 son, mighty hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, hercules
 to his shame killed him, though was his guest, for feared not
 heaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which had set
 before iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the
 mares himself. it was when claiming these that iphitus met ulysses, and
 gave him the bow which mighty eurytus had been used to carry, and which
 on his death had been left by him to his son. ulysses gave him in
 return sword and spear, and this was the beginning of fast
 friendship, although they never visited at one another’s houses, for
 jove’s hercules killed iphitus ere they could do so. this bow,
 then, given him by iphitus, had not been taken with him by ulysses when
 sailed for troy; had used it so long as had been at home, but
 had left it behind as having been keepsake from valued friend.
 
penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the
 carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn line on it so as to get
 it quite straight; had then set the door posts into it and hung the
 doors. she loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the
 key, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the
 doors;161 these flew open with noise like bull bellowing in a
 meadow, and penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests
 stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with
 fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow
 case from the peg on which it hung. she sat down with it on her knees,
 weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her
 tears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where the suitors
 were, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that
 were inside it. along with her came her maidens, bearing chest that
 contained much iron and bronze which her husband had won as prizes.
 when she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts
 supporting the roof of the cloister, holding veil before her face,
 and with maid on either side of her. then she said:
 
“listen to you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of
 this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other
 pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize
 that you are contending for, i will bring out the mighty bow of
 ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his
 arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will i follow and quit this
 house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. but
 even so i doubt not that i shall remember it in my dreams.”
 
as she spoke, she told eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron
 before the suitors, and eumaeus wept as took them to do as she had
 bidden him. hard by, the stockman wept also when saw his master’s
 bow, but antinous scolded them. “you country louts,” said he, “silly
 simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by
 crying in this way? she has enough to grieve her in the loss of her
 husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go
 outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. we suitors
 shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it
 light matter to string such bow as this is. there is not man of
 us all who is such another as ulysses; for i have seen him and remember
 him, though i was then only child.”
 
this was what said, but all the time was expecting to be able to
 string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact was to be
 the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of ulysses,
 whom was dishonouring in his own house—egging the others on to do so
 also.
 
then telemachus spoke. “great heavens!” exclaimed, “jove must have
 robbed of my senses. here is my dear and excellent mother saying she
 will quit this house and marry again, yet i am laughing and enjoying
 myself as though there were nothing happening. but, suitors, as the
 contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. it is for woman
 whose peer is not to be found in pylos, argos, or mycene, nor yet in
 ithaca nor on the mainland. you know this as well as i do; what need
 have i to speak in praise of my mother? come on, then, make excuses
 for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. i too
 will make trial of it, for if i can string it and shoot through the
 iron, i shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with stranger,
 not if i can win the prizes which my father won before me.”
 
as spoke sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,
 and took his sword from his shoulder. first set the axes in row,
 in long groove which had dug for them, and had made straight by
 line.162 then stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was
 surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though had never
 seen anything of the kind before. this done, went on to the pavement
 to make trial of the bow; thrice did tug at it, trying with all his
 might to draw the string, and thrice had to leave off, though had
 hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. was trying for
 the fourth time, and would have strung it had not ulysses made sign
 to check him in spite of all his eagerness. so said:
 
“alas! i shall either be always feeble and of prowess, or i am too
 young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to
 hold my own if any one attacks me. you others, therefore, who are
 stronger than i, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled.”
 
on this put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led
 into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow.
 then sat down on the seat from which had risen, and antinous
 said:
 
“come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the
 place at which the cupbearer begins when is handing round the wine.”
 
the rest agreed, and leiodes of oenops was the first to rise. he
 was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the
 mixing-bowl. 163 was the only man who hated their evil deeds and was
 indignant with the others. was now the first to take the bow and
 arrow, so went on to the pavement to make his trial, but could
 not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work,
 they therefore soon grew tired, and said to the suitors, “my
 friends, i cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take
 the life and soul out of many chief among us, for it is better to die
 than to live after having missed the prize that we have so long striven
 for, and which has brought us so long together. some one of us is even
 now hoping and praying that may marry penelope, but when has seen
 this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some
 other woman, and let penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer
 and whose lot it is to win her.”
 
on this put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,164 with
 the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. then took his seat
 again on the seat from which had risen; and antinous rebuked him
 saying:
 
“leiodes, what are you talking about? your words are monstrous and
 intolerable; it makes angry to listen to you. shall, then, this bow
 take the life of many chief among us, merely because you cannot bend
 it yourself? true, you were not born to be an archer, but there are
 others who will soon string it.”
 
then said to melanthius the goatherd, “look sharp, light fire in
 the court, and set seat hard by with sheep skin on it; bring us
 also large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. let us
 warm the bow and grease it—we will then make trial of it again, and
 bring the contest to an end.”
 
melanthius lit the fire, and set seat covered with sheep skins beside
 it. also brought great ball of lard from what they had in the
 house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but
 they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. nevertheless
 there still remained antinous and eurymachus, who were the ringleaders
 among the suitors and much the foremost among them all.
 
then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and
 ulysses followed them. when they had got outside the gates and the
 outer yard, ulysses said to them quietly:
 
“stockman, and you swineherd, i have something in my mind which i am in
 doubt whether to say or no; but i think i will say it. what manner of
 men would you be to stand by ulysses, if some god should bring him back
 here all of sudden? say which you are disposed to do—to side with the
 suitors, or with ulysses?”
 
“father jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that you might so
 ordain it. if some god were but to bring ulysses back, you should see
 with what might and main i would fight for him.”
 
in like words eumaeus prayed to all the gods that ulysses might return;
 when, therefore, saw for certain what mind they were of, ulysses
 said, “it is i, ulysses, who am here. i have suffered much, but at
 last, in the twentieth year, i am come back to my own country. i find
 that you two alone of all my servants are glad that i should do so, for
 i have not heard any of the others praying for my return. to you two,
 therefore, will i unfold the truth as it shall be. if heaven shall
 deliver the suitors into my hands, i will find wives for both of you,
 will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me
 as though you were brothers and friends of telemachus. i will now give
 you convincing proofs that you may know and be assured. see, here is
 the scar from the boar’s tooth that ripped when i was out hunting on
 mt. parnassus with the sons of autolycus.”
 
as spoke drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they
 had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about ulysses, threw
 their arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while ulysses
 kissed their hands and faces in return. the sun would have gone down
 upon their mourning if ulysses had not checked them and said:
 
“cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and
 tell those who are within. when you go in, do so separately, not both
 together; i will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this
 moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to
 prevent from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore,
 eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and tell
 the women to close the doors of their apartment. if they hear any
 groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not
 come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.
 and i charge you, philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer
 court, and to bind them securely at once.”
 
when had thus spoken, went back to the house and took the seat
 that had left. presently, his two servants followed him inside.
 
at this moment the bow was in the hands of eurymachus, who was warming
 it by the fire, but even so could not string it, and was greatly
 grieved. heaved deep sigh and said, “i grieve for myself and for
 us all; i grieve that i shall have to forgo the marriage, but i do not
 care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in
 ithaca and elsewhere; what i feel most is the fact of our being so
 inferior to ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. this
 will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.”
 
“it shall not be so, eurymachus,” said antinous, “and you know it
 yourself. today is the feast of apollo throughout all the land; who can
 string bow on such day as this? put it on one side—as for the axes
 they can stay where they are, for one is likely to come to the house
 and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we
 may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will
 tell melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow—the best has; we
 can then offer thigh bones to apollo the mighty archer, and again make
 trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.”
 
the rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over
 the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine
 and water and handed it round after giving every man his
 drink-offering. then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk
 each as much as desired, ulysses craftily said:—
 
“suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that i may speak even as i am
 minded. i appeal more especially to eurymachus, and to antinous who has
 just spoken with so much reason. cease shooting for the present and
 leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give
 victory to whom it will. for the moment, however, give the bow that
 i may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether i
 still have as much strength as i used to have, or whether travel and
 neglect have made an end of it.”
 
this made them all very angry, for they feared might string the bow,
 antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “wretched creature, you
 have not so much as grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to
 think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
 betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
 have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. other
 beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among
 ourselves; the wine must have been doing you mischief, as it does
 with all those who drink immoderately. it was wine that inflamed the
 centaur eurytion when was staying with peirithous among the
 lapithae. when the wine had got into his head, went mad and did ill
 deeds about the house of peirithous; this angered the heroes who were
 there assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and
 nostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house,
 so went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of
 understanding. henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind and
 the centaurs, but brought it upon himself through his own
 drunkenness. in like manner i can tell you that it will go hardly with
 you if you string the bow: you will find mercy from any one here,
 for we shall at once ship you off to king echetus, who kills every one
 that comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep
 quiet without getting into quarrel with men younger than yourself.”
 
penelope then spoke to him. “antinous,” said she, “it is not right that
 you should ill-treat any guest of telemachus who comes to this house.
 if the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of
 ulysses, can you suppose that would take home with him and make
 his wife? even the man himself can have such idea in his mind:
 none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all
 reason.”
 
“queen penelope,” answered eurymachus, “we do not suppose that this man
 will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest
 some of the baser sort, men or women among the achaeans, should go
 gossiping about and say, ‘these suitors are feeble folk; they are
 paying court to the wife of brave man whose bow not one of them was
 able to string, and yet beggarly tramp who came to the house strung
 it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.’ this is what will be
 said, and it will be scandal against us.”
 
“eurymachus,” penelope answered, “people who persist in eating up the
 estate of great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect
 others to think well of them. why then should you mind if men talk as
 you think they will? this stranger is strong and well-built, says
 moreover that is of noble birth. give him the bow, and let us see
 whether can string it or no. i say—and it shall surely be—that if
 apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, i will give him a
 cloak and shirt of good wear, with javelin to keep off dogs and
 robbers, and sharp sword. i will also give him sandals, and will see
 him sent safely wherever wants to go.”
 
then telemachus said, “mother, i am the only man either in ithaca or in
 the islands that are over against elis who has the right to let any one
 have the bow or to refuse it. one shall force one way or the
 other, not even though i choose to make the stranger present of the
 bow outright, and let him take it away with him. go, then, within the
 house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your
 distaff, and the ordering of your servants. this bow is man’s matter,
 and mine above all others, for it is i who am master here.”
 
she went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in
 her heart. then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she
 mourned her dear husband till minerva sent sweet sleep over her
 eyelids.
 
the swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to ulysses, but
 the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one
 of them said, “you idiot, where are you taking the bow to? are you out
 of your wits? if apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your
 own boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry
 you to death.”
 
eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so put the bow
 down then and there, but telemachus shouted out at him from the other
 side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, “father eumaeus,
 bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as i am i will pelt you
 with stones back to the country, for i am the better man of the two. i
 wish i was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as
 i am than you, i would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for
 they mean mischief.”
 
thus did speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put
 them in better humour with telemachus; so eumaeus brought the bow on
 and placed it in the hands of ulysses. when had done this, called
 euryclea apart and said to her, “euryclea, telemachus says you are to
 close the doors of the women’s apartments. if they hear any groaning or
 uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out,
 but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work.”
 
euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’s
 apartments.
 
meanwhile philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the
 outer court. there was ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in the
 gatehouse, so made the gates fast with it and then came in again,
 resuming the seat that had left, and keeping an eye on ulysses, who
 had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about,
 and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into
 its two horns during his absence. then would one turn towards his
 neighbour saying, “this is some tricky old bow-fancier; either has
 got one like it at home, or wants to make one, in such workmanlike
 style does the old vagabond handle it.”
 
another said, “i hope may be more successful in other things than
 is likely to be in stringing this bow.”
 
but ulysses, when had taken it up and examined it all over, strung
 it as easily as skilled bard strings new peg of his lyre and makes
 the twisted gut fast at both ends. then took it in his right hand to
 prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the
 twittering of swallow. the suitors were dismayed, and turned colour
 as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, jove thundered loudly as a
 sign, and the heart of ulysses rejoiced as heard the omen that the
 of scheming saturn had sent him.
 
took an arrow that was lying upon the table165—for those which the
 achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—he
 laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow
 and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. when had taken
 aim let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes of
 the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through them,
 and into the outer courtyard. then said to telemachus:
 
“your guest has not disgraced you, telemachus. i did not miss what i
 aimed at, and i was not long in stringing my bow. i am still strong,
 and not as the suitors twit with being. now, however, it is time for
 the achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and then
 otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the
 crowning ornaments of banquet.”
 
as spoke made sign with his eyebrows, and telemachus girded on
 his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.
 



book xxii
 

the killing of the suitors—the maids who have misconducted themselves
 are made to cleanse the cloisters and are then hanged.
 

then ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement
 with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. shed the arrows on to
 the ground at his feet and said, “the mighty contest is at an end. i
 will now see whether apollo will vouchsafe it to to hit another mark
 which man has yet hit.”
 
on this aimed deadly arrow at antinous, who was about to take up a
 two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.
 had thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would think
 that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill
 him? the arrow struck antinous in the throat, and the point went clean
 through his neck, so that fell over and the cup dropped from his
 hand, while thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. kicked
 the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and
 roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground.166
 the suitors were in an uproar when they saw that man had been hit;
 they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked
 everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear,
 and they rebuked ulysses very angrily. “stranger,” said they, “you
 shall pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see other
 contest; you are doomed man; whom you have slain was the foremost
 youth in ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed
 him.”
 
thus they spoke, for they thought that had killed antinous by
 mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of
 every one of them. but ulysses glared at them and said:
 
“dogs, did you think that i should not come back from troy? you have
 wasted my substance,167 have forced my women servants to lie with you,
 and have wooed my wife while i was still living. you have feared
 neither god nor man, and now you shall die.”
 
they turned pale with fear as spoke, and every man looked round
 about to see whither might fly for safety, but eurymachus alone
 spoke.
 
“if you are ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said is just. we
 have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. but antinous who
 was the head and front of the offending lies low already. it was all
 his doing. it was not that wanted to marry penelope; did not so
 much care about that; what wanted was something quite different, and
 jove has not vouchsafed it to him; wanted to kill your and to be
 chief man in ithaca. now, therefore, that has met the death which
 was his due, spare the lives of your people. we will make everything
 good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten
 and drunk. each one of us shall pay you fine worth twenty oxen, and
 we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened.
 until we have done this one can complain of your being enraged
 against us.”
 
ulysses again glared at him and said, “though you should give all
 that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, i
 will not stay my hand till i have paid all of you in full. you must
 fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not man of you shall.”
 
their hearts sank as they heard him, but eurymachus again spoke saying:
 
“my friends, this man will give us quarter. will stand where he
 is and shoot us down till has killed every man among us. let us then
 show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from
 his arrows. let us have at him with rush, to drive him from the
 pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise
 such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting.”
 
as spoke drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,
 and with loud cry sprang towards ulysses, but ulysses instantly shot
 an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself
 in his liver. dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.
 the cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as smote the
 earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and kicked the
 stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.
 
then amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at ulysses to try and
 get him away from the door; but telemachus was too quick for him, and
 struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and
 went right through his chest, so that fell heavily to the ground and
 struck the earth with his forehead. then telemachus sprang away from
 him, leaving his spear still in the body, for feared that if he
 stayed to draw it out, some one of the achaeans might come up and hack
 at him with his sword, or knock him down, so set off at run, and
 immediately was at his father’s side. then said:
 
“father, let bring you shield, two spears, and brass helmet for
 your temples. i will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour
 for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.”
 
“run and fetch them,” answered ulysses, “while my arrows hold out, or
 when i am alone they may get away from the door.”
 
telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where
 the armour was kept. chose four shields, eight spears, and four
 brass helmets with horse-hair plumes. brought them with all speed to
 his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the
 swineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near ulysses.
 meanwhile ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the
 suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows
 gave out, set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by
 the door post, and hung shield four hides thick about his shoulders;
 on his comely head set his helmet, well wrought with crest of
 horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it,168 and grasped two
 redoubtable bronze-shod spears.
 
now there was trap door169 on the wall, while at one end of the
 pavement170 there was an exit leading to narrow passage, and this
 exit was closed by well-made door. ulysses told philoetius to stand
 by this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a
 time. but agelaus shouted out, “cannot some one go up to the trap door
 and tell the people what is going on? help would come at once, and we
 should soon make an end of this man and his shooting.”
 
“this may not be, agelaus,” answered melanthius, “the mouth of the
 narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. one
 brave man could prevent any number from getting in. but i know what i
 will do, i will bring you arms from the store-room, for i am sure it is
 there that ulysses and his have put them.”
 
on this the goatherd melanthius went by back passages to the store-room
 of ulysses’ house. there chose twelve shields, with as many helmets
 and spears, and brought them back as fast as could to give them to
 the suitors. ulysses’ heart began to fail him when saw the
 suitors171 putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. saw
 the greatness of the danger, and said to telemachus, “some one of the
 women inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be
 melanthius.”
 
telemachus answered, “the fault, father, is mine, and mine only; i left
 the store room door open, and they have kept sharper look out than i
 have. go, eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the
 women who is doing this, or whether, as i suspect, it is melanthius the
 of dolius.”
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile melanthius was again going to the
 store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to
 ulysses who was beside him, “ulysses, noble of laertes, it is that
 scoundrel melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store
 room. say, shall i kill him, if i can get the better of him, or shall i
 bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many
 wrongs that has done in your house?”
 
ulysses answered, “telemachus and i will hold these suitors in check,
 matter what they do; go back both of you and bind melanthius’ hands
 and feet behind him. throw him into the store room and make the door
 fast behind you; then fasten noose about his body, and string him
 close up to the rafters from high bearing-post,172 that may linger
 on in an agony.”
 
thus did speak, and they did even as had said; they went to the
 store room, which they entered before melanthius saw them, for was
 busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two
 took their stand on either side of the door and waited. by and by
 melanthius came out with helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted
 shield in the other, which had been borne by laertes when was young,
 but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become
 unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and
 threw him struggling to the ground. they bent his hands and feet well
 behind his back, and bound them tight with painful bond as ulysses
 had told them; then they fastened noose about his body and strung him
 up from high pillar till was close up to the rafters, and over him
 did you then vaunt, swineherd eumaeus saying, “melanthius, you will
 pass the night on soft bed as you deserve. you will know very well
 when morning comes from the streams of oceanus, and it is time for you
 to be driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on.”
 
there, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on
 their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take
 their places by the side of ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the
 cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the
 body of the court were still both brave and many. then jove’s daughter
 minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of mentor.
 ulysses was glad when saw her and said, “mentor, lend your help,
 and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns has done
 you. besides, you are my age-mate.”
 
but all the time felt sure it was minerva, and the suitors from the
 other side raised an uproar when they saw her. agelaus was the first to
 reproach her. “mentor,” cried, “do not let ulysses beguile you into
 siding with him and fighting the suitors. this is what we will do: when
 we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. you
 shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will
 take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with
 ulysses’ property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor
 your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of
 ithaca.”
 
this made minerva still more furious, so she scolded ulysses very
 angrily.173 “ulysses,” said she, “your strength and prowess are no
 longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the
 trojans about the noble lady helen. you killed many man in those
 days, and it was through your stratagem that priam’s city was taken.
 how comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are
 on your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house?
 come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how mentor, of
 alcimus shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred
 upon him.”
 
but she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still
 further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew
 up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in
 the form of swallow.
 
meanwhile agelaus of damastor, eurynomus, amphimedon, demoptolemus,
 pisander, and polybus of polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon
 the suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives
 they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen
 under the arrows of ulysses. agelaus shouted to them and said, “my
 friends, will soon have to leave off, for mentor has gone away after
 having done nothing for him but brag. they are standing at the doors
 unsupported. do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your
 spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by
 killing him. when has fallen we need not be uneasy about the
 others.”
 
they threw their spears as bade them, but minerva made them all of
 effect. one hit the door post; another went against the door; the
 pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had
 avoided all the spears of the suitors ulysses said to his own men, “my
 friends, i should say we too had better let drive into the middle of
 them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us
 outright.”
 
they therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
 ulysses killed demoptolemus, telemachus euryades, eumaeus elatus, while
 the stockman killed pisander. these all bit the dust, and as the others
 drew back into corner ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained
 their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.
 
the suitors now aimed second time, but again minerva made their
 weapons for the most part without effect. one hit bearing-post of the
 cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of
 another struck the wall. still, amphimedon just took piece of the top
 skin from off telemachus’s wrist, and ctesippus managed to graze
 eumaeus’s shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell to
 the ground. then ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of
 suitors. ulysses hit eurydamas, telemachus amphimedon, and eumaeus
 polybus. after this the stockman hit ctesippus in the breast, and
 taunted him saying, “foul-mouthed of polytherses, do not be so
 foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your
 speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. i make you present of
 this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave ulysses when he
 was begging about in his own house.”
 
thus spoke the stockman, and ulysses struck the of damastor with a
 spear in close fight, while telemachus hit leocritus of evenor in
 the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that fell forward
 full on his face upon the ground. then minerva from her seat on the
 rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.
 they fled to the other end of the court like herd of cattle maddened
 by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. as
 eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on
 the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them,
 for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the
 sport—even so did ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite
 them on every side. they made horrible groaning as their brains were
 being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.
 
leiodes then caught the knees of ulysses and said, “ulysses i beseech
 you have mercy upon and spare me. i never wronged any of the women
 in your house either in word or deed, and i tried to stop the others. i
 saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their
 folly. i was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, i shall die
 without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no
 thanks for all the good that i did.”
 
ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “if you were their
 sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many time that it might be
 long before i got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have
 children by her. therefore you shall die.”
 
with these words picked up the sword that agelaus had dropped when
 was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. then he
 struck leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling
 in the dust while was yet speaking.
 
the minstrel phemius of terpes—he who had been forced by the
 suitors to sing to them—now tried to save his life. was standing
 near towards the trap door,174 and held his lyre in his hand. did
 not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar
 of jove that was in the outer court, and on which both laertes and
 ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go
 straight up to ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end deemed
 it best to embrace ulysses’ knees. so laid his lyre on the ground
 between the mixing bowl 175 and the silver-studded seat; then going up
 to ulysses caught hold of his knees and said, “ulysses, i beseech
 you have mercy on and spare me. you will be sorry for it afterwards
 if you kill bard who can sing both for gods and men as i can. i make
 all my lays myself, and heaven visits with every kind of
 inspiration. i would sing to you as though you were god, do not
 therefore be in such hurry to cut my head off. your own son
 telemachus will tell you that i did not want to frequent your house and
 sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many and too
 strong for me, so they made me.”
 
telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. “hold!” he
 cried, “the man is guiltless, do him hurt; and we will spare medon
 too, who was always good to when i was boy, unless philoetius or
 eumaeus has already killed him, or has fallen in your way when you
 were raging about the court.”
 
medon caught these words of telemachus, for was crouching under a
 seat beneath which had hidden by covering himself up with freshly
 flayed heifer’s hide, so threw off the hide, went up to telemachus,
 and laid hold of his knees.
 
“here i am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore, and tell
 your father, or will kill in his rage against the suitors for
 having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to
 yourself.”
 
ulysses smiled at him and answered, “fear not; telemachus has saved
 your life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how
 greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. go, therefore,
 outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of
 the slaughter—you and the bard—while i finish my work here inside.”
 
the pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down
 by jove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting
 that they would be killed. then ulysses searched the whole court
 carefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was
 still living, but found them all lying in the dust and weltering in
 their blood. they were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of
 the sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the
 heat of the sun makes an end of them. even so were the suitors lying
 all huddled up one against the other.
 
then ulysses said to telemachus, “call nurse euryclea; i have something
 to say to her.”
 
telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room. “make
 haste,” said he, “you old woman who have been set over all the other
 women in the house. come outside; my father wishes to speak to you.”
 
when euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s room
 and came out, following telemachus. she found ulysses among the corpses
 bespattered with blood and filth like lion that has just been
 devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so
 that is fearful sight; even so was ulysses besmirched from head to
 foot with gore. when she saw all the corpses and such quantity of
 blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that great
 deed had been done; but ulysses checked her, “old woman,” said he,
 “rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about
 it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. heaven’s doom and
 their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they
 respected man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came
 near them, and they have come to bad end as punishment for their
 wickedness and folly. now, however, tell which of the women in the
 house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent.”176
 
“i will tell you the truth, my son,” answered euryclea. “there are
 fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding
 wool, and all kinds of household work. of these, twelve in all177 have
 misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to
 penelope. they showed disrespect to telemachus, for has only
 lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the
 female servants; but let go upstairs and tell your wife all that has
 happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep.”
 
“do not wake her yet,” answered ulysses, “but tell the women who have
 misconducted themselves to come to me.”
 
euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to
 ulysses; in the meantime called telemachus, the stockman, and the
 swineherd. “begin,” said he, “to remove the dead, and make the women
 help you. then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables
 and seats. when you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take
 the women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the
 outer court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite
 dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used
 to lie in secret with the suitors.”
 
on this the women came down in body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
 first they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one
 another in the gatehouse. ulysses ordered them about and made them do
 their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. when they had
 done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and
 water, while telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and
 dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out
 of doors. then when they had made the whole place quite clean and
 orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space
 between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they
 could not get away: and telemachus said to the other two, “i shall not
 let these women die clean death, for they were insolent to and my
 mother, and used to sleep with the suitors.”
 
so saying made ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that
 supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the
 building, at good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touch
 the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against net that has been
 set for them in thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and
 terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their
 heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.178 their
 feet moved convulsively for while, but not for very long.
 
as for melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
 court. there they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
 vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut
 off his hands and his feet.
 
when they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back
 into the house, for all was now over; and ulysses said to the dear old
 nurse euryclea, “bring sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and
 fetch fire also that i may burn it, and purify the cloisters. go,
 moreover, and tell penelope to come here with her attendants, and also
 all the maidservants that are in the house.”
 
“all that you have said is true,” answered euryclea, “but let bring
 you some clean clothes—a shirt and cloak. do not keep these rags on
 your back any longer. it is not right.”
 
“first light fire,” replied ulysses.
 
she brought the fire and sulphur, as had bidden her, and ulysses
 thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
 then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
 whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and
 pressed round ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders
 and taking hold of his hands. it made him feel as if should like to
 weep, for remembered every one of them.179
 



book xxiii
 

penelope eventually recognises her husband—early in the morning
 ulysses, telemachus, eumaeus, and philoetius leave the town.
 

euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear
 husband had come home. her aged knees became young again and her feet
 were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her
 head to speak to her. “wake up penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed,
 “and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this
 long time past. ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has
 killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating
 up his estate and ill treating his son.”
 
“my good nurse,” answered penelope, “you must be mad. the gods
 sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make
 foolish people become sensible. this is what they must have been doing
 to you; for you always used to be reasonable person. why should you
 thus mock when i have trouble enough already—talking such nonsense,
 and waking up out of sweet sleep that had taken possession of my
 eyes and closed them? i have never slept so soundly from the day my
 poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. go back again
 into the women’s room; if it had been any one else who had woke up
 to bring such absurd news i should have sent her away with severe
 scolding. as it is your age shall protect you.”
 
“my dear child,” answered euryclea, “i am not mocking you. it is quite
 true as i tell you that ulysses is come home again. was the stranger
 whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. telemachus
 knew all the time that was come back, but kept his father’s secret
 that might have his revenge on all these wicked people.”
 
then penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round euryclea,
 and wept for joy. “but my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me;
 if has really come home as you say, how did manage to overcome
 the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what number of them there
 always were?”
 
“i was not there,” answered euryclea, “and do not know; i only heard
 them groaning while they were being killed. we sat crouching and
 huddled up in corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, till
 your came to fetch because his father sent him. then i found
 ulysses standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all
 round him, one on top of the other. you would have enjoyed it if you
 could have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and
 filth, and looking just like lion. but the corpses are now all piled
 up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and ulysses has lit a
 great fire to purify the house with sulphur. has sent to call
 you, so come with that you may both be happy together after all; for
 now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband
 is come home to find both wife and alive and well, and to take his
 revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him.”
 
“my dear nurse,” said penelope, “do not exult too confidently over all
 this. you know how delighted every one would be to see ulysses come
 home—more particularly myself, and the who has been born to both of
 us; but what you tell cannot be really true. it is some god who is
 angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end
 of them; for they respected man in the whole world, neither rich nor
 poor, who came near them, and they have come to bad end in
 consequence of their iniquity; ulysses is dead far away from the
 achaean land; will never return home again.”
 
then nurse euryclea said, “my child, what are you talking about? but
 you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your
 husband is never coming, although is in the house and by his own
 fire side at this very moment. besides i can give you another proof;
 when i was washing him i perceived the scar which the wild boar gave
 him, and i wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom would not
 let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with and i will
 make this bargain with you—if i am deceiving you, you may have me
 killed by the most cruel death you can think of.”
 
“my dear nurse,” said penelope, “however wise you may be you can hardly
 fathom the counsels of the gods. nevertheless, we will go in search of
 my son, that i may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has
 killed them.”
 
on this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
 considered whether she should keep at distance from her husband and
 question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
 him. when, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister,
 she sat down opposite ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right
 angles180 [to that by which she had entered], while ulysses sat near
 one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see
 what his brave wife would say to him when she saw him. for long time
 she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. at one moment she looked
 him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his
 shabby clothes and failed to recognise him,181 till telemachus began to
 reproach her and said:
 
“mother—but you are so hard that i cannot call you by such name—why
 do you keep away from my father in this way? why do you not sit by his
 side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? other woman
 could bear to keep away from her husband when had come back to her
 after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;
 but your heart always was as hard as stone.”
 
penelope answered, “my son, i am so lost in astonishment that i can
 find words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. i
 cannot even look him straight in the face. still, if really is
 ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one
 another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are
 alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others.”
 
ulysses smiled at this, and said to telemachus, “let your mother put me
 to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
 she rejects for the moment and believes to be somebody else,
 because i am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
 however, consider what we had better do next. when one man has killed
 another—even though was not one who would leave many friends to take
 up his quarrel—the man who has killed him must still say good bye to
 his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay
 of whole town, and all the picked youth of ithaca. i would have you
 consider this matter.”
 
“look to it yourself, father,” answered telemachus, “for they say you
 are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is other
 mortal man who can compare with you. we will follow you with right good
 will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
 out.”
 
“i will say what i think will be best,” answered ulysses. “first wash
 and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and
 dress; phemius shall then strike up dance tune on his lyre, so that
 if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going
 along the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a
 wedding in the house, and rumours about the death of the suitors
 will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my
 own land. once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven
 vouchsafes us shall seem wisest.”
 
thus did speak, and they did even as had said. first they washed
 and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. then phemius took
 his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. the
 house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people
 outside said, “i suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
 she ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her
 husband’s property until comes home.”182
 
this was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had
 been happening. the upper servant eurynome washed and anointed ulysses
 in his own house and gave him shirt and cloak, while minerva made him
 look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick
 on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
 she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as skilful
 workman who has studied art of all kinds under vulcan or minerva—and
 his work is full of beauty—enriches piece of silver plate by gilding
 it. came from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat
 down opposite his wife on the seat had left. “my dear,” said he,
 “heaven has endowed you with heart more unyielding than woman ever
 yet had. other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when
 had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having
 gone through so much. but come, nurse, get bed ready for me; i will
 sleep alone, for this woman has heart as hard as iron.”
 
“my dear,” answered penelope, “i have wish to set myself up, nor to
 depreciate you; but i am not struck by your appearance, for i very well
 remember what kind of man you were when you set sail from ithaca.
 nevertheless, euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he
 himself built. bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it
 with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets.”
 
she said this to try him, but ulysses was very angry and said, “wife, i
 am much displeased at what you have just been saying. who has been
 taking my bed from the place in which i left it? must have found it
 hard task, matter how skilled workman was, unless some god
 came and helped him to shift it. there is man living, however strong
 and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a
 marvellous curiosity which i made with my very own hands. there was a
 young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour,
 and about as thick as bearing-post. i built my room round this with
 strong walls of stone and roof to cover them, and i made the doors
 strong and well-fitting. then i cut off the top boughs of the olive
 tree and left the stump standing. this i dressed roughly from the root
 upwards and then worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully,
 straightening my work by drawing line on the wood, and making it into
 bed-prop. i then bored hole down the middle, and made it the
 centre-post of my bed, at which i worked till i had finished it,
 inlaying it with gold and silver; after this i stretched hide of
 crimson leather from one side of it to the other. so you see i know all
 about it, and i desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether
 any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its
 roots.”
 
when she heard the sure proofs ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
 down. she flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and
 kissed him. “do not be angry with ulysses,” she cried, “you, who are
 the wisest of mankind. we have suffered, both of us. heaven has denied
 us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together;
 do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that i did not embrace you
 thus as soon as i saw you. i have been shuddering all the time through
 fear that someone might come here and deceive with lying story;
 for there are many very wicked people going about. jove’s daughter
 helen would never have yielded herself to man from foreign country,
 if she had known that the sons of achaeans would come after her and
 bring her back. heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no
 thought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. now,
 however, that you have convinced by showing that you know all about
 our bed (which human being has ever seen but you and i and single
 maidservant, the daughter of actor, who was given by my father on my
 marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though i
 have been i can mistrust longer.”
 
then ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as clasped his dear and
 faithful wife to his bosom. as the sight of land is welcome to men who
 are swimming towards the shore, when neptune has wrecked their ship
 with the fury of his winds and waves; few alone reach the land, and
 these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on
 firm ground and out of danger—even so was her husband welcome to her as
 she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from
 about his neck. indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow
 till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not minerva determined otherwise,
 and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer dawn to
 leave oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds lampus and phaethon that bear
 her onward to break the day upon mankind.
 
at last, however, ulysses said, “wife, we have not yet reached the end
 of our troubles. i have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. it
 is long and difficult, but i must go through with it, for thus the
 shade of teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when i went
 down into hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. but
 now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon
 of sleep.”
 
“you shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied penelope, “now
 that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your
 country. but as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me
 about the task that lies before you. i shall have to hear about it
 later, so it is better that i should be told at once.”
 
“my dear,” answered ulysses, “why should you press to tell you?
 still, i will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. i
 do not like it myself, for teiresias bade travel far and wide,
 carrying an oar, till i came to country where the people have never
 heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. they know
 nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of ship. gave
 this certain token which i will not hide from you. said that a
 wayfarer should meet and ask whether it was winnowing shovel
 that i had on my shoulder. on this, i was to fix my oar in the ground
 and sacrifice ram, bull, and boar to neptune; after which i was
 to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the
 other. as for myself, said that death should come to from the
 sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when i was full of
 years and peace of mind, and my people should bless me. all this, he
 said, should surely come to pass.”
 
and penelope said, “if the gods are going to vouchsafe you happier
 time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
 misfortune.”
 
thus did they converse. meanwhile eurynome and the nurse took torches
 and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
 them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
 bed chamber woman eurynome183 to show ulysses and penelope to bed by
 torch light. when she had conducted them to their room she went back,
 and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
 telemachus, philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
 made the women leave off also. they then laid themselves down to sleep
 in the cloisters.
 
when ulysses and penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
 with one another. she told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
 the house filled with crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
 sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
 ulysses in his turn told her what had suffered, and how much trouble
 had himself given to other people. told her everything, and she
 was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till had
 ended his whole story.
 
began with his victory over the cicons, and how thence reached
 the fertile land of the lotus-eaters. told her all about the cyclops
 and how had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
 comrades; how then went on to aeolus, who received him hospitably
 and furthered him on his way, but even so was not to reach home, for
 to his great grief hurricane carried him out to again; how he
 went on to the laestrygonian city telepylos, where the people destroyed
 all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
 then told of cunning circe and her craft, and how sailed to the
 chill house of hades, to consult the ghost of the theban prophet
 teiresias, and how saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who
 bore him and brought him up when was child; how then heard the
 wondrous singing of the sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and
 terrible charybdis and to scylla, whom man had ever yet passed in
 safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how jove
 therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men
 perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last he
 reached the ogygian island and the nymph calypso, who kept him there in
 cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she
 intended making him immortal so that should never grow old, but she
 could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering
 had found his way to the phaeacians, who had treated him as though
 had been god, and sent him back in ship to his own country after
 having given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. this was
 the last thing about which told her, for here deep sleep took hold
 upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows.
 
then minerva bethought her of another matter. when she deemed that
 ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
 dawn rise out of oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. on
 this, ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to penelope,
 “wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in
 lamenting my absence, and i in being prevented from getting home though
 i was longing all the time to do so. now, however, that we have at last
 come together, take care of the property that is in the house. as for
 the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, i will take
 many myself by force from other people, and will compel the achaeans to
 make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. i am now
 going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has
 so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself i will give these
 instructions, though you have little need of them. at sunrise it will
 at once get abroad that i have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,
 therefore,184 and stay there with your women. see nobody and ask no
 questions.”185
 
as spoke girded on his armour. then roused telemachus,
 philoetius, and eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
 this they did, and armed themselves. when they had done so, they opened
 the gates and sallied forth, ulysses leading the way. it was now
 daylight, but minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led
 them quickly out of the town.
 



book xxiv
 

the ghosts of the suitors in hades—ulysses and his men go to the house
 of laertes—the people of ithaca come out to attack ulysses, but minerva
 concludes peace.
 

then mercury of cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his
 hand held the fair golden wand with which seals men’s eyes in
 sleep or wakes them just as pleases; with this roused the ghosts
 and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. as
 bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them
 has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the
 ghosts whine and squeal as mercury the healer of sorrow led them down
 into the dark abode of death. when they had passed the waters of
 oceanus and the rock leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the
 land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell
 the souls and shadows of them that can labour more.
 
here they found the ghost of achilles of peleus, with those of
 patroclus, antilochus, and ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man
 of all the danaans after the of peleus himself.
 
they gathered round the ghost of the of peleus, and the ghost of
 agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. round him were gathered also
 the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of
 aegisthus; and the ghost of achilles spoke first.
 
“son of atreus,” it said, “we used to say that jove had loved you
 better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain
 over many and brave men, when we were all fighting together before
 troy; yet the hand of death, which mortal can escape, was laid upon
 you all too early. better for you had you fallen at troy in the hey-day
 of your renown, for the achaeans would have built mound over your
 ashes, and your would have been heir to your good name, whereas it
 has now been your lot to come to most miserable end.”
 
“happy of peleus,” answered the ghost of agamemnon, “for having
 died at troy far from argos, while the bravest of the trojans and the
 achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. there you lay in the
 whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your
 chivalry. we fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever
 have left off if jove had not sent hurricane to stay us. then, when
 we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed
 and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. the
 danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. your mother,
 when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and
 the sound of great wailing went forth over the waters so that the
 achaeans quaked for fear. they would have fled panic-stricken to their
 ships had not wise old nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked
 them saying, ‘hold, argives, fly not sons of the achaeans, this is his
 mother coming from the with her immortal nymphs to view the body of
 her son.’
 
“thus spoke, and the achaeans feared more. the daughters of the
 old man of the stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in
 immortal raiment. the nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet
 voices in lament—calling and answering one another; there was not an
 argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. days and nights
 seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the
 eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many fat sheep with
 many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. you were burnt in
 raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes,
 horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were
 burning, with the tramp as of great multitude. but when the flames of
 heaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak
 and laid them in ointments and in pure wine. your mother brought us a
 golden vase to hold them—gift of bacchus, and work of vulcan himself;
 in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of patroclus who had
 gone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of antilochus, who
 had been closer to you than any other of your comrades now that
 patroclus was more.
 
“over these the host of the argives built noble tomb, on point
 jutting out over the open hellespont, that it might be seen from far
 out upon the by those now living and by them that shall be born
 hereafter. your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them to
 be contended for by the noblest of the achaeans. you must have been
 present at the funeral of many hero, when the young men gird
 themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
 great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed thetis
 offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. thus even in death
 your fame, achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore
 among all mankind. but as for me, what solace had i when the days of my
 fighting were done? for jove willed my destruction on my return, by the
 hands of aegisthus and those of my wicked wife.”
 
thus did they converse, and presently mercury came up to them with the
 ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by ulysses. the ghosts of
 agamemnon and achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to
 them at once. the ghost of agamemnon recognised amphimedon of
 melaneus, who lived in ithaca and had been his host, so it began to
 talk to him.
 
“amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fine young men—all
 of an age too—that you are come down here under the ground? one could
 pick finer body of men from any city. did neptune raise his winds
 and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an
 end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or
 sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city?
 answer my question, for i have been your guest. do you not remember how
 i came to your house with menelaus, to persuade ulysses to join us with
 his ships against troy? it was whole month ere we could resume our
 voyage, for we had hard work to persuade ulysses to come with us.”
 
and the ghost of amphimedon answered, “agamemnon, of atreus, king
 of men, i remember everything that you have said, and will tell you
 fully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about.
 ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not
 say point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an
 end, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the
 trick she played us. she set up great tambour frame in her room and
 began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. ‘sweethearts,’
 said she, ‘ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press to marry
 again immediately; wait—for i would not have my skill in needlework
 perish unrecorded—till i have completed pall for the hero laertes,
 against the time when death shall take him. is very rich, and the
 women of the place will talk if is laid out without pall.’ this is
 what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon
 her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches
 again by torchlight. she fooled us in this way for three years without
 our finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth
 year, in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one
 of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in
 the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would
 or no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had
 it washed,186 its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.
 
“then some malicious god conveyed ulysses to the upland farm where his
 swineherd lives. thither presently came also his son, returning from a
 voyage to pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
 their plot for our destruction. telemachus came first, and then after
 him, accompanied by the swineherd, came ulysses, clad in rags and
 leaning on staff as though were some miserable old beggar. came
 so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among
 us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. endured both being
 struck and insulted without word, though was in his own house; but
 when the will of aegis-bearing jove inspired him, and telemachus
 took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors
 behind them. then cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a
 quantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this
 was the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the
 bow—nor nearly do so. when it was about to reach the hands of ulysses,
 we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him, matter
 what might say, but telemachus insisted on his having it. when he
 had got it in his hands strung it with ease and sent his arrow
 through the iron. then stood on the floor of the cloister and poured
 his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. first killed
 antinous, and then, aiming straight before him, let fly his deadly
 darts and they fell thick on one another. it was plain that some one of
 the gods was helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main
 throughout the cloisters, and there was hideous sound of groaning as
 our brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our
 blood. this, agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are
 lying still uncared for in the house of ulysses, for our friends at
 home do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out
 and wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according
 to the offices due to the departed.”
 
“happy ulysses, of laertes,” replied the ghost of agamemnon, “you
 are indeed blessed in the possession of wife endowed with such rare
 excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
 penelope the daughter of icarius. the fame, therefore, of her virtue
 shall never die, and the immortals shall compose song that shall be
 welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of penelope. how far
 otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of tyndareus who killed
 her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has
 brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones.”
 
thus did they converse in the house of hades deep down within the
 bowels of the earth. meanwhile ulysses and the others passed out of the
 town and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of laertes, which
 had reclaimed with infinite labour. here was his house, with a
 lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept
 and sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old sicel woman,
 who looked after him in this his country-farm. when ulysses got there,
 said to his and to the other two:
 
“go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
 meanwhile i want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
 recognise after so long an absence.”
 
then took off his armour and gave it to eumaeus and philoetius, who
 went straight on to the house, while turned off into the vineyard to
 make trial of his father. as went down into the great orchard, he
 did not see dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for
 they were all gathering thorns to make fence for the vineyard, at the
 place where the old man had told them; therefore found his father
 alone, hoeing vine. had on dirty old shirt, patched and very
 shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him
 from the brambles, and also wore sleeves of leather; had goat
 skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. when ulysses saw
 him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, stood still under tall
 pear tree and began to weep. doubted whether to embrace him, kiss
 him, and tell him all about his having come home, or whether should
 first question him and see what would say. in the end deemed it
 best to be crafty with him, so in this mind went up to his father,
 who was bending down and digging about plant.
 
“i see, sir,” said ulysses, “that you are an excellent gardener—what
 pains you take with it, to be sure. there is not single plant, not a
 fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of
 your attention. i trust, however, that you will not be offended if i
 say that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. you are
 old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. it cannot be because you are idle
 that your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and
 figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble
 birth. i should have said that you were one of those who should wash
 well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have right to do;
 but tell me, and tell true, whose bondman are you, and in whose
 garden are you working? tell also about another matter. is this
 place that i have come to really ithaca? i met man just now who said
 so, but was dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story
 out when i was asking him about an old friend of mine, whether was
 still living, or was already dead and in the house of hades. believe me
 when i tell you that this man came to my house once when i was in my
 own country and never yet did any stranger come to whom i liked
 better. said that his family came from ithaca and that his father
 was laertes, of arceisius. i received him hospitably, making him
 welcome to all the abundance of my house, and when went away i gave
 him all customary presents. i gave him seven talents of fine gold, and
 cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it. i gave him twelve
 light cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; i also gave him twelve
 cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal
 number of shirts. to all this i added four good looking women skilled
 in all useful arts, and i let him take his choice.”
 
his father shed tears and answered, “sir, you have indeed come to the
 country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked
 people. all this wealth of presents has been given to purpose. if
 you could have found your friend here alive in ithaca, would have
 entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply
 when you left him—as would have been only right considering what you
 had already given him. but tell me, and tell true, how many years is
 it since you entertained this guest—my unhappy son, as ever was? alas!
 has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the have
 eaten him, or has fallen prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
 continent. neither his mother, nor i his father, who were his parents,
 could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could
 his excellent and richly dowered wife penelope bewail her husband as
 was natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the
 offices due to the departed. but now, tell truly for i want to know.
 who and whence are you—tell of your town and parents? where is the
 ship lying that has brought you and your men to ithaca? or were you a
 passenger on some other man’s ship, and those who brought you here have
 gone on their way and left you?”
 
“i will tell you everything,” answered ulysses, “quite truly. i come
 from alybas, where i have fine house. i am of king apheidas, who
 is the of polypemon. my own name is eperitus; heaven drove off
 my course as i was leaving sicania, and i have been carried here
 against my will. as for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open
 country outside the town, and this is the fifth year since ulysses left
 my country. poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when left
 me. the birds all flew on our right hands, and both and i rejoiced
 to see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have
 another friendly meeting and exchange presents.”
 
dark cloud of sorrow fell upon laertes as listened. filled both
 hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey
 head, groaning heavily as did so. the heart of ulysses was touched,
 and his nostrils quivered as looked upon his father; then sprang
 towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, “i am he,
 father, about whom you are asking—i have returned after having been
 away for twenty years. but cease your sighing and lamentation—we have
 time to lose, for i should tell you that i have been killing the
 suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes.”
 
“if you really are my ulysses,” replied laertes, “and have come
 back again, you must give such manifest proof of your identity as
 shall convince me.”
 
“first observe this scar,” answered ulysses, “which i got from boar’s
 tusk when i was hunting on mt. parnassus. you and my mother had sent me
 to autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presents which when he
 was over here had promised to give me. furthermore i will point out
 to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and i asked you all
 about them as i followed you round the garden. we went over them all,
 and you told their names and what they all were. you gave me
 thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also
 said you would give fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted
 between each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of
 heaven has been laid heavy upon them.”
 
laertes’ strength failed him when heard the convincing proofs which
 his had given him. threw his arms about him, and ulysses had to
 support him, or would have gone off into swoon; but as soon as he
 came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, said, “o father
 jove, then you gods are still in olympus after all, if the suitors have
 really been punished for their insolence and folly. nevertheless, i am
 much afraid that i shall have all the townspeople of ithaca up here
 directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the
 cities of the cephallenians.”
 
ulysses answered, “take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
 but let us go into the house hard by your garden. i have already told
 telemachus, philoetius, and eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready
 as soon as possible.”
 
thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. when they got
 there they found telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting
 up meat and mixing wine with water. then the old sicel woman took
 laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. she put him on
 good cloak, and minerva came up to him and gave him more imposing
 presence, making him taller and stouter than before. when came back
 his was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said
 to him, “my dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much
 taller and better-looking.”
 
laertes answered, “would, by father jove, minerva, and apollo, that i
 were the man i was when i ruled among the cephallenians, and took
 nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. if i were still what i
 then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, i
 should have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors.
 i should have killed great many of them, and you would have rejoiced
 to see it.”
 
thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
 work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his
 proper place on the benches and seats. then they began eating; by and
 by old dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their
 mother, the sicel woman who looked after laertes now that was
 growing old, had been to fetch them. when they saw ulysses and were
 certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but ulysses
 scolded them good naturedly and said, “sit down to your dinner, old
 man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin
 for some time and have been waiting for you.”
 
then dolius put out both his hands and went up to ulysses. “sir,” said
 he, seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “we have
 long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after
 we had given up hoping. all hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper
 you.187 but tell me, does penelope already know of your return, or
 shall we send some one to tell her?”
 
“old man,” answered ulysses, “she knows already, so you need not
 trouble about that.” on this took his seat, and the sons of dolius
 gathered round ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after
 the other; then they took their seats in due order near dolius their
 father.
 
while they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, rumour went round
 the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the
 suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
 from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of ulysses.
 they took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
 of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the
 fishermen to take each of them to his own place. they then met angrily
 in the place of assembly, and when they were got together eupeithes
 rose to speak. was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son
 antinous, who had been the first man killed by ulysses, so said,
 weeping bitterly, “my friends, this man has done the achaeans great
 wrong. took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he
 has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return has been
 killing all the foremost men among the cephallenians. let us be up and
 doing before can get away to pylos or to elis where the epeans rule,
 or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. it will be an
 everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons
 and brothers. for my own part i should have more pleasure in life,
 but had rather die at once. let us be up, then, and after them, before
 they can cross over to the main land.”
 
wept as spoke and every one pitied him. but medon and the bard
 phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of ulysses.
 every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle
 of the assembly, and medon said, “hear me, men of ithaca. ulysses did
 not do these things against the will of heaven. i myself saw an
 immortal god take the form of mentor and stand beside him. this god
 appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously
 about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on
 one another.”
 
on this pale fear laid hold of them, and old halitherses, of
 mastor, rose to speak, for was the only man among them who knew both
 past and future; so spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,
 saying,
 
“men of ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as
 they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to mentor, when we bade
 you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the
 wantonness of their hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring the
 wife of chieftain who they thought would not return. now, however,
 let it be as i say, and do as i tell you. do not go out against
 ulysses, or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your
 own heads.”
 
this was what said, and more than half raised loud shout, and at
 once left the assembly. but the rest stayed where they were, for the
 speech of halitherses displeased them, and they sided with eupeithes;
 they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
 themselves, they met together in front of the city, and eupeithes led
 them on in their folly. thought was going to avenge the murder of
 his son, whereas in truth was never to return, but was himself to
 perish in his attempt.
 
then minerva said to jove, “father, of saturn, king of kings,
 answer this question—what do you propose to do? will you set them
 fighting still further, or will you make peace between them?”
 
and jove answered, “my child, why should you ask me? was it not by your
 own arrangement that ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the
 suitors? do whatever you like, but i will tell you what i think will be
 most reasonable arrangement. now that ulysses is revenged, let them
 swear to solemn covenant, in virtue of which shall continue to
 rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of
 their sons and brothers. let them then all become friends as
 heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.”
 
this was what minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
 darted from off the topmost summits of olympus.
 
now when laertes and the others had done dinner, ulysses began by
 saying, “some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up to
 us.” so one of dolius’s sons went as was bid. standing on the
 threshold could see them all quite near, and said to ulysses, “here
 they are, let us put on our armour at once.”
 
they put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say ulysses,
 his three men, and the six sons of dolius. laertes also and dolius did
 the same—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. when they
 had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,
 ulysses leading the way.
 
then jove’s daughter minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
 and voice of mentor. ulysses was glad when saw her, and said to his
 telemachus, “telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an
 engagement, which will show every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgrace
 your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the
 world over.”
 
“you say truly, my dear father,” answered telemachus, “and you shall
 see, if you will, that i am in mind to disgrace your family.”
 
laertes was delighted when heard this. “good heavens,” exclaimed,
 “what day i am enjoying: i do indeed rejoice at it. my and
 grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour.”
 
on this minerva came close up to him and said, “son of arceisius—-best
 friend i have in the world—pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to jove
 her father; then poise your spear and hurl it.”
 
as she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when had prayed
 to her poised his spear and hurled it. hit eupeithes’ helmet, and
 the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his
 armour rang rattling round him as fell heavily to the ground.
 meantime ulysses and his fell upon the front line of the foe and
 smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
 every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
 only minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. “men of
 ithaca,” she cried, “cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at
 once without further bloodshed.”
 
on this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
 arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of
 the goddess’ voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. but
 ulysses gave great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down
 like soaring eagle. then the of saturn sent thunderbolt of fire
 that fell just in front of minerva, so she said to ulysses, “ulysses,
 noble of laertes, stop this warful strife, or jove will be angry
 with you.”
 
thus spoke minerva, and ulysses obeyed her gladly. then minerva assumed
 the form and voice of mentor, and presently made covenant of peace
 between the two contending parties.
 



footnotes:
 
[1] [ black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching all
 across africa, one half looking west on to the atlantic, and the other
 east on to the indian ocean.]
 
[2] [ the original use of the footstool was probably less to rest the
 feet than to keep them (especially when bare) from floor which was
 often wet and dirty.]
 
[3] [ the θρόνος or seat, is occasionally called “high,” as being
 higher than the θρῆνυς or low footstool. it was probably higher than
 an ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had back.]
 
[4] [ temesa was on the west coast of the toe of italy, in what is now
 the gulf of sta eufemia. it was famous in remote times for its copper
 mines, which, however, were worked out when strabo wrote.]
 
[5] [ i.e. “with current in it”—see illustrations and map near the
 end of bks. v. and vi. respectively.]
 
[6] [ reading Νηρίτῳ for Νηίῳ, cf. “od.” iii. 81 where the same mistake
 is made, and xiii. 351 where the mountain is called neritum, the same
 place being intended both here and in book xiii.]
 
[7] [ it is never plausibly explained why penelope cannot do this, and
 from bk. ii. it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging the
 suitors, though we are asked to believe that she was only fooling
 them.]
 
[8] [ see note on “od.” i. 365.]
 
[9] [ middle argos means the peleponnese which, however, is never so
 called in the “iliad”. i presume “middle” means “middle between the two
 greek-speaking countries of asia minor and sicily, with south italy”;
 for that parts of sicily and also large parts, though not the whole of
 south italy, were inhabited by greek-speaking races centuries before
 the dorian colonisations can hardly be doubted. the sicians, and also
 the sicels, both of them probably spoke greek.]
 
[10] [ cf. “il.” vi. 490-495. in the “iliad” it is “war,” not “speech,”
 that is man’s matter. it argues certain hardness, or at any rate
 dislike of the “iliad” on the part of the writer of the “odyssey,” that
 she should have adopted hector’s farewell to andromache here, as
 elsewhere in the poem, for scene of such inferior pathos.]
 
[11] [ μέγαρα σκιοέντα the whole open court with the covered cloister
 running round it was called μέγαρον, or μέγαρα, but the covered part
 was distinguished by being called “shady” or “shadow-giving”. it was in
 this part that the tables for the suitors were laid. the fountain court
 at hampton court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the use
 of arches instead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangement
 is still common in sicily. the usual translation “shadowy” or “dusky”
 halls, gives false idea of the scene.]
 
[12] [ the reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes to
 make it clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep in
 ulysses’ house.]
 
[13] [ see appendix; g, in plan of ulysses’ house.]
 
[14] [ i imagine this passage to be rejoinder to “il.” xxiii. 702-705
 in which tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and good useful maid of
 all work at only four. the scrupulous regard of laertes for his wife’s
 feelings is of piece with the extreme jealousy for the honour of
 woman, which is manifest throughout the “odyssey”.]
 
[15] [ χιτῶνα “the χιτών, or _tunica_, was shirt or shift, and served
 as the chief under garment of the greeks and romans, whether men or
 women.” smith’s dictionary of greek and roman antiquities, under
 “tunica”.]
 
[16] [ doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described may
 be seen in the older houses at trapani. there is slot on the outer
 side of the door by means of which person who has left the room can
 shoot the bolt. my bedroom at the albergo centrale was fastened in this
 way.]
 
[17] [ πύματον δ’ ὡπλίσσατο δόρπον. so we vulgarly say “had cooked his
 goose,” or “had settled his hash.” Ægyptius cannot of course know of
 the fate antiphus had met with, for there had as yet been news of or
 from ulysses.]
 
[18] [ “il.” xxii. 416. σχέσθε φίλοι, καὶ μ’ οἷον ἐάσατε...... the
 authoress has bungled by borrowing these words verbatim from the
 “iliad”, without prefixing the necessary “do not,” which i have
 supplied.]
 
[19] [ i.e. you have money, and could pay when i got judgment, whereas
 the suitors are men of straw.]
 
[20] [ cf. “il.” ii. 76. ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’
 ἀνέστη
 Νέστωρ, ὄς ῥα.......................................
 ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.
 the odyssean passage runs—
 “ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ ἀνέστη
 Μεντορ ὄς ῥ’.......................................
 ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.
 is it possible not to suspect that the name mentor was coined upon that
 of nestor?]
 
[21] [ i.e. in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the inner
 house.]
 
[22] [ this would be fair from sicily, which was doing duty for ithaca
 in the mind of the writer, but north wind would have been preferable
 for voyage from the real ithaca to pylos.]
 
[23] [ κελάδοντ’ ἐπὶ οὶνοπα πόντον the wind does not whistle over
 waves. it only whistles through rigging or some other obstacle that
 cuts it.]
 
[24] [ cf. “il.” v.20. Ἰδαῖος δ’ ἀπόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα δίφρον, the
 odyssean line is ἠέλιος δ’ ἀνόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα λίμνην. there can
 be doubt that the odyssean line was suggested by the iliadic, but
 nothing can explain why idæus jumping from his chariot should suggest
 to the writer of the “odyssey” the sun jumping from the sea. the
 probability is that she never gave the matter thought, but took the
 line in question as an effect of saturation with the “iliad,” and of
 unconscious cerebration. the “odyssey” contains many such examples.]
 
[25] [ the heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc. were taken out from the
 inside and eaten first as being more readily cooked; the {greek}, or
 bone meat, was cooking while the {greek} or inward parts were being
 eaten. i imagine that the thigh bones made kind of gridiron, while at
 the same time the marrow inside them got cooked.]
 
[26] [ i.e. skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged. the
 meat would be pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes to
 grill—the two ends of the skewer being supported in whatever way
 convenient. meat so cooking may be seen in any eating house in smyrna,
 or any eastern town. when i rode across the troad from the dardanelles
 to hissarlik and mount ida, i noticed that my dragoman and his men did
 all our outdoor cooking exactly in the odyssean and iliadic fashion.]
 
[27] [ cf. “il.” xvii. 567. {greek} the odyssean lines are—{greek}]
 
[28] [ reading {greek} for {greek}, cf. “od.” i. 186.]
 
29[] [ the geography of the Ægean as above described is correct, but is
 probably taken from the lost poem, the nosti, the existence of which is
 referred to “od.” i. 326, 327 and 350, &c. glance at the map will
 show that heaven advised its supplicants quite correctly.]
 
[30] [ the writer—ever jealous for the honour of women—extenuates
 clytemnestra’s guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to her
 having been left unprotected, and fallen into the hands of wicked
 man.]
 
[31] [ the greek is {greek} cf. “iliad” ii. 408 {greek} surely the
 {greek} of the odyssean passage was due to the {greek} of the “iliad.”
 other reason suggests itself for the making menelaus return on the
 very day of the feast given by orestes. the fact that in the “iliad”
 menelaus came to banquet without waiting for an invitation,
 determines the writer of the “odyssey” to make him come to banquet,
 also uninvited, but as circumstances did not permit of his having been
 invited, his coming uninvited is shown to have been due to chance. i do
 not think the authoress thought all this out, but attribute the
 strangeness of the coincidence to unconscious cerebration and
 saturation.]
 
[32] [ cf. “il.” i. 458, ii. 421. the writer here interrupts an iliadic
 passage (to which she returns immediately) for the double purpose of
 dwelling upon the slaughter of the heifer, and of letting nestor’s wife
 and daughter enjoy it also. male writer, if was borrowing from the
 “iliad,” would have stuck to his borrowing.]
 
[33] [ cf. “il.” xxiv. 587, 588 where the lines refer to the washing
 the dead body of hector.]
 
[34] [ see illustration on opposite page. the yard is typical of many
 that may be seen in sicily. the existing ground-plan is probably
 unmodified from odyssean, and indeed long pre-odyssean times, but the
 earlier buildings would have arches, and would, one would suppose,
 be mainly timber. the odyssean {greek} were the sheds that ran round
 the yard as the arches do now. the {greek} was the one through which
 the main entrance passed, and which was hence “noisy,” or
 reverberating. it had an upper story in which visitors were often
 lodged.]
 
[35] [ this journey is an impossible one. telemachus and pisistratus
 would have been obliged to drive over the taygetus range, over which
 there has never yet been road for wheeled vehicles. it is plain
 therefore that the audience for whom the “odyssey” was written was one
 that would be unlikely to know anything about the topography of the
 peloponnese, so that the writer might take what liberties she chose.]
 
[36] [ the lines which i have enclosed in brackets are evidently an
 afterthought—added probably by the writer herself—for they evince the
 same instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern a
 woman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem. there is further
 sign of any special festivities nor of any other guests than telemachus
 and pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets)
 are abruptly introduced, probably with view of trying to carry off
 the introduction of the lines now in question.
 
the addition was, i imagine, suggested by desire to excuse and
 explain the non-appearance of hermione in bk. xv., as also of both
 hermione and megapenthes in the rest of bk. iv. megapenthes in bk. xv.
 seems to be still bachelor: the presumption therefore is that bk. xv.
 was written before the story of his marriage here given. i take it he
 is only married here because his sister is being married. she having
 been properly attended to, megapenthes might as well be married at the
 same time. hermione could not now be less than thirty.
 
i have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my “authoress of
 the odyssey”, p. 136-138. see also p. 256 of the same book.]
 
[37] [ sparta and lacedaemon are here treated as two different places,
 though in other parts of the poem it is clear that the writer
 understands them as one. the catalogue in the “iliad,” which the writer
 is here presumably following, makes the same mistake (“il.” ii. 581,
 582)]
 
[38] [ these last three lines are identical with “il.” vxiii. 604-606.]
 
[39] [ from the greek {greek} it is plain that menelaus took up the
 piece of meat with his fingers.]
 
[40] [ amber is never mentioned in the “iliad.” sicily, where i suppose
 the “odyssey” to have been written, has always been, and still is, one
 of the principal amber producing countries. it was probably the only
 one known in the odyssean age. see “the authoress of the odyssey,”
 longmans 1898, p. 186.]
 
[41] [ this doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of the
 cypria about paris and helen robbing menelaus of the greater part of
 his treasures, when they sailed together for troy.]
 
[42] [ it is inconceivable that helen should enter thus, in the middle
 of supper, intending to work with her distaff, if great festivities
 were going on. telemachus and pisistratus are evidently dining en
 famille.]
 
[43] [ in the italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who were
 being hotly pursued by the austrian police hid themselves inside
 donatello’s colossal wooden horse in the salone at padua, and remained
 there for week being fed by their confederates. in 1898 the last
 survivor was carried round padua in triumph.]
 
[44] [ the greek is {greek}. is it unfair to argue that the writer is a
 person of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom strong smell of fish
 is distasteful?]
 
[45] [ the greek is {greek}. i believe this to be hit at the writer’s
 own countrymen who were of phocaean descent, and the next following
 line to be rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk. vi.
 273-288, to the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry none
 of her own people. for that the writer of the “odyssey” was the person
 who has been introduced into the poem under the name of nausicaa, i
 cannot bring myself to question. i may remind english readers that
 {greek} (i.e. phoca) means “seal.” seals almost always appear on
 phocaean coins.]
 
[46] [ surely here again we are in the hands of writer of delicate
 sensibility. it is not as though the seals were stale; they had only
 just been killed. the writer, however is obviously laughing at her own
 countrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.]
 
[47] [ we were told above (lines 356, 357) that it was only one day’s
 sail.]
 
[48] [ i give the usual translation, but i do not believe the greek
 will warrant it. the greek reads {greek}.
 
this is usually held to mean that ithaca is an island fit for breeding
 goats, and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would
 have been if it were fit for breeding horses. i find little authority
 for such translation; the most equitable translation of the text as
 it stands is, “ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and
 delectable rather than fit for breeding horses; for not one of the
 islands is good driving ground, nor well meadowed.” surely the writer
 does not mean that pleasant or delectable island would not be fit for
 breeding horses? the most equitable translation, therefore, of the
 present text being thus halt and impotent, we may suspect corruption,
 and i hazard the following emendation, though i have not adopted it in
 my translation, as fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful. i
 would read:—{greek}.
 
as far as scanning goes the {greek} is not necessary; {greek} iv. 72,
 (footnote greek) iv. 233, to go further afield than earlier lines of
 the same book, give sufficient authority for {greek}, but the {greek}
 would not be redundant; it would emphasise the surprise of the
 contrast, and i should prefer to have it, though it is not very
 important either way. this reading of course should be translated
 “ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and (by your leave) itself
 horseman rather than fit for breeding horses—for not one of the
 islands is good and well meadowed ground.”
 
this would be sure to baffle the alexandrian editors. “how,” they would
 ask themselves, “could an island be horseman?” and they would cast
 about for an emendation. visit to the top of mt. eryx might perhaps
 make the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration of
 the text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.
 
i have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the “odyssey”
 was familiar with the old sican city at the top of mt. eryx, and that
 the aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence did duty
 with her for the ionian islands—marettimo, the highest and most
 westerly of the group, standing for ithaca. when seen from the top of
 mt. eryx marettimo shows as it should do according to “od.” ix. 25, 26,
 “on the horizon, all highest up in the towards the west,” while the
 other islands lie “some way off it to the east.” as we descend to
 trapani, marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island of
 levanzo, behind which it disappears. my friend, the late signor e.
 biaggini, pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top of
 levanzo, and said to “come cavalca bene” (“how well it rides”), and
 this immediately suggested my emendation to me. later on i found in the
 hymn to the pythian apollo (which abounds with tags taken from the
 “odyssey”) line ending {greek} which strengthened my suspicion that
 this was the original ending of the second of the two lines above under
 consideration.]
 
[49] [ see note on line 3 of this book. the reader will observe that
 the writer has been unable to keep the women out of an interpolation
 consisting only of four lines.]
 
[50] [ scheria means piece of land jutting out into the sea. in my
 “authoress of the odyssey” i thought “jutland” would be suitable
 translation, but it has been pointed out to that “jutland” only
 means the land of the jutes.]
 
[51] [ irrigation as here described is common in gardens near trapani.
 the water that supplies the ducts is drawn from wells by mule who
 turns wheel with buckets on it.]
 
[52] [ there is not word here about the cattle of the sun-god.]
 
[53] [ the writer evidently thought that green, growing wood might also
 be well seasoned.]
 
[54] [ the reader will note that the river was flowing with salt water
 i.e. that it was tidal.]
 
[55] [ then the ogygian island was not so far off, but that nausicaa
 might be assumed to know where it was.]
 
[56] [ greek {greek}]
 
[57] [ i suspect family joke, or sly allusion to some thing of which
 we know nothing, in this story of eurymedusa’s having been brought from
 apeira. the greek word “apeiros” means “inexperienced,” “ignorant.” is
 it possible that eurymedusa was notoriously incompetent?]
 
[58] [ polyphemus was also to neptune, see “od.” ix. 412, 529. he
 was therefore half brother to nausithous, half uncle to king alcinous,
 and half great uncle to nausicaa.]
 
[59] [ it would seem as though the writer thought that marathon was
 close to athens.]
 
[60] [ here the writer, knowing that she is drawing (with
 embellishments) from things actually existing, becomes impatient of
 past tenses and slides into the present.]
 
[61] [ this is hidden malice, implying that the phaeacian magnates were
 better than they should be. the final drink-offering should have
 been made to jove or neptune, not to the god of thievishness and
 rascality of all kinds. in line 164 we do indeed find echeneus
 proposing that drink-offering should be made to jove, but mercury is
 evidently, according to our authoress, the god who was most likely to
 be of use to them.]
 
[62] [ the fact of alcinous knowing anything about the cyclopes
 suggests that in the writer’s mind scheria and the country of the
 cyclopes were not very far from one another. i take the cyclopes and
 the giants to be one and the same people.]
 
[63] [ “my property, etc.” the authoress is here adopting an iliadic
 line (xix. 333), and this must account for the absence of all reference
 to penelope. if she had happened to remember “il.” v. 213, she would
 doubtless have appropriated it by preference, for that line reads “my
 country, _my wife_, and all the greatness of my house.”]
 
[64] [ the at first inexplicable sleep of ulysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc.)
 is here, as also in viii. 445, being obviously prepared. the writer
 evidently attached the utmost importance to it. those who know that the
 harbour which did duty with the writer of the “odyssey” for the one in
 which ulysses landed in ithaca, was only about 2 miles from the place
 in which ulysses is now talking with alcinous, will understand why the
 sleep was so necessary.]
 
[65] [ there were two classes—the lower who were found in provisions
 which they had to cook for themselves in the yards and outer precincts,
 where they would also eat—and the upper who would eat in the cloisters
 of the inner court, and have their cooking done for them.]
 
[66] [ translation very dubious. i suppose the {greek} here to be the
 covered sheds that ran round the outer courtyard. see illustrations at
 the end of bk. iii.]
 
[67] [ the writer apparently deems that the words “as compared with
 what oxen can plough in the same time” go without saying. not so the
 writer of the “iliad” from which the odyssean passage is probably
 taken. explains that mules can plough quicker than oxen (“il.” x.
 351-353)]
 
[68] [ it was very fortunate that such disc happened to be there,
 seeing that none like it were in common use.]
 
[69] [ “il.” xiii. 37. here, as so often elsewhere in the “odyssey,”
 the appropriation of an iliadic line which is not quite appropriate
 puzzles the reader. the “they” is not the chains, nor yet mars and
 venus. it is an overflow from the iliadic passage in which neptune
 hobbles his horses in bonds “which none could either unloose or break
 so that they might stay there in that place.” if the line would have
 scanned without the addition of the words “so that they might stay
 there in that place,” they would have been omitted in the “odyssey.”]
 
[70] [ the reader will note that alcinous never goes beyond saying that
 is going to give the goblet; never gives it. elsewhere in both
 “iliad” and “odyssey” the offer of present is immediately followed by
 the statement that it was given and received gladly—alcinous actually
 does give chest and cloak and shirt—probably also some of the corn
 and wine for the long two-mile voyage was provided by him—but it is
 quite plain that gave talent and cup.]
 
[71] [ “il.” xviii. 344-349. these lines in the “iliad” tell of the
 preparation for washing the body of patroclus, and i am not pleased
 that the writer of the “odyssey” should have adopted them here.]
 
[72] [ see note [64] : ]
 
[73] [ see note [43] : ]
 
[74] [ the reader will find this threat fulfilled in bk. xiii]
 
[75] [ if the other islands lay some distance away from ithaca (which
 the word {greek} suggests), what becomes of the πόρθμος or gut between
 ithaca and samos which we hear of in bks. iv. and xv.? i suspect that
 the authoress in her mind makes telemachus come back from pylos to the
 lilybaean promontory and thence to trapani through the strait between
 the _isola grande_ and the mainland—the island of asteria being the one
 on which motya afterwards stood.]
 
[76] [ “il.” xviii. 533-534. the sudden lapse into the third person
 here for couple of lines is due to the fact that the two iliadic
 lines taken are in the third person.]
 
[77] [ cf. “il.” ii. 776. the words in both “iliad” and “odyssey” are
 [footnote greek]. in the “iliad” they are used of the horses of
 achilles’ followers as they stood idle, “champing lotus.”]
 
[78] [ i take all this passage about the cyclopes having ships to be
 sarcastic—meaning, “you people of drepanum have excuse for not
 colonising the island of favognana, which you could easily do, for you
 have plenty of ships, and the island is very good one.” for that the
 island so fully described here is the aegadean or “goat” island of
 favognana, and that the cyclopes are the old sican inhabitants of mt.
 eryx should not be doubted.]
 
[79] [ for the reasons why it was necessary that the night should be so
 exceptionally dark see “the authoress of the odyssey” pp. 188-189.]
 
[80] [ none but such lambs as would suck if they were with their
 mothers would be left in the yard. the older lambs should have been out
 feeding. the authoress has got it all wrong, but it does not matter.
 see “the authoress of the odyssey” p. 148.]
 
[81] [ this line is enclosed in brackets in the received text, and is
 omitted (with note) by messrs. butcher & lang. but lines enclosed in
 brackets are almost always genuine; all that brackets mean is that the
 bracketed passage puzzled some early editor, who nevertheless found it
 too well established in the text to venture on omitting it. in the
 present case the line bracketed is the very last which full-grown
 male editor would be likely to interpolate. it is safer to infer that
 the writer, young woman, not knowing or caring at which end of the
 ship the rudder should be, determined to make sure by placing it at
 both ends, which we shall find she presently does by repeating it (line
 340) at the stern of the ship. as for the two rocks thrown, the first i
 take to be the asinelli, see map facing p. 80. the second i see as the
 two contiguous islands of the formiche, which are treated as one, see
 map facing p. 108. the asinelli is an island shaped like boat, and
 pointing to the island of favognana. i think the authoress’s
 compatriots, who probably did not like her much better that she did
 them, jeered at the absurdity of ulysses’ conduct, and saw the asinelli
 or “donkeys,” not as the rock thrown by polyphemus, but as the boat
 itself containing ulysses and his men.]
 
[82] [ this line exists in the text here but not in the corresponding
 passage xii. 141. i am inclined to think it is interpolated (probably
 by the poetess herself) from the first of lines xi. 115-137, which i
 can hardly doubt were added by the writer when the scheme of the work
 was enlarged and altered. see “the authoress of the odyssey” pp.
 254-255.]
 
[83] [ “floating” (πλωτῇ) is not to be taken literally. the island
 itself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal. there is no
 indication of its moving during the month that ulysses stayed with
 aeolus, and on his return from his unfortunate voyage, seems to have
 found it in the same place. the πλωτῇ in fact should more be pressed
 than θοῇσι as applied to islands, “odyssey” xv. 299—where they are
 called “flying” because the ship would fly past them. so also the
 “wanderers,” as explained by buttmann; see note on “odyssey” xii. 57.]
 
[84] [ literally “for the ways of the night and of the day are near.” i
 have seen what mr. andrew lang says (“homer and the epic,” p. 236, and
 “longman’s magazine” for january, 1898, p. 277) about the “amber route”
 and the “sacred way” in this connection; but until gives his grounds
 for holding that the mediterranean peoples in the odyssean age used to
 go far north for their amber instead of getting it in sicily, where it
 is still found in considerable quantities, i do not know what weight i
 ought to attach to his opinion. i have been unable to find grounds for
 asserting that b.c. 1000 there was any commerce between the
 mediterranean and the “far north,” but i shall be very ready to learn
 if mr. lang will enlighten me. see “the authoress of the odyssey” pp.
 185-186.]
 
[85] [ one would have thought that when the sun was driving the stag
 down to the water, ulysses might have observed its whereabouts.]
 
[86] [ see hobbes of malmesbury’s translation.]
 
[87] [ “il.” vxiii. 349. again the writer draws from the washing the
 body of patroclus—which offends.]
 
[88] [ this visit is wholly without topographical significance.]
 
[89] [ brides presented themselves instinctively to the imagination of
 the writer, as the phase of humanity which she found most interesting.]
 
[90] [ ulysses was, in fact, to become missionary and preach neptune
 to people who knew not his name. i was fortunate enough to meet in
 sicily woman carrying one of these winnowing shovels; it was not much
 shorter than an oar, and i was able at once to see what the writer of
 the “odyssey” intended.]
 
[91] [ i suppose the lines i have enclosed in brackets to have been
 added by the author when she enlarged her original scheme by the
 addition of books i.-iv. and xiii. (from line 187)-xxiv. the reader
 will observe that in the corresponding passage (xii. 137-141) the
 prophecy ends with “after losing all your comrades,” and that there is
 allusion to the suitors. for fuller explanation see “the authoress
 of the odyssey” pp. 254-255.]
 
[92] [ the reader will remember that we are in the first year of
 ulysses’ wanderings, telemachus therefore was only eleven years old.
 the same anachronism is made later on in this book. see “the authoress
 of the odyssey” pp. 132-133.]
 
[93] [ tradition says that she had hanged herself. cf. “odyssey” xv.
 355, etc.]
 
[94] [ not to be confounded with aeolus king of the winds.]
 
[95] [ melampus, vide book xv. 223, etc.]
 
[96] [ i have already said in note on bk. xi. 186 that at this point
 of ulysses’ voyage telemachus could only be between eleven and twelve
 years old.]
 
[97] [ is the writer man or woman?]
 
[98] [ cf. “il.” iv. 521, {greek}. the odyssean line reads, {greek}.
 the famous dactylism, therefore, of the odyssean line was probably
 suggested by that of the ileadic rather than by desire to accommodate
 sound to sense. at any rate the double coincidence of dactylic line,
 and an ending {greek}, seems conclusive as to the familiarity of the
 writer of the “odyssey” with the iliadic line.]
 
[99] [ off the coast of sicily and south italy, in the month of may, i
 have seen men fastened half way up boat’s mast with their feet
 resting on crosspiece, just large enough to support them. from this
 point of vantage they spear sword-fish. when i saw men thus employed i
 could hardly doubt that the writer of the “odyssey” had seen others
 like them, and had them in her mind when describing the binding of
 ulysses. i have therefore with some diffidence ventured to depart from
 the received translation of ἰστοπέδη (cf. alcaeus frag. 18, where,
 however, it is very hard to say what ἰστοπέδαν means). in sophocles’
 lexicon i find reference to chrysostom (l, 242, a. ed. benedictine
 paris 1834-1839) for the word ἰστοπόδη, which is probably the same as
 ἰστοπέδη, but i have looked for the passage in vain.]
 
[100] [ the writer is at fault here and tries to put it off on circe.
 when ulysses comes to take the route prescribed by circe, ought to
 pass either the wanderers or some other difficulty of which we are not
 told, but does not do so. the planctae, or wanderers, merge into
 scylla and charybdis, and the alternative between them and something
 untold merges into the alternative whether ulysses had better choose
 scylla or charybdis. yet from line 260, it seems we are to consider the
 wanderers as having been passed by ulysses; this appears even more
 plainly from xxiii. 327, in which ulysses expressly mentions the
 wandering rocks as having been between the sirens and scylla and
 charybdis. the writer, however, is evidently unaware that she does not
 quite understand her own story; her difficulty was perhaps due to the
 fact that though trapanese sailors had given her fair idea as to
 where all her other localities really were, one in those days more
 than in our own could localise the planctae, which in fact, as buttmann
 has argued, were derived not from any particular spot, but from
 sailors’ tales about the difficulties of navigating the group of the
 aeolian islands as whole (see note on “od.” x. 3). still the matter
 of the poor doves caught her fancy, so she would not forgo them. the
 whirlwinds of fire and the smoke that hangs on scylla suggests allusion
 to stromboli and perhaps even etna. scylla is on the italian side, and
 therefore may be said to look west. it is about 8 miles thence to the
 sicilian coast, so ulysses may be perfectly well told that after
 passing scylla will come to the thrinacian island or sicily.
 charybdis is transposed to site some few miles to the north of its
 actual position.]
 
[101] [ i suppose this line to have been intercalated by the author
 when lines 426-446 were added.]
 
[102] [ for the reasons which enable us to identify the island of the
 two sirens with the lipari island now salinas—the ancient didyme, or
 “twin” island—see the authoress of the odyssey, pp. 195, 196. the two
 sirens doubtless were, as their name suggests, the whistling gusts, or
 avalanches of air that at times descend without moment’s warning from
 the two lofty mountains of salinas—as also from all high points in the
 neighbourhood.]
 
[103] [ see admiral smyth on the currents in the straits of messina,
 quoted in “the authoress of the odyssey,” p. 197.]
 
[104] [ in the islands of favognana and marettimo off trapani i have
 seen men fish exactly as here described. they chew bread into paste
 and throw it into the to attract the fish, which they then spear.
 line is used.]
 
[105] [ the writer evidently regards ulysses as on coast that looked
 east at great distance south of the straits of messina somewhere,
 say, near tauromenium, now taormina.]
 
[106] [ surely there must be line missing here to tell us that the
 keel and mast were carried down into charybdis. besides, the aorist
 {greek} in its present surrounding is perplexing. i have translated it
 as though it were an imperfect; i see messrs. butcher and lang
 translate it as pluperfect, but surely charybdis was in the act of
 sucking down the water when ulysses arrived.]
 
[107] [ i suppose the passage within brackets to have been an
 afterthought but to have been written by the same hand as the rest of
 the poem. i suppose xii. 103 to have been also added by the writer when
 she decided on sending ulysses back to charybdis. the simile suggests
 the hand of the wife or daughter of magistrate who had often seen her
 father come in cross and tired.]
 
[108] [ gr. πολυδαίδαλος. this puts coined money out of the question,
 but nevertheless implies that the gold had been worked into ornaments
 of some kind.]
 
[109] [ i suppose teiresias’ prophecy of bk. xi. 114-120 had made no
 impression on ulysses. more probably the prophecy was an afterthought,
 intercalated, as i have already said, by the authoress when she changed
 her scheme.]
 
[110] [ male writer would have made ulysses say, not “may you give
 satisfaction to your wives,” but “may your wives give satisfaction to
 you.”]
 
[111] [ see note [64].]
 
[112] [ the land was in reality the shallow inlet, now the salt works
 of s. cusumano—the neighbourhood of trapani and mt. eryx being made to
 do double duty, both as scheria and ithaca. hence the necessity for
 making ulysses set out after dark, fall instantly into profound
 sleep, and wake up on morning so foggy that could not see anything
 till the interviews between neptune and jove and between ulysses and
 minerva should have given the audience time to accept the situation.
 see illustrations and map near the end of bks. v. and vi.
 respectively.]
 
[113] [ this cave, which is identifiable with singular completeness, is
 now called the “grotta toro,” probably corruption of “tesoro,”
 for it is held to contain treasure. see the authoress of the odyssey,
 pp. 167-170.]
 
[114] [ probably they would.]
 
[115] [ then it had shallow shelving bottom.]
 
[116] [ doubtless the road would pass the harbour in odyssean times as
 it passes the salt works now; indeed, if there is to be road at all
 there is other level ground which it could take. see map above
 referred to.]
 
[117] [ the rock at the end of the northern harbour of trapani, to
 which i suppose the writer of the “odyssey” to be here referring, still
 bears the name malconsiglio—“the rock of evil counsel.” there is a
 legend that it was ship of turkish pirates who were intending to
 attack trapani, but the “madonna di trapani” crushed them under this
 rock just as they were coming into port. my friend cavaliere
 giannitrapani of trapani told that his father used to tell him when
 was boy that if would drop exactly three drops of oil on to the
 water near the rock, would see the ship still at the bottom. the
 legend is evidently christianised version of the odyssean story,
 while the name supplies the additional detail that the disaster
 happened in consequence of an evil counsel.]
 
[118] [ it would seem then that the ship had got all the way back from
 ithaca in about quarter of an hour.]
 
[119] [ and may we not add “and also to prevent his recognising that he
 was only in the place where had met nausicaa two days earlier.”]
 
[120] [ all this is to excuse the entire absence of minerva from books
 ix.-xii., which i suppose had been written already, before the
 authoress had determined on making minerva so prominent character.]
 
[121] [ we have met with this somewhat lame attempt to cover the
 writer’s change of scheme at the end of bk. vi.]
 
[122] [ i take the following from the authoress of the odyssey, p. 167.
 “it is clear from the text that there were two [caves] not one, but
 some one has enclosed in brackets the two lines in which the second
 cave is mentioned, i presume because found himself puzzled by having
 second cave sprung upon him when up to this point had only been
 told of one.
 
“i venture to think that if had known the ground would not have
 been puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yards
 from one another.” the cave in which ulysses hid his treasure is, as i
 have already said, identifiable with singular completeness. the other
 cave presents special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.]
 
[123] [ there is attempt to disguise the fact that penelope had long
 given encouragement to the suitors. the only defence set up is that she
 did not really mean to encourage them. would it not have been wiser to
 have tried little discouragement?]
 
[124] [ see map near the end of bk. vi. _ruccazzù dei corvi_ of course
 means “the rock of the ravens.” both name and ravens still exist.]
 
[125] [ see the authoress of the odyssey, pp. 140, 141. the real reason
 for sending telemachus to pylos and lacedaemon was that the authoress
 might get helen of troy into her poem. was sent at the only point in
 the story at which could be sent, so must have gone then or not
 at all.]
 
[126] [ the site i assign to eumaeus’s hut, close to the _ruccazzù dei
 corvi_, is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensive
 view.]
 
[127] [ sandals such as eumaeus was making are still worn in the
 abruzzi and elsewhere. an oblong piece of leather forms the sole: holes
 are cut at the four corners, and through these holes leathern straps
 are passed, which are bound round the foot and cross-gartered up the
 calf.]
 
[128] [ see note [75] : ]
 
[129] [ telemachus like many another good young man seems to expect
 every one to fetch and carry for him.]
 
[130] [ “il.” vi. 288. the store room was fragrant because it was made
 of cedar wood. see “il.” xxiv. 192.]
 
[131] [ cf. “il.” vi. 289 and 293-296. the dress was kept at the bottom
 of the chest as one that would only be wanted on the greatest
 occasions; but surely the marriage of hermione and of megapenthes (bk,
 iv. _ad init_.) might have induced helen to wear it on the preceding
 evening, in which case it could hardly have got back. we find hint
 here of megapenthes’ recent marriage.]
 
[132] [ see note [83].]
 
[133] [ cf. “od.” xi. 196, etc.]
 
[134] [ the names syra and ortygia, on which island great part of the
 doric syracuse was originally built, suggest that even in odyssean
 times there was prehistoric syracuse, the existence of which was
 known to the writer of the poem.]
 
[135] [ literally “where are the turnings of the sun.” assuming, as we
 may safely do, that the syra and ortygia of the “odyssey” refer to
 syracuse, it is the fact that not far to the south of these places the
 land turns sharply round, so that mariners following the coast would
 find the sun upon the other side of their ship to that on which they’d
 had it hitherto.
 
mr. a. s. griffith has kindly called my attention to herod iv. 42,
 where, speaking of the circumnavigation of africa by phoenician
 mariners under necos, writes:
 
“on their return they declared—i for my part do not believe them, but
 perhaps others may—that in sailing round libya [i.e. africa] they had
 the sun upon their right hand. in this way was the extent of libya
 first discovered.
 
“i take it that eumaeus was made to have come from syracuse because the
 writer thought she rather ought to have made something happen at
 syracuse during her account of the voyages of ulysses. she could not,
 however, break his long drift from charybdis to the island of
 pantellaria; she therefore resolved to make it up to syracuse in
 another way.”
 
modern excavations establish the existence of two and only two
 pre-dorian communities at syracuse; they were, so dr. orsi informed me,
 at plemmirio and cozzo pantano. see the authoress of the odyssey, pp.
 211-213.]
 
[136] [ this harbour is again evidently the harbour in which ulysses
 had landed, i.e. the harbour that is now the salt works of s.
 cusumano.]
 
[137] [ this never can have been anything but very niggardly pay for
 some eight or nine days’ service. i suppose the crew were to consider
 the pleasure of having had trip to pylos as set off. there is no
 trace of the dinner as having been actually given, either on the
 following or any other morning.]
 
[138] [ hawk can tear its prey while it is on the wing.]
 
[139] [ the text is here apparently corrupt, and will not make sense as
 it stands. i follow messrs. butcher & lang in omitting line 101.]
 
[140] [ i.e. to be milked, as in south italian and sicilian towns at
 the present day.]
 
[141] [ the butchering and making ready the carcases took place partly
 in the outer yard and partly in the open part of the inner court.]
 
[142] [ these words cannot mean that it would be afternoon soon after
 they were spoken. ulysses and eumaeus reached the town which was “some
 way off” (xvii. 25) in time for the suitor’s early meal (xvii. 170 and
 176) say at ten or eleven o’ clock. the context of the rest of the book
 shows this. eumaeus and ulysses, therefore, cannot have started later
 than eight or nine, and eumaeus’s words must be taken as an
 exaggeration for the purpose of making ulysses bestir himself.]
 
[143] [ i imagine the fountain to have been somewhere about where the
 church of the _madonna di trapani_ now stands, and to have been fed
 with water from what is now called the fontana diffali on mt. eryx.]
 
[144] [ from this and other passages in the “odyssey” it appears that
 we are in an age anterior to the use of coined money—an age when
 cauldrons, tripods, swords, cattle, chattels of all kinds, measures of
 corn, wine, or oil, etc. etc., not to say pieces of gold, silver,
 bronze, or even iron, wrought more or less, but unstamped, were the
 nearest approach to currency that had as yet been reached.]
 
[145] [ gr. ἐς μέσσον.]
 
[146] [ i correct these proofs abroad and am not within reach of
 hesiod, but surely this passage suggests acquaintance with the works
 and ways, though it by means compels it.]
 
[147] [ it would seem as though eurynome and euryclea were the same
 person. see note 156]
 
[148] [ it is plain, therefore, that iris was commonly accepted as the
 messenger of the gods, though our authoress will never permit her to
 fetch or carry for any one.]
 
[149] [ i.e. the doorway leading from the inner to the outer court.]
 
[150] [see note 156]
 
[151] [ these, i imagine, must have been in the open part of the inner
 courtyard, where the maids also stood, and threw the light of their
 torches into the covered cloister that ran all round it. the smoke
 would otherwise have been intolerable.]
 
[152] [ translation very uncertain; vide liddell and scott, under
 {greek}]
 
[153] [ see photo on opposite page.]
 
[154] [ cf. “il.” ii. 184, and 217, 218. an additional and well-marked
 feature being wanted to convince penelope, the writer has taken the
 hunched shoulders of thersites (who is mentioned immediately after
 eurybates in the “iliad”) and put them on to eurybates’ back.]
 
[155] [ this is how geese are now fed in sicily, at any rate in summer,
 when the grass is all burnt up. i have never seen them grazing.]
 
[156] [ lower down (line 143) euryclea says it was herself that had
 thrown the cloak over ulysses—for the plural should not be taken as
 implying more than one person. the writer is evidently still
 fluctuating between euryclea and eurynome as the name for the old
 nurse. she probably originally meant to call her euryclea, but finding
 it not immediately easy to make euryclea scan in xvii. 495, she hastily
 called her eurynome, intending either to alter this name later or to
 change the earlier euryclea’s into eurynome. she then drifted in to
 eurynome as convenience further directed, still nevertheless hankering
 after euryclea, till at last she found that the path of least
 resistance would lie in the direction of making eurynome and euryclea
 two persons. therefore in xxiii. 289-292 both eurynome and “the nurse”
 (who can be none other than euryclea) come on together. i do not say
 that this is feminine, but it is not unfeminine.]
 
[157] [ see note [156]]
 
[158] [ this, i take it, was immediately in front of the main entrance
 of the inner courtyard into the body of the house.]
 
[159] [ this is the only allusion to sardinia in either “iliad” or
 “odyssey.”]
 
[160] [ the normal translation of the greek word would be “holding
 back,” “curbing,” “restraining,” but i cannot think that the writer
 meant this—she must have been using the word in its other sense of
 “having,” “holding,” “keeping,” “maintaining.”]
 
[161] [ i have vainly tried to realise the construction of the
 fastening here described.]
 
[162] [ see plan of ulysses’ house in the appendix. it is evident that
 the open part of the court had flooring but the natural soil.]
 
[163] [ see plan of ulysses’ house, and note [175].]
 
[164] [ i.e. the door that led into the body of the house.]
 
[165] [ this was, doubt, the little table that was set for ulysses,
 “od.” xx. 259.
 
surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated. i suppose the
 iron part of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or bound
 securely to it—the handle being half buried in the ground. the axe
 would be placed edgeways towards the archer, and would have to shoot
 his arrow through the hole into which the handle was fitted when the
 axe was in use. twelve axes were placed in row all at the same
 height, all exactly in front of one another, all edgeways to ulysses
 whose arrow passed through all the holes from the first onward. i
 cannot see how the greek can bear any other interpretation, the words
 being, {greek}
 
“he did not miss single hole from the first onwards.” {greek}
 according to liddell and scott being “the hole for the handle of an
 axe, etc.,” while {greek} (“od.” v. 236) is, according to the same
 authorities, the handle itself. the feat is absurdly impossible, but
 our authoress sometimes has soul above impossibilities.]
 
[166] [ the reader will note how the spoiling of good food distresses
 the writer even in such supreme moment as this.]
 
[167] [ here we have it again. waste of substance comes first.]
 
[168] [ cf. “il.” iii. 337 and three other places. it is strange that
 the author of the “iliad” should find little horse-hair so alarming.
 possibly enough she was merely borrowing common form line from some
 earlier poet—or poetess—for this is woman’s line rather than a
 man’s.]
 
[169] [ or perhaps simply “window.” see plan in the appendix.]
 
[170] [ i.e. the pavement on which ulysses was standing.]
 
[171] [ the interpretation of lines 126-143 is most dubious, and at
 best we are in region of melodrama: cf., however, i. 425, etc. from
 which it appears that there was tower in the outer court, and that
 telemachus used to sleep in it. the ὀρσοθύρα i take to be door, or
 trap door, leading on to the roof above telemachus’s bed room, which we
 are told was in place that could be seen from all round—or it might
 be simply window in telemachus’s room looking out into the street.
 from the top of the tower the outer world was to be told what was going
 on, but people could not get in by the ὀρσοθύρα: they would have to
 come in by the main entrance, and melanthius explains that the mouth of
 the narrow passage (which was in the lands of ulysses and his friends)
 commanded the only entrance by which help could come, so that there
 would be nothing gained by raising an alarm.
 as for the ῥῶγες of line 143, commentator ancient or modern has
 been able to say what was intended—but whatever they were,
 melanthius could never carry twelve shields, twelve helmets, and
 twelve spears. moreover, where could go the others could go
 also. if dozen suitors had followed melanthius into the house
 they could have attacked ulysses in the rear, in which case, unless
 minerva had intervened promptly, the “odyssey” would have had a
 different ending. but throughout the scene we are in region of
 extravagance rather than of true fiction—it cannot be taken
 seriously by any but the very serious, until we come to the episode
 of phemius and medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.]
 
[172] [ i presume it was intended that there should be hook driven
 into the bearing-post.]
 
[173] [ what for?]
 
[174] [ gr: {greek}. this is not {greek}.]
 
[175] [ from lines 333 and 341 of this book, and lines 145 and 146 of
 bk. xxi we can locate the approach to the {greek} with some certainty.]
 
[176] [ but in xix. 500-502 ulysses scolded euryclea for offering
 information on this very point, and declared himself quite able to
 settle it for himself.]
 
[177] [ there were hundred and eight suitors.]
 
[178] [ lord grimthorpe, whose understanding does not lend itself to
 easy imposition, has been good enough to write to about my
 conviction that the “odyssey” was written by woman, and to send me
 remarks upon the gross absurdity of the incident here recorded. it is
 plain that all the authoress cared about was that the women should be
 hanged: as for attempting to realise, or to make her readers realise,
 how the hanging was done, this was of consequence. the reader must
 take her word for it and ask questions. lord grimthorpe wrote:
 
“i had better send you my ideas about nausicaa’s hanging of the maids
 (not ‘maidens,’ of whom froude wrote so well in his ‘science of
 history’) before i forget it all. luckily for liddell & scott have
 specially translated most of the doubtful words, referring to this very
 place.
 
“a ship’s cable. i don’t know how big ship she meant, but it must
 have been very small one indeed if its ‘cable’ could be used to tie
 tightly round woman’s neck, and still more round dozen of them ‘in
 row,’ besides being strong enough to hold them and pull them all up.
 
“a dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more than
 dozen strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roof
 over them; and the idea of pulling them up by rope hung anyhow round
 pillar {greek} is absurdly impossible; and how dozen of them could
 be hung dangling round one post is problem which senior wrangler
 would be puzzled to answer... she had better have let telemachus use
 his sword as had intended till she changed his mind for him.”]
 
[179] [ then they had all been in ulysses’ service over twenty years;
 perhaps the twelve guilty ones had been engaged more recently.]
 
[180] [ translation very doubtful—cf. “it.” xxiv. 598.]
 
[181] [ but why could she not at once ask to see the scar, of which
 euryclea had told her, or why could not ulysses have shown it to her?]
 
[182] [ the people of ithaca seem to have been as fond of carping as
 the phaeacians were in vi. 273, etc.]
 
[183] [ see note [156]. ulysses’s bed room does not appear to have been
 upstairs, nor yet quite within the house. is it possible that it was
 “the domed room” round the outside of which the erring maids were, for
 aught we have heard to the contrary, still hanging?]
 
[184] [ ulysses bedroom in the mind of the writer is here too
 apparently down stairs.]
 
[185] [ penelope having been now sufficiently whitewashed, disappears
 from the poem.]
 
[186] [ so practised washerwoman as our authoress doubtless knew that
 by this time the web must have become such wreck that it would have
 gone to pieces in the wash.]
 
lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands,
 that really good needlewoman—no one, indeed, whose work or character
 was worth consideration—could have endured, matter for what reason,
 the unpicking of her day’s work, day after day for between three and
 four years.]
 
[187] [ we must suppose dolius not yet to know that his melanthius
 had been tortured, mutilated, and left to die by ulysses’ orders on the
 preceding day, and that his daughter melantho had been hanged. dolius
 was probably exceptionally simple-minded, and his name was ironical. so
 on mt. eryx i was shown man who was always called sonza malizia or
 “guileless”—he being held exceptionally cunning.]
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the odyssey ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 
