the project gutenberg ebook of the count of monte cristo
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: the count of monte cristo
 
author: alexandre dumas
 auguste maquet
 
release date: january 1, 1998 [ebook #1184]
 most recently updated: february 4, 2024
 
language: english
 
credits: anonymous project gutenberg volunteers, dan muller and david widger
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the count of monte cristo ***
 the count of monte cristo
 


by alexandre dumas [père]
 




0009m 



0011m 



0019m 



contents
 

volume one
 chapter 1. marseilles—the arrival
 chapter 2. father and son
 chapter 3. the catalans
 chapter 4. conspiracy
 chapter 5. the marriage feast
 chapter 6. the deputy procureur du roi
 chapter 7. the examination
 chapter 8. the château d’if
 chapter 9. the evening of the betrothal
 chapter 10. the king’s closet at the tuileries
 chapter 11. the corsican ogre
 chapter 12. father and son
 chapter 13. the hundred days
 chapter 14. the two prisoners
 chapter 15. number 34 and number 27
 chapter 16. learned italian
 chapter 17. the abbé’s chamber
 chapter 18. the treasure
 chapter 19. the third attack
 chapter 20. the cemetery of the château d’if
 chapter 21. the island of tiboulen
 chapter 22. the smugglers
 chapter 23. the island of monte cristo
 chapter 24. the secret cave
 chapter 25. the unknown
 chapter 26. the pont du gard inn
 chapter 27. the story
 
volume two
 chapter 28. the prison register
 chapter 29. the house of morrel & son
 chapter 30. the fifth of september
 chapter 31. italy: sinbad the sailor
 chapter 32. the waking
 chapter 33. roman bandits
 chapter 34. the colosseum
 chapter 35. mazzolata
 chapter 36. the carnival at rome.
 chapter 37. the catacombs of saint sebastian 
chapter 38. the rendezvous
 chapter 39. the guests
 chapter 40. the breakfast
 chapter 41. the presentation
 chapter 42. monsieur bertuccio
 chapter 43. the house at auteuil
 chapter 44. the vendetta
 chapter 45. the rain of blood
 chapter 46. unlimited credit
 chapter 47. the dappled grays
 
volume three
 chapter 48. ideology
 chapter 49. haydée
 chapter 50. the morrel family
 chapter 51. pyramus and thisbe
 chapter 52. toxicology
 chapter 53. robert diable
 chapter 54. flurry in stocks
 chapter 55. major cavalcanti
 chapter 56. andrea cavalcanti
 chapter 57. in the lucern patch
 chapter 58. m. noirtier villefort
 chapter 59. the will
 chapter 60. the telegraph
 chapter 61. how gardener may get rid of the dormice
 chapter 62. ghosts
 chapter 63. the dinner
 chapter 64. the beggar
 chapter 65. conjugal scene
 chapter 66. matrimonial projects
 chapter 67. the office of the king’s attorney
 chapter 68. summer ball
 chapter 69. the inquiry
 chapter 70. the ball
 chapter 71. bread and salt
 chapter 72. madame saint-méran
 chapter 73. the promise
 
volume four
 chapter 74. the villefort family vault
 chapter 75. signed statement
 chapter 76. progress of cavalcanti the younger
 chapter 77. haydée
 chapter 78. we hear from yanina
 chapter 79. the lemonade
 chapter 80. the accusation
 chapter 81. the room of the retired baker
 chapter 82. the burglary
 chapter 83. the hand of god
 chapter 84. beauchamp
 chapter 85. the journey
 chapter 86. the trial
 chapter 87. the challenge
 chapter 88. the insult
 chapter 89. the night
 chapter 90. the meeting
 chapter 91. mother and son
 chapter 92. the suicide
 chapter 93. valentine
 chapter 94. maximilian’s avowal
 chapter 95. father and daughter
 
volume five
 chapter 96. the contract
 chapter 97. the departure for belgium
 chapter 98. the bell and bottle tavern
 chapter 99. the law
 chapter 100. the apparition
 chapter 101. locusta
 chapter 102. valentine
 chapter 103. maximilian
 chapter 104. danglars’ signature
 chapter 105. the cemetery of père-lachaise 
chapter 106. dividing the proceeds
 chapter 107. the lions’ den
 chapter 108. the judge
 chapter 109. the assizes
 chapter 110. the indictment
 chapter 111. expiation
 chapter 112. the departure
 chapter 113. the past
 chapter 114. peppino
 chapter 115. luigi vampa’s bill of fare 
chapter 116. the pardon
 chapter 117. the fifth of october
 


volume one
 


chapter 1. marseilles—the arrival
 
on the 24th of february, 1815, the look-out at notre-dame garde
 signalled the three-master, the _pharaon_ from smyrna, trieste, and
 naples.
 
as usual, pilot put off immediately, and rounding the château d’if,
 got on board the vessel between cape morgiou and rion island.
 
immediately, and according to custom, the ramparts of fort saint-jean
 were covered with spectators; it is always an event at marseilles for a
 ship to come into port, especially when this ship, like the _pharaon_,
 has been built, rigged, and laden at the old phocee docks, and belongs
 to an owner of the city.
 
the ship drew on and had safely passed the strait, which some volcanic
 shock has made between the calasareigne and jaros islands; had doubled
 pomègue, and approached the harbor under topsails, jib, and spanker,
 but so slowly and sedately that the idlers, with that instinct which is
 the forerunner of evil, asked one another what misfortune could have
 happened on board. however, those experienced in navigation saw plainly
 that if any accident had occurred, it was not to the vessel herself,
 for she bore down with all the evidence of being skilfully handled, the
 anchor a-cockbill, the jib-boom guys already eased off, and standing by
 the side of the pilot, who was steering the _pharaon_ towards the
 narrow entrance of the inner port, was young man, who, with activity
 and vigilant eye, watched every motion of the ship, and repeated each
 direction of the pilot.
 
the vague disquietude which prevailed among the spectators had so much
 affected one of the crowd that did not await the arrival of the
 vessel in harbor, but jumping into small skiff, desired to be pulled
 alongside the _pharaon_, which reached as she rounded into la
 réserve basin.
 
when the young man on board saw this person approach, left his
 station by the pilot, and, hat in hand, leaned over the ship’s
 bulwarks.
 
was fine, tall, slim young fellow of eighteen or twenty, with
 black eyes, and hair as dark as raven’s wing; and his whole
 appearance bespoke that calmness and resolution peculiar to men
 accustomed from their cradle to contend with danger.
 
“ah, is it you, dantès?” cried the man in the skiff. “what’s the
 matter? and why have you such an air of sadness aboard?”
 
“a great misfortune, m. morrel,” replied the young man, “a great
 misfortune, for especially! off civita vecchia we lost our brave
 captain leclere.”
 
“and the cargo?” inquired the owner, eagerly.
 
“is all safe, m. morrel; and i think you will be satisfied on that
 head. but poor captain leclere——”
 
“what happened to him?” asked the owner, with an air of considerable
 resignation. “what happened to the worthy captain?”
 
“he died.”
 
“fell into the sea?”
 
“no, sir, died of brain-fever in dreadful agony.” then turning to
 the crew, said, “bear hand there, to take in sail!”
 
all hands obeyed, and at once the eight or ten seamen who composed the
 crew, sprang to their respective stations at the spanker brails and
 outhaul, topsail sheets and halyards, the jib downhaul, and the topsail
 clewlines and buntlines. the young sailor gave look to see that his
 orders were promptly and accurately obeyed, and then turned again to
 the owner.
 
“and how did this misfortune occur?” inquired the latter, resuming the
 interrupted conversation.
 
0023m
 


“alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner. after long talk with the
 harbor-master, captain leclere left naples greatly disturbed in mind.
 in twenty-four hours was attacked by fever, and died three days
 afterwards. we performed the usual burial service, and is at his
 rest, sewn up in his hammock with thirty-six-pound shot at his head
 and his heels, off giglio island. we bring to his widow his sword
 and cross of honor. it was worth while, truly,” added the young man
 with melancholy smile, “to make war against the english for ten
 years, and to die in his bed at last, like everybody else.”
 
“why, you see, edmond,” replied the owner, who appeared more comforted
 at every moment, “we are all mortal, and the old must make way for the
 young. if not, why, there would be promotion; and since you assure
 that the cargo——”
 
“is all safe and sound, m. morrel, take my word for it; and i advise
 you not to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the voyage.”
 
then, as they were just passing the round tower, the young man shouted:
 “stand by there to lower the topsails and jib; brail up the spanker!”
 
the order was executed as promptly as it would have been on board a
 man-of-war.
 
“let go—and clue up!” at this last command all the sails were lowered,
 and the vessel moved almost imperceptibly onwards.
 
“now, if you will come on board, m. morrel,” said dantès, observing the
 owner’s impatience, “here is your supercargo, m. danglars, coming out
 of his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. as for me, i
 must look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning.”
 
the owner did not wait for second invitation. seized rope which
 dantès flung to him, and with an activity that would have done credit
 to sailor, climbed up the side of the ship, while the young man,
 going to his task, left the conversation to danglars, who now came
 towards the owner. was man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of
 age, of unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors,
 insolent to his subordinates; and this, in addition to his position as
 responsible agent on board, which is always obnoxious to the sailors,
 made him as much disliked by the crew as edmond dantès was beloved by
 them.
 
“well, m. morrel,” said danglars, “you have heard of the misfortune
 that has befallen us?”
 
“yes—yes: poor captain leclere! was brave and an honest man.”
 
“and first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service,
 as became man charged with the interests of house so important as
 that of morrel & son,” replied danglars.
 
“but,” replied the owner, glancing after dantès, who was watching the
 anchoring of his vessel, “it seems to that sailor needs not be so
 old as you say, danglars, to understand his business, for our friend
 edmond seems to understand it thoroughly, and not to require
 instruction from anyone.”
 
“yes,” said danglars, darting at edmond look gleaming with hate.
 “yes, is young, and youth is invariably self-confident. scarcely was
 the captain’s breath out of his body when assumed the command
 without consulting anyone, and caused us to lose day and half at
 the island of elba, instead of making for marseilles direct.”
 
0025m
 


“as to taking command of the vessel,” replied morrel, “that was his
 duty as captain’s mate; as to losing day and half off the island of
 elba, was wrong, unless the vessel needed repairs.”
 
“the vessel was in as good condition as i am, and as, i hope you are,
 m. morrel, and this day and half was lost from pure whim, for the
 pleasure of going ashore, and nothing else.”
 
“dantès,” said the shipowner, turning towards the young man, “come this
 way!”
 
“in moment, sir,” answered dantès, “and i’m with you.” then calling
 to the crew, said, “let go!”
 
the anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattling through
 the port-hole. dantès continued at his post in spite of the presence of
 the pilot, until this manœuvre was completed, and then added,
 “half-mast the colors, and square the yards!”
 
“you see,” said danglars, “he fancies himself captain already, upon my
 word.”
 
“and so, in fact, is,” said the owner.
 
“except your signature and your partner’s, m. morrel.”
 
“and why should not have this?” asked the owner; “he is young, it is
 true, but seems to thorough seaman, and of full experience.”
 
cloud passed over danglars’ brow.
 
“your pardon, m. morrel,” said dantès, approaching, “the vessel now
 rides at anchor, and i am at your service. you hailed me, i think?”
 
danglars retreated step or two. “i wished to inquire why you stopped
 at the island of elba?”
 
“i do not know, sir; it was to fulfil the last instructions of captain
 leclere, who, when dying, gave packet for marshal bertrand.”
 
“then did you see him, edmond?”
 
“who?”
 
“the marshal.”
 
“yes.”
 
morrel looked around him, and then, drawing dantès on one side, said
 suddenly—
 
“and how is the emperor?”
 
“very well, as far as i could judge from the sight of him.”
 
“you saw the emperor, then?”
 
“he entered the marshal’s apartment while i was there.”
 
“and you spoke to him?”
 
“why, it was who spoke to me, sir,” said dantès, with smile.
 
“and what did say to you?”
 
“asked questions about the vessel, the time she left marseilles, the
 course she had taken, and what was her cargo. i believe, if she had not
 been laden, and i had been her master, would have bought her. but i
 told him i was only mate, and that she belonged to the firm of morrel &
 son. ‘ah, yes,’ said, ‘i know them. the morrels have been shipowners
 from father to son; and there was morrel who served in the same
 regiment with when i was in garrison at valence.’”
 
“_pardieu!_ and that is true!” cried the owner, greatly delighted. “and
 that was policar morrel, my uncle, who was afterwards captain.
 dantès, you must tell my uncle that the emperor remembered him, and you
 will see it will bring tears into the old soldier’s eyes. come, come,”
 continued he, patting edmond’s shoulder kindly, “you did very right,
 dantès, to follow captain leclere’s instructions, and touch at elba,
 although if it were known that you had conveyed packet to the
 marshal, and had conversed with the emperor, it might bring you into
 trouble.”
 
0027m
 


“how could that bring into trouble, sir?” asked dantès; “for i did
 not even know of what i was the bearer; and the emperor merely made
 such inquiries as would of the first comer. but, pardon me, here are
 the health officers and the customs inspectors coming alongside.” and
 the young man went to the gangway. as departed, danglars approached,
 and said,—
 
“well, it appears that has given you satisfactory reasons for his
 landing at porto-ferrajo?”
 
“yes, most satisfactory, my dear danglars.”
 
“well, so much the better,” said the supercargo; “for it is not
 pleasant to think that comrade has not done his duty.”
 
“dantès has done his,” replied the owner, “and that is not saying much.
 it was captain leclere who gave orders for this delay.”
 
“talking of captain leclere, has not dantès given you letter from
 him?”
 
“to me?—no—was there one?”
 
“i believe that, besides the packet, captain leclere confided letter
 to his care.”
 
“of what packet are you speaking, danglars?”
 
“why, that which dantès left at porto-ferrajo.”
 
“how do you know had packet to leave at porto-ferrajo?”
 
danglars turned very red.
 
“i was passing close to the door of the captain’s cabin, which was half
 open, and i saw him give the packet and letter to dantès.”
 
“he did not speak to of it,” replied the shipowner; “but if there be
 any letter will give it to me.”
 
danglars reflected for moment. “then, m. morrel, i beg of you,” said
 he, “not to say word to dantès on the subject. i may have been
 mistaken.”
 
at this moment the young man returned; danglars withdrew.
 
“well, my dear dantès, are you now free?” inquired the owner.
 
“yes, sir.”
 
“you have not been long detained.”
 
“no. i gave the custom-house officers copy of our bill of lading; and
 as to the other papers, they sent man off with the pilot, to whom i
 gave them.”
 
“then you have nothing more to do here?”
 
“no—everything is all right now.”
 
“then you can come and dine with me?”
 
“i really must ask you to excuse me, m. morrel. my first visit is due
 to my father, though i am not the less grateful for the honor you have
 done me.”
 
0029m
 


“right, dantès, quite right. i always knew you were good son.”
 
“and,” inquired dantès, with some hesitation, “do you know how my
 father is?”
 
“well, i believe, my dear edmond, though i have not seen him lately.”
 
“yes, likes to keep himself shut up in his little room.”
 
“that proves, at least, that has wanted for nothing during your
 absence.”
 
dantès smiled. “my father is proud, sir, and if had not meal left,
 i doubt if would have asked anything from anyone, except from
 heaven.”
 
“well, then, after this first visit has been made we shall count on
 you.”
 
“i must again excuse myself, m. morrel, for after this first visit has
 been paid i have another which i am most anxious to pay.”
 
“true, dantès, i forgot that there was at the catalans someone who
 expects you less impatiently than your father—the lovely mercédès.”
 
dantès blushed.
 
“ah, ha,” said the shipowner, “i am not in the least surprised, for she
 has been to three times, inquiring if there were any news of the
 _pharaon_. _peste!_ edmond, you have very handsome mistress!”
 
“she is not my mistress,” replied the young sailor, gravely; “she is my
 betrothed.”
 
“sometimes one and the same thing,” said morrel, with smile.
 
“not with us, sir,” replied dantès.
 
“well, well, my dear edmond,” continued the owner, “don’t let detain
 you. you have managed my affairs so well that i ought to allow you all
 the time you require for your own. do you want any money?”
 
“no, sir; i have all my pay to take—nearly three months’ wages.”
 
“you are careful fellow, edmond.”
 
“say i have poor father, sir.”
 
“yes, yes, i know how good you are, so now hasten away to see
 your father. i have too, and i should be very wroth with those
 who detained him from after three months’ voyage.”
 
“then i have your leave, sir?”
 
“yes, if you have nothing more to say to me.”
 
“nothing.”
 
“captain leclere did not, before died, give you letter for me?”
 
“he was unable to write, sir. but that reminds that i must ask your
 leave of absence for some days.”
 
“to get married?”
 
“yes, first, and then to go to paris.”
 
“very good; have what time you require, dantès. it will take quite six
 weeks to unload the cargo, and we cannot get you ready for until
 three months after that; only be back again in three months, for the
 _pharaon_,” added the owner, patting the young sailor on the back,
 “cannot sail without her captain.”
 
“without her captain!” cried dantès, his eyes sparkling with animation;
 “pray mind what you say, for you are touching on the most secret wishes
 of my heart. is it really your intention to make captain of the
 _pharaon_?”
 
“if i were sole owner we’d shake hands on it now, my dear dantès, and
 call it settled; but i have partner, and you know the italian
 proverb—_chi compagno padrone_—‘he who has partner has a
 master.’ but the thing is at least half done, as you have one out of
 two votes. rely on to procure you the other; i will do my best.”
 
“ah, m. morrel,” exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in his eyes,
 and grasping the owner’s hand, “m. morrel, i thank you in the name of
 my father and of mercédès.”
 
“that’s all right, edmond. there’s providence that watches over the
 deserving. go to your father; go and see mercédès, and afterwards come
 to me.”
 
“shall i row you ashore?”
 
“no, thank you; i shall remain and look over the accounts with
 danglars. have you been satisfied with him this voyage?”
 
“that is according to the sense you attach to the question, sir. do you
 mean is good comrade? no, for i think never liked since the
 day when i was silly enough, after little quarrel we had, to propose
 to him to stop for ten minutes at the island of monte cristo to settle
 the dispute—a proposition which i was wrong to suggest, and quite
 right to refuse. if you mean as responsible agent when you ask the
 question, i believe there is nothing to say against him, and that you
 will be content with the way in which has performed his duty.”
 
“but tell me, dantès, if you had command of the _pharaon_ should you be
 glad to see danglars remain?”
 
“captain or mate, m. morrel, i shall always have the greatest respect
 for those who possess the owners’ confidence.”
 
“that’s right, that’s right, dantès! i see you are thoroughly good
 fellow, and will detain you longer. go, for i see how impatient you
 are.”
 
“then i have leave?”
 
“go, i tell you.”
 
“may i have the use of your skiff?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“then, for the present, m. morrel, farewell, and thousand thanks!”
 
“i hope soon to see you again, my dear edmond. good luck to you.”
 
the young sailor jumped into the skiff, and sat down in the stern
 sheets, with the order that be put ashore at canebière. the two
 oarsmen bent to their work, and the little boat glided away as rapidly
 as possible in the midst of the thousand vessels which choke up the
 narrow way which leads between the two rows of ships from the mouth of
 the harbor to the quai d’orléans.
 
the shipowner, smiling, followed him with his eyes until saw him
 spring out on the quay and disappear in the midst of the throng, which
 from five o’clock in the morning until nine o’clock at night, swarms in
 the famous street of canebière,—a street of which the modern
 phocéens are so proud that they say with all the gravity in the world,
 and with that accent which gives so much character to what is said, “if
 paris had canebière, paris would be second marseilles.” on turning
 round the owner saw danglars behind him, apparently awaiting orders,
 but in reality also watching the young sailor,—but there was great
 difference in the expression of the two men who thus followed the
 movements of edmond dantès.
 


chapter 2. father and son
 
we will leave danglars struggling with the demon of hatred, and
 endeavoring to insinuate in the ear of the shipowner some evil
 suspicions against his comrade, and follow dantès, who, after having
 traversed canebière, took the rue noailles, and entering small
 house, on the left of the allées meilhan, rapidly ascended four
 flights of dark staircase, holding the baluster with one hand, while
 with the other repressed the beatings of his heart, and paused
 before half-open door, from which could see the whole of small
 room.
 
this room was occupied by dantès’ father. the news of the arrival of
 the _pharaon_ had not yet reached the old man, who, mounted on chair,
 was amusing himself by training with trembling hand the nasturtiums and
 sprays of clematis that clambered over the trellis at his window.
 suddenly, felt an arm thrown around his body, and well-known voice
 behind him exclaimed, “father—dear father!”
 
the old man uttered cry, and turned round; then, seeing his son, he
 fell into his arms, pale and trembling.
 
“what ails you, my dearest father? are you ill?” inquired the young
 man, much alarmed.
 
“no, no, my dear edmond—my boy—my son!—no; but i did not expect you;
 and joy, the surprise of seeing you so suddenly—ah, i feel as if i were
 going to die.”
 
“come, come, cheer up, my dear father! ’tis i—really i! they say joy
 never hurts, and so i came to you without any warning. come now, do
 smile, instead of looking at so solemnly. here i am back again, and
 we are going to be happy.”
 
“yes, yes, my boy, so we will—so we will,” replied the old man; “but
 how shall we be happy? shall you never leave again? come, tell me
 all the good fortune that has befallen you.”
 
“god forgive me,” said the young man, “for rejoicing at happiness
 derived from the misery of others, but, heaven knows, i did not seek
 this good fortune; it has happened, and i really cannot pretend to
 lament it. the good captain leclere is dead, father, and it is probable
 that, with the aid of m. morrel, i shall have his place. do you
 understand, father? only imagine captain at twenty, with hundred
 louis pay, and share in the profits! is this not more than poor
 sailor like could have hoped for?”
 
“yes, my dear boy,” replied the old man, “it is very fortunate.”
 
“well, then, with the first money i touch, i mean you to have small
 house, with garden in which to plant clematis, nasturtiums, and
 honeysuckle. but what ails you, father? are you not well?”
 
“’tis nothing, nothing; it will soon pass away”—and as said so the
 old man’s strength failed him, and fell backwards.
 
“come, come,” said the young man, “a glass of wine, father, will revive
 you. where do you keep your wine?”
 
“no, no; thanks. you need not look for it; i do not want it,” said the
 old man.
 
“yes, yes, father, tell where it is,” and opened two or three
 cupboards.
 
“it is use,” said the old man, “there is wine.”
 
“what, wine?” said dantès, turning pale, and looking alternately at
 the hollow cheeks of the old man and the empty cupboards. “what, no
 wine? have you wanted money, father?”
 
“i want nothing now that i have you,” said the old man.
 
“yet,” stammered dantès, wiping the perspiration from his brow,—“yet i
 gave you two hundred francs when i left, three months ago.”
 
“yes, yes, edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that time little
 debt to our neighbor, caderousse. reminded of it, telling if i
 did not pay for you, would be paid by m. morrel; and so, you see,
 lest might do you an injury——”
 
“well?”
 
“why, i paid him.”
 
“but,” cried dantès, “it was hundred and forty francs i owed
 caderousse.”
 
“yes,” stammered the old man.
 
“and you paid him out of the two hundred francs i left you?”
 
the old man nodded.
 
“so that you have lived for three months on sixty francs,” muttered
 edmond.
 
“you know how little i require,” said the old man.
 
“heaven pardon me,” cried edmond, falling on his knees before his
 father.
 
“what are you doing?”
 
“you have wounded to the heart.”
 
“never mind it, for i see you once more,” said the old man; “and now
 it’s all over—everything is all right again.”
 
0035m
 


“yes, here i am,” said the young man, “with promising future and a
 little money. here, father, here!” said, “take this—take it, and
 send for something immediately.” and emptied his pockets on the
 table, the contents consisting of dozen gold pieces, five or six
 five-franc pieces, and some smaller coin. the countenance of old dantès
 brightened.
 
“whom does this belong to?” inquired.
 
“to me, to you, to us! take it; buy some provisions; be happy, and
 tomorrow we shall have more.”
 
“gently, gently,” said the old man, with smile; “and by your leave i
 will use your purse moderately, for they would say, if they saw buy
 too many things at time, that i had been obliged to await your
 return, in order to be able to purchase them.”
 
“do as you please; but, first of all, pray have servant, father. i
 will not have you left alone so long. i have some smuggled coffee and
 most capital tobacco, in small chest in the hold, which you shall
 have tomorrow. but, hush, here comes somebody.”
 
“’tis caderousse, who has heard of your arrival, and doubt comes to
 congratulate you on your fortunate return.”
 
“ah, lips that say one thing, while the heart thinks another,” murmured
 edmond. “but, never mind, is neighbor who has done us service on
 time, so he’s welcome.”
 
as edmond paused, the black and bearded head of caderousse appeared at
 the door. was man of twenty-five or six, and held piece of
 cloth, which, being tailor, was about to make into coat-lining.
 
“what, is it you, edmond, back again?” said he, with broad
 marseillaise accent, and grin that displayed his ivory-white teeth.
 
“yes, as you see, neighbor caderousse; and ready to be agreeable to you
 in any and every way,” replied dantès, but ill-concealing his coldness
 under this cloak of civility.
 
“thanks—thanks; but, fortunately, i do not want for anything; and it
 chances that at times there are others who have need of me.” dantès
 made gesture. “i do not allude to you, my boy. no!—no! i lent you
 money, and you returned it; that’s like good neighbors, and we are
 quits.”
 
“we are never quits with those who oblige us,” was dantès’ reply; “for
 when we do not owe them money, we owe them gratitude.”
 
“what’s the use of mentioning that? what is done is done. let us talk
 of your happy return, my boy. i had gone on the quay to match piece
 of mulberry cloth, when i met friend danglars. ‘you at
 marseilles?’—‘yes,’ says he.
 
“‘i thought you were at smyrna.’—‘i was; but am now back again.’
 
“‘and where is the dear boy, our little edmond?’
 
“‘why, with his father, doubt,’ replied danglars. and so i came,”
 added caderousse, “as fast as i could to have the pleasure of shaking
 hands with friend.”
 
0037m
 


“worthy caderousse!” said the old man, “he is so much attached to us.”
 
“yes, to be sure i am. i love and esteem you, because honest folks are
 so rare. but it seems you have come back rich, my boy,” continued the
 tailor, looking askance at the handful of gold and silver which dantès
 had thrown on the table.
 
the young man remarked the greedy glance which shone in the dark eyes
 of his neighbor. “eh,” said, negligently, “this money is not mine. i
 was expressing to my father my fears that had wanted many things in
 my absence, and to convince emptied his purse on the table. come,
 father” added dantès, “put this money back in your box—unless neighbor
 caderousse wants anything, and in that case it is at his service.”
 
“no, my boy, no,” said caderousse. “i am not in any want, thank god, my
 living is suited to my means. keep your money—keep it, i say;—one never
 has too much;—but, at the same time, my boy, i am as much obliged by
 your offer as if i took advantage of it.”
 
“it was offered with good will,” said dantès.
 
“no doubt, my boy; doubt. well, you stand well with m. morrel i
 hear,—you insinuating dog, you!”
 
“m. morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me,” replied dantès.
 
“then you were wrong to refuse to dine with him.”
 
“what, did you refuse to dine with him?” said old dantès; “and did he
 invite you to dine?”
 
“yes, my dear father,” replied edmond, smiling at his father’s
 astonishment at the excessive honor paid to his son.
 
“and why did you refuse, my son?” inquired the old man.
 
“that i might the sooner see you again, my dear father,” replied the
 young man. “i was most anxious to see you.”
 
“but it must have vexed m. morrel, good, worthy man,” said caderousse.
 “and when you are looking forward to be captain, it was wrong to annoy
 the owner.”
 
“but i explained to him the cause of my refusal,” replied dantès, “and
 i hope fully understood it.”
 
“yes, but to be captain one must do little flattery to one’s
 patrons.”
 
“i hope to be captain without that,” said dantès.
 
“so much the better—so much the better! nothing will give greater
 pleasure to all your old friends; and i know one down there behind the
 saint nicolas citadel who will not be sorry to hear it.”
 
“mercédès?” said the old man.
 
“yes, my dear father, and with your permission, now i have seen you,
 and know you are well and have all you require, i will ask your consent
 to go and pay visit to the catalans.”
 
“go, my dear boy,” said old dantès; “and heaven bless you in your wife,
 as it has blessed in my son!”
 
“his wife!” said caderousse; “why, how fast you go on, father dantès;
 she is not his wife yet, as it seems to me.”
 
“no, but according to all probability she soon will be,” replied
 edmond.
 
“yes—yes,” said caderousse; “but you were right to return as soon as
 possible, my boy.”
 
“and why?”
 
“because mercédès is very fine girl, and fine girls never lack
 followers; she particularly has them by dozens.”
 
“really?” answered edmond, with smile which had in it traces of
 slight uneasiness.
 
0039m
 


“ah, yes,” continued caderousse, “and capital offers, too; but you
 know, you will be captain, and who could refuse you then?”
 
“meaning to say,” replied dantès, with smile which but ill-concealed
 his trouble, “that if i were not captain——”
 
“eh—eh!” said caderousse, shaking his head.
 
“come, come,” said the sailor, “i have better opinion than you of
 women in general, and of mercédès in particular; and i am certain that,
 captain or not, she will remain ever faithful to me.”
 
“so much the better—so much the better,” said caderousse. “when one is
 going to be married, there is nothing like implicit confidence; but
 never mind that, my boy,—go and announce your arrival, and let her know
 all your hopes and prospects.”
 
“i will go directly,” was edmond’s reply; and, embracing his father,
 and nodding to caderousse, left the apartment.
 
caderousse lingered for moment, then taking leave of old dantès, he
 went downstairs to rejoin danglars, who awaited him at the corner of
 the rue senac.
 
“well,” said danglars, “did you see him?”
 
“i have just left him,” answered caderousse.
 
“did allude to his hope of being captain?”
 
“he spoke of it as thing already decided.”
 
“indeed!” said danglars, “he is in too much hurry, it appears to me.”
 
“why, it seems m. morrel has promised him the thing.”
 
“so that is quite elated about it?”
 
“why, yes, is actually insolent over the matter—has already offered
 his patronage, as if were grand personage, and proffered a
 loan of money, as though were banker.”
 
“which you refused?”
 
“most assuredly; although i might easily have accepted it, for it was i
 who put into his hands the first silver ever earned; but now m.
 dantès has longer any occasion for assistance—he is about to become
 captain.”
 
“pooh!” said danglars, “he is not one yet.”
 
“_ma foi!_ it will be as well if is not,” answered caderousse; “for
 if should be, there will be really speaking to him.”
 
“if we choose,” replied danglars, “he will remain what is; and
 perhaps become even less than is.”
 
“what do you mean?”
 
“nothing—i was speaking to myself. and is still in love with the
 catalane?”
 
“over head and ears; but, unless i am much mistaken, there will be a
 storm in that quarter.”
 
0041m
 


“explain yourself.”
 
“why should i?”
 
“it is more important than you think, perhaps. you do not like dantès?”
 
“i never like upstarts.”
 
“then tell all you know about the catalane.”
 
“i know nothing for certain; only i have seen things which induce to
 believe, as i told you, that the future captain will find some
 annoyance in the vicinity of the vieilles infirmeries.”
 
“what have you seen?—come, tell me!”
 
“well, every time i have seen mercédès come into the city she has been
 accompanied by tall, strapping, black-eyed catalan, with red
 complexion, brown skin, and fierce air, whom she calls cousin.”
 
“really; and you think this cousin pays her attentions?”
 
“i only suppose so. what else can strapping chap of twenty-one mean
 with fine wench of seventeen?”
 
“and you say that dantès has gone to the catalans?”
 
“he went before i came down.”
 
“let us go the same way; we will stop at réserve, and we can drink a
 glass of malgue, whilst we wait for news.”
 
“come along,” said caderousse; “but you pay the score.”
 
“of course,” replied danglars; and going quickly to the designated
 place, they called for bottle of wine, and two glasses.
 
père pamphile had seen dantès pass not ten minutes before; and assured
 that was at the catalans, they sat down under the budding foliage of
 the planes and sycamores, in the branches of which the birds were
 singing their welcome to one of the first days of spring.
 


chapter 3. the catalans
 
beyond bare, weather-worn wall, about hundred paces from the spot
 where the two friends sat looking and listening as they drank their
 wine, was the village of the catalans. long ago this mysterious colony
 quitted spain, and settled on the tongue of land on which it is to this
 day. whence it came one knew, and it spoke an unknown tongue. one of
 its chiefs, who understood provençal, begged the commune of marseilles
 to give them this bare and barren promontory, where, like the sailors
 of old, they had run their boats ashore. the request was granted; and
 three months afterwards, around the twelve or fifteen small vessels
 which had brought these gypsies of the sea, small village sprang up.
 this village, constructed in singular and picturesque manner, half
 moorish, half spanish, still remains, and is inhabited by descendants
 of the first comers, who speak the language of their fathers. for three
 or four centuries they have remained upon this small promontory, on
 which they had settled like flight of seabirds, without mixing with
 the marseillaise population, intermarrying, and preserving their
 original customs and the costume of their mother-country as they have
 preserved its language.
 
our readers will follow us along the only street of this little
 village, and enter with us one of the houses, which is sunburned to the
 beautiful dead-leaf color peculiar to the buildings of the country, and
 within coated with whitewash, like spanish posada. young and
 beautiful girl, with hair as black as jet, her eyes as velvety as the
 gazelle’s, was leaning with her back against the wainscot, rubbing in
 her slender delicately moulded fingers bunch of heath blossoms, the
 flowers of which she was picking off and strewing on the floor; her
 arms, bare to the elbow, brown, and modelled after those of the
 arlesian venus, moved with kind of restless impatience, and she
 tapped the earth with her arched and supple foot, so as to display the
 pure and full shape of her well-turned leg, in its red cotton, gray and
 blue clocked, stocking. at three paces from her, seated in chair
 which balanced on two legs, leaning his elbow on an old worm-eaten
 table, was tall young man of twenty, or two-and-twenty, who was
 looking at her with an air in which vexation and uneasiness were
 mingled. questioned her with his eyes, but the firm and steady gaze
 of the young girl controlled his look.
 
“you see, mercédès,” said the young man, “here is easter come round
 again; tell me, is this the moment for wedding?”
 
“i have answered you hundred times, fernand, and really you must be
 very stupid to ask again.”
 
“well, repeat it,—repeat it, i beg of you, that i may at last believe
 it! tell for the hundredth time that you refuse my love, which had
 your mother’s sanction. make understand once for all that you are
 trifling with my happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you.
 ah, to have dreamed for ten years of being your husband, mercédès, and
 to lose that hope, which was the only stay of my existence!”
 
“at least it was not i who ever encouraged you in that hope, fernand,”
 replied mercédès; “you cannot reproach with the slightest coquetry.
 i have always said to you, ‘i love you as brother; but do not ask
 from more than sisterly affection, for my heart is another’s.’ is
 not this true, fernand?”
 
“yes, that is very true, mercédès,” replied the young man, “yes, you
 have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forget that it is among the
 catalans sacred law to intermarry?”
 
0045m
 


“you mistake, fernand; it is not law, but merely custom, and, i
 pray of you, do not cite this custom in your favor. you are included in
 the conscription, fernand, and are only at liberty on sufferance,
 liable at any moment to be called upon to take up arms. once soldier,
 what would you do with me, poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune,
 with nothing but half-ruined hut and few ragged nets, the miserable
 inheritance left by my father to my mother, and by my mother to me? she
 has been dead year, and you know, fernand, i have subsisted almost
 entirely on public charity. sometimes you pretend i am useful to you,
 and that is an excuse to share with the produce of your fishing, and
 i accept it, fernand, because you are the of my father’s brother,
 because we were brought up together, and still more because it would
 give you so much pain if i refuse. but i feel very deeply that this
 fish which i go and sell, and with the produce of which i buy the flax
 i spin,—i feel very keenly, fernand, that this is charity.”
 
“and if it were, mercédès, poor and lone as you are, you suit as
 well as the daughter of the first shipowner or the richest banker of
 marseilles! what do such as we desire but good wife and careful
 housekeeper, and where can i look for these better than in you?”
 
“fernand,” answered mercédès, shaking her head, “a woman becomes bad
 manager, and who shall say she will remain an honest woman, when she
 loves another man better than her husband? rest content with my
 friendship, for i say once more that is all i can promise, and i will
 promise more than i can bestow.”
 
“i understand,” replied fernand, “you can endure your own wretchedness
 patiently, but you are afraid to share mine. well, mercédès, beloved by
 you, i would tempt fortune; you would bring good luck, and i should
 become rich. i could extend my occupation as fisherman, might get a
 place as clerk in warehouse, and become in time dealer myself.”
 
“you could do such thing, fernand; you are soldier, and if you
 remain at the catalans it is because there is war; so remain a
 fisherman, and contented with my friendship, as i cannot give you
 more.”
 
“well, i will do better, mercédès. i will be sailor; instead of the
 costume of our fathers, which you despise, i will wear varnished hat,
 striped shirt, and blue jacket, with an anchor on the buttons.
 would not that dress please you?”
 
“what do you mean?” asked mercédès, with an angry glance,—“what do you
 mean? i do not understand you?”
 
“i mean, mercédès, that you are thus harsh and cruel with me, because
 you are expecting someone who is thus attired; but perhaps whom you
 await is inconstant, or if is not, the is so to him.”
 
“fernand,” cried mercédès, “i believed you were good-hearted, and i was
 mistaken! fernand, you are wicked to call to your aid jealousy and the
 anger of god! yes, i will not deny it, i do await, and i do love him of
 whom you speak; and, if does not return, instead of accusing him of
 the inconstancy which you insinuate, i will tell you that died
 loving and only.” the young girl made gesture of rage. “i
 understand you, fernand; you would be revenged on him because i do not
 love you; you would cross your catalan knife with his dirk. what end
 would that answer? to lose you my friendship if were conquered, and
 see that friendship changed into hate if you were victor. believe me,
 to seek quarrel with man is bad method of pleasing the woman who
 loves that man. no, fernand, you will not thus give way to evil
 thoughts. unable to have for your wife, you will content yourself
 with having for your friend and sister; and besides,” she added, her
 eyes troubled and moistened with tears, “wait, wait, fernand; you said
 just now that the was treacherous, and has been gone four
 months, and during these four months there have been some terrible
 storms.”
 
fernand made reply, nor did attempt to check the tears which
 flowed down the cheeks of mercédès, although for each of these tears he
 would have shed his heart’s blood; but these tears flowed for another.
 arose, paced while up and down the hut, and then, suddenly
 stopping before mercédès, with his eyes glowing and his hands
 clenched,—“say, mercédès,” said, “once for all, is this your final
 determination?”
 
“i love edmond dantès,” the young girl calmly replied, “and none but
 edmond shall ever be my husband.”
 
“and you will always love him?”
 
“as long as i live.”
 
fernand let fall his head like defeated man, heaved sigh that was
 like groan, and then suddenly looking her full in the face, with
 clenched teeth and expanded nostrils, said,—“but if is dead——”
 
“if is dead, i shall die too.”
 
“if has forgotten you——”
 
“mercédès!” called joyous voice from without,—“mercédès!”
 
“ah,” exclaimed the young girl, blushing with delight, and fairly
 leaping in excess of love, “you see has not forgotten me, for here
 is!” and rushing towards the door, she opened it, saying, “here,
 edmond, here i am!”
 
fernand, pale and trembling, drew back, like traveller at the sight
 of serpent, and fell into chair beside him. edmond and mercédès
 were clasped in each other’s arms. the burning marseilles sun, which
 shot into the room through the open door, covered them with flood of
 light. at first they saw nothing around them. their intense happiness
 isolated them from all the rest of the world, and they only spoke in
 broken words, which are the tokens of joy so extreme that they seem
 rather the expression of sorrow. suddenly edmond saw the gloomy, pale,
 and threatening countenance of fernand, as it was defined in the
 shadow. by movement for which could scarcely account to himself,
 the young catalan placed his hand on the knife at his belt.
 
“ah, your pardon,” said dantès, frowning in his turn; “i did not
 perceive that there were three of us.” then, turning to mercédès, he
 inquired, “who is this gentleman?”
 
“one who will be your best friend, dantès, for is my friend, my
 cousin, my brother; it is fernand—the man whom, after you, edmond, i
 love the best in the world. do you not remember him?”
 
“yes!” said dantès, and without relinquishing mercédès’ hand clasped in
 one of his own, extended the other to the catalan with cordial
 air. but fernand, instead of responding to this amiable gesture,
 remained mute and trembling. edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly
 at the agitated and embarrassed mercédès, and then again on the gloomy
 and menacing fernand. this look told him all, and his anger waxed hot.
 
“i did not know, when i came with such haste to you, that i was to meet
 an enemy here.”
 
“an enemy!” cried mercédès, with an angry look at her cousin. “an enemy
 in my house, do you say, edmond! if i believed that, i would place my
 arm under yours and go with you to marseilles, leaving the house to
 return to it more.”
 
fernand’s eye darted lightning. “and should any misfortune occur to
 you, dear edmond,” she continued with the same calmness which proved to
 fernand that the young girl had read the very innermost depths of his
 sinister thought, “if misfortune should occur to you, i would ascend
 the highest point of the cape morgiou and cast myself headlong from
 it.”
 
fernand became deadly pale. “but you are deceived, edmond,” she
 continued. “you have enemy here—there is one but fernand, my
 brother, who will grasp your hand as devoted friend.”
 
and at these words the young girl fixed her imperious look on the
 catalan, who, as if fascinated by it, came slowly towards edmond, and
 offered him his hand. his hatred, like powerless though furious wave,
 was broken against the strong ascendancy which mercédès exercised over
 him. scarcely, however, had touched edmond’s hand when felt he
 had done all could do, and rushed hastily out of the house.
 
“oh,” exclaimed, running furiously and tearing his hair—“oh, who
 will deliver from this man? wretched—wretched that i am!”
 
“hallo, catalan! hallo, fernand! where are you running to?” exclaimed a
 voice.
 
the young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, and perceived
 caderousse sitting at table with danglars, under an arbor.
 
“well”, said caderousse, “why don’t you come? are you really in such a
 hurry that you have time to pass the time of day with your friends?”
 
“particularly when they have still full bottle before them,” added
 danglars. fernand looked at them both with stupefied air, but did not
 say word.
 
“he seems besotted,” said danglars, pushing caderousse with his knee.
 “are we mistaken, and is dantès triumphant in spite of all we have
 believed?”
 
“why, we must inquire into that,” was caderousse’s reply; and turning
 towards the young man, said, “well, catalan, can’t you make up your
 mind?”
 
fernand wiped away the perspiration steaming from his brow, and slowly
 entered the arbor, whose shade seemed to restore somewhat of calmness
 to his senses, and whose coolness somewhat of refreshment to his
 exhausted body.
 
“good-day,” said he. “you called me, didn’t you?” and fell, rather
 than sat down, on one of the seats which surrounded the table.
 
“i called you because you were running like madman, and i was afraid
 you would throw yourself into the sea,” said caderousse, laughing.
 “why, when man has friends, they are not only to offer him glass of
 wine, but, moreover, to prevent his swallowing three or four pints of
 water unnecessarily!”
 
fernand gave groan, which resembled sob, and dropped his head into
 his hands, his elbows leaning on the table.
 
“well, fernand, i must say,” said caderousse, beginning the
 conversation, with that brutality of the common people in which
 curiosity destroys all diplomacy, “you look uncommonly like rejected
 lover;” and burst into hoarse laugh.
 
“bah!” said danglars, “a lad of his make was not born to be unhappy in
 love. you are laughing at him, caderousse.”
 
“no,” replied, “only hark how sighs! come, come, fernand,” said
 caderousse, “hold up your head, and answer us. it’s not polite not to
 reply to friends who ask news of your health.”
 
“my health is well enough,” said fernand, clenching his hands without
 raising his head.
 
“ah, you see, danglars,” said caderousse, winking at his friend, “this
 is how it is; fernand, whom you see here, is good and brave catalan,
 one of the best fishermen in marseilles, and is in love with very
 fine girl, named mercédès; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine
 girl is in love with the mate of the _pharaon_; and as the _pharaon_
 arrived today—why, you understand!”
 
“no; i do not understand,” said danglars.
 
“poor fernand has been dismissed,” continued caderousse.
 
“well, and what then?” said fernand, lifting up his head, and looking
 at caderousse like man who looks for someone on whom to vent his
 anger; “mercédès is not accountable to any person, is she? is she not
 free to love whomsoever she will?”
 
“oh, if you take it in that sense,” said caderousse, “it is another
 thing. but i thought you were catalan, and they told the catalans
 were not men to allow themselves to be supplanted by rival. it was
 even told that fernand, especially, was terrible in his vengeance.”
 
fernand smiled piteously. “a lover is never terrible,” said.
 
“poor fellow!” remarked danglars, affecting to pity the young man from
 the bottom of his heart. “why, you see, did not expect to see dantès
 return so suddenly—he thought was dead, perhaps; or perchance
 faithless! these things always come on us more severely when they come
 suddenly.”
 
“ah, _ma foi_, under any circumstances!” said caderousse, who drank as
 spoke, and on whom the fumes of the wine began to take
 effect,—“under any circumstances fernand is not the only person put out
 by the fortunate arrival of dantès; is he, danglars?”
 
“no, you are right—and i should say that would bring him ill-luck.”
 
“well, never mind,” answered caderousse, pouring out glass of wine
 for fernand, and filling his own for the eighth or ninth time, while
 danglars had merely sipped his. “never mind—in the meantime marries
 mercédès—the lovely mercédès—at least returns to do that.”
 
during this time danglars fixed his piercing glance on the young man,
 on whose heart caderousse’s words fell like molten lead.
 
“and when is the wedding to be?” asked.
 
“oh, it is not yet fixed!” murmured fernand.
 
“no, but it will be,” said caderousse, “as surely as dantès will be
 captain of the _pharaon_—eh, danglars?”
 
danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned to caderousse,
 whose countenance scrutinized, to try and detect whether the blow
 was premeditated; but read nothing but envy in countenance already
 rendered brutal and stupid by drunkenness.
 
“well,” said he, filling the glasses, “let us drink to captain edmond
 dantès, husband of the beautiful catalane!”
 
caderousse raised his glass to his mouth with unsteady hand, and
 swallowed the contents at gulp. fernand dashed his on the ground.
 
“eh, eh, eh!” stammered caderousse. “what do i see down there by the
 wall, in the direction of the catalans? look, fernand, your eyes are
 better than mine. i believe i see double. you know wine is deceiver;
 but i should say it was two lovers walking side by side, and hand in
 hand. heaven forgive me, they do not know that we can see them, and
 they are actually embracing!”
 
danglars did not lose one pang that fernand endured.
 
“do you know them, fernand?” said.
 
“yes,” was the reply, in low voice. “it is edmond and mercédès!”
 
“ah, see there, now!” said caderousse; “and i did not recognize them!
 hallo, dantès! hello, lovely damsel! come this way, and let us know
 when the wedding is to be, for fernand here is so obstinate will not
 tell us.”
 
“hold your tongue, will you?” said danglars, pretending to restrain
 caderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards, leaned out of the
 arbor. “try to stand upright, and let the lovers make love without
 interruption. see, look at fernand, and follow his example; is
 well-behaved!”
 
0051m
 


fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked by danglars, as the
 bull is by the bandilleros, was about to rush out; for had risen
 from his seat, and seemed to be collecting himself to dash headlong
 upon his rival, when mercédès, smiling and graceful, lifted up her
 lovely head, and looked at them with her clear and bright eyes. at this
 fernand recollected her threat of dying if edmond died, and dropped
 again heavily on his seat. danglars looked at the two men, one after
 the other, the one brutalized by liquor, the other overwhelmed with
 love.
 
“i shall get nothing from these fools,” muttered; “and i am very
 much afraid of being here between drunkard and coward. here’s an
 envious fellow making himself boozy on wine when ought to be nursing
 his wrath, and here is fool who sees the woman loves stolen from
 under his nose and takes on like big baby. yet this catalan has eyes
 that glisten like those of the vengeful spaniards, sicilians, and
 calabrians, and the other has fists big enough to crush an ox at one
 blow. unquestionably, edmond’s star is in the ascendant, and will
 marry the splendid girl—he will be captain, too, and laugh at us all,
 unless”—a sinister smile passed over danglars’ lips—“unless i take a
 hand in the affair,” added.
 
“hallo!” continued caderousse, half-rising, and with his fist on the
 table, “hallo, edmond! do you not see your friends, or are you too
 proud to speak to them?”
 
“no, my dear fellow!” replied dantès, “i am not proud, but i am happy,
 and happiness blinds, i think, more than pride.”
 
“ah, very well, that’s an explanation!” said caderousse. “how do you
 do, madame dantès?”
 
mercédès courtesied gravely, and said—“that is not my name, and in my
 country it bodes ill fortune, they say, to call young girl by the
 name of her betrothed before becomes her husband. so call me
 mercédès, if you please.”
 
“we must excuse our worthy neighbor, caderousse,” said dantès, “he is
 so easily mistaken.”
 
“so, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, m. dantès,” said
 danglars, bowing to the young couple.
 
“as soon as possible, m. danglars; today all preliminaries will be
 arranged at my father’s, and tomorrow, or next day at latest, the
 wedding festival here at réserve. my friends will be there, i hope;
 that is to say, you are invited, m. danglars, and you, caderousse.”
 
“and fernand,” said caderousse with chuckle; “fernand, too, is
 invited!”
 
“my wife’s brother is my brother,” said edmond; “and we, mercédès and
 i, should be very sorry if were absent at such time.”
 
fernand opened his mouth to reply, but his voice died on his lips, and
 could not utter word.
 
“today the preliminaries, tomorrow or next day the ceremony! you are in
 hurry, captain!”
 
“danglars,” said edmond, smiling, “i will say to you as mercédès said
 just now to caderousse, ‘do not give title which does not belong
 to me’; that may bring bad luck.”
 
“your pardon,” replied danglars, “i merely said you seemed in hurry,
 and we have lots of time; the _pharaon_ cannot be under weigh again in
 less than three months.”
 
“we are always in hurry to be happy, m. danglars; for when we have
 suffered long time, we have great difficulty in believing in good
 fortune. but it is not selfishness alone that makes thus in haste; i
 must go to paris.”
 
“ah, really?—to paris! and will it be the first time you have ever been
 there, dantès?”
 
“yes.”
 
“have you business there?”
 
“not of my own; the last commission of poor captain leclere; you know
 to what i allude, danglars—it is sacred. besides, i shall only take the
 time to go and return.”
 
“yes, yes, i understand,” said danglars, and then in low tone, he
 added, “to paris, doubt to deliver the letter which the grand
 marshal gave him. ah, this letter gives an idea—a capital idea! ah;
 dantès, my friend, you are not yet registered number one on board the
 good ship _pharaon_;” then turning towards edmond, who was walking
 away, “a pleasant journey,” cried.
 
“thank you,” said edmond with friendly nod, and the two lovers
 continued on their way, as calm and joyous as if they were the very
 elect of heaven.
 


chapter 4. conspiracy
 
danglars followed edmond and mercédès with his eyes until the two
 lovers disappeared behind one of the angles of fort saint nicolas;
 then, turning round, perceived fernand, who had fallen, pale and
 trembling, into his chair, while caderousse stammered out the words of
 drinking-song.
 
“well, my dear sir,” said danglars to fernand, “here is marriage
 which does not appear to make everybody happy.”
 
“it drives to despair,” said fernand.
 
“do you, then, love mercédès?”
 
“i adore her!”
 
“for long?”
 
“as long as i have known her—always.”
 
“and you sit there, tearing your hair, instead of seeking to remedy
 your condition; i did not think that was the way of your people.”
 
“what would you have do?” said fernand.
 
“how do i know? is it my affair? i am not in love with mademoiselle
 mercédès; but for you—in the words of the gospel, seek, and you shall
 find.”
 
“i have found already.”
 
“what?”
 
“i would stab the man, but the woman told that if any misfortune
 happened to her betrothed, she would kill herself.”
 
“pooh! women say those things, but never do them.”
 
“you do not know mercédès; what she threatens she will do.”
 
“idiot!” muttered danglars; “whether she kill herself or not, what
 matter, provided dantès is not captain?”
 
“before mercédès should die,” replied fernand, with the accents of
 unshaken resolution, “i would die myself!”
 
“that’s what i call love!” said caderousse with voice more tipsy than
 ever. “that’s love, or i don’t know what love is.”
 
“come,” said danglars, “you appear to good sort of fellow, and
 hang me, i should like to help you, but——”
 
“yes,” said caderousse, “but how?”
 
“my dear fellow,” replied danglars, “you are three parts drunk; finish
 the bottle, and you will be completely so. drink then, and do not
 meddle with what we are discussing, for that requires all one’s wit and
 cool judgment.”
 
“i—drunk!” said caderousse; “well that’s good one! i could drink four
 more such bottles; they are bigger than cologne flasks. père
 pamphile, more wine!”
 
and caderousse rattled his glass upon the table.
 
“you were saying, sir——” said fernand, awaiting with great anxiety the
 end of this interrupted remark.
 
“what was i saying? i forget. this drunken caderousse has made lose
 the thread of my sentence.”
 
“drunk, if you like; so much the worse for those who fear wine, for it
 is because they have bad thoughts which they are afraid the liquor will
 extract from their hearts;” and caderousse began to sing the two last
 lines of song very popular at the time:
 
‘tous méchants sont buveurs d’eau;
 
c’est bien prouvé par déluge.’1
 

“you said, sir, you would like to help me, but——”
 
“yes; but i added, to help you it would be sufficient that dantès did
 not marry her you love; and the marriage may easily be thwarted,
 methinks, and yet dantès need not die.”
 
“death alone can separate them,” remarked fernand.
 
“you talk like noodle, my friend,” said caderousse; “and here is
 danglars, who is wide-awake, clever, deep fellow, who will prove to
 you that you are wrong. prove it, danglars. i have answered for you.
 say there is need why dantès should die; it would, indeed, be pity
 should. dantès is good fellow; i like dantès. dantès, your
 health.”
 
fernand rose impatiently. “let him run on,” said danglars, restraining
 the young man; “drunk as is, is not much out in what says.
 absence severs as well as death, and if the walls of prison were
 between edmond and mercédès they would be as effectually separated as
 if lay under tombstone.”
 
0056m
 


“yes; but one gets out of prison,” said caderousse, who, with what
 sense was left him, listened eagerly to the conversation, “and when one
 gets out and one’s name is edmond dantès, one seeks revenge——”
 
“what matters that?” muttered fernand.
 
“and why, i should like to know,” persisted caderousse, “should they
 put dantès in prison? has neither robbed, nor killed, nor murdered.”
 
“hold your tongue!” said danglars.
 
“i won’t hold my tongue!” replied caderousse; “i say i want to know why
 they should put dantès in prison; i like dantès; dantès, your health!”
 and swallowed another glass of wine.
 
0057m
 


danglars saw in the muddled look of the tailor the progress of his
 intoxication, and turning towards fernand, said, “well, you understand
 there is need to kill him.”
 
“certainly not, if, as you said just now, you have the means of having
 dantès arrested. have you that means?”
 
“it is to be found for the searching. but why should i meddle in the
 matter? it is affair of mine.”
 
“i know not why you meddle,” said fernand, seizing his arm; “but this i
 know, you have some motive of personal hatred against dantès, for he
 who himself hates is never mistaken in the sentiments of others.”
 
“i! motives of hatred against dantès? none, on my word! i saw you were
 unhappy, and your unhappiness interested me; that’s all; but since you
 believe i act for my own account, adieu, my dear friend, get out of the
 affair as best you may;” and danglars rose as if meant to depart.
 
“no, no,” said fernand, restraining him, “stay! it is of very little
 consequence to at the end of the matter whether you have any angry
 feeling or not against dantès. i hate him! i confess it openly. do you
 find the means, i will execute it, provided it is not to kill the man,
 for mercédès has declared she will kill herself if dantès is killed.”
 
caderousse, who had let his head drop on the table, now raised it, and
 looking at fernand with his dull and fishy eyes, said, “kill dantès!
 who talks of killing dantès? i won’t have him killed—i won’t! he’s my
 friend, and this morning offered to share his money with me, as i
 shared mine with him. i won’t have dantès killed—i won’t!”
 
“and who has said word about killing him, muddlehead?” replied
 danglars. “we were merely joking; drink to his health,” added,
 filling caderousse’s glass, “and do not interfere with us.”
 
“yes, yes, dantès’ good health!” said caderousse, emptying his glass,
 “here’s to his health! his health—hurrah!”
 
“but the means—the means?” said fernand.
 
“have you not hit upon any?” asked danglars.
 
“no!—you undertook to do so.”
 
“true,” replied danglars; “the french have the superiority over the
 spaniards, that the spaniards ruminate, while the french invent.”
 
“do you invent, then,” said fernand impatiently.
 
“waiter,” said danglars, “pen, ink, and paper.”
 
“pen, ink, and paper,” muttered fernand.
 
“yes; i am supercargo; pen, ink, and paper are my tools, and without
 my tools i am fit for nothing.”
 
“pen, ink, and paper, then,” called fernand loudly.
 
“there’s what you want on that table,” said the waiter.
 
“bring them here.” the waiter did as was desired.
 
0059m
 


“when one thinks,” said caderousse, letting his hand drop on the paper,
 “there is here wherewithal to kill man more sure than if we waited at
 the corner of wood to assassinate him! i have always had more dread
 of pen, bottle of ink, and sheet of paper, than of sword or
 pistol.”
 
“the fellow is not so drunk as appears to be,” said danglars. “give
 him some more wine, fernand.” fernand filled caderousse’s glass, who,
 like the confirmed toper was, lifted his hand from the paper and
 seized the glass.
 
the catalan watched him until caderousse, almost overcome by this fresh
 assault on his senses, rested, or rather dropped, his glass upon the
 table.
 
“well!” resumed the catalan, as saw the final glimmer of
 caderousse’s reason vanishing before the last glass of wine.
 
“well, then, i should say, for instance,” resumed danglars, “that if
 after voyage such as dantès has just made, in which touched at the
 island of elba, someone were to denounce him to the king’s procureur as
 bonapartist agent——”
 
“i will denounce him!” exclaimed the young man hastily.
 
“yes, but they will make you then sign your declaration, and confront
 you with him you have denounced; i will supply you with the means of
 supporting your accusation, for i know the fact well. but dantès cannot
 remain forever in prison, and one day or other will leave it, and
 the day when comes out, woe betide him who was the cause of his
 incarceration!”
 
“oh, i should wish nothing better than that would come and seek a
 quarrel with me.”
 
“yes, and mercédès! mercédès, who will detest you if you have only the
 misfortune to scratch the skin of her dearly beloved edmond!”
 
“true!” said fernand.
 
“no, no,” continued danglars; “if we resolve on such step, it would
 be much better to take, as i now do, this pen, dip it into this ink,
 and write with the left hand (that the writing may not be recognized)
 the denunciation we propose.” and danglars, uniting practice with
 theory, wrote with his left hand, and in writing reversed from his
 usual style, and totally unlike it, the following lines, which he
 handed to fernand, and which fernand read in an undertone:
 
“the honorable, the king’s attorney, is informed by friend of the
 throne and religion, that one edmond dantès, mate of the ship
 _pharaon_, arrived this morning from smyrna, after having touched at
 naples and porto-ferrajo, has been intrusted by murat with letter for
 the usurper, and by the usurper with letter for the bonapartist
 committee in paris. proof of this crime will be found on arresting him,
 for the letter will be found upon him, or at his father’s, or in his
 cabin on board the _pharaon_.”
 
“very good,” resumed danglars; “now your revenge looks like common
 sense, for in way can it revert to yourself, and the matter will
 thus work its own way; there is nothing to do now but fold the letter
 as i am doing, and write upon it, ‘to the king’s attorney,’ and that’s
 all settled.” and danglars wrote the address as spoke.
 
“yes, and that’s all settled!” exclaimed caderousse, who, by last
 effort of intellect, had followed the reading of the letter, and
 instinctively comprehended all the misery which such denunciation
 must entail. “yes, and that’s all settled; only it will be an infamous
 shame;” and stretched out his hand to reach the letter.
 
“yes,” said danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; “and as what i
 say and do is merely in jest, and i, amongst the first and foremost,
 should be sorry if anything happened to dantès—the worthy dantès—look
 here!” and taking the letter, squeezed it up in his hands and threw
 it into corner of the arbor.
 
“all right!” said caderousse. “dantès is my friend, and i won’t have
 him ill-used.”
 
“and who thinks of using him ill? certainly neither i nor fernand,”
 said danglars, rising and looking at the young man, who still remained
 seated, but whose eye was fixed on the denunciatory sheet of paper
 flung into the corner.
 
“in this case,” replied caderousse, “let’s have some more wine. i wish
 to drink to the health of edmond and the lovely mercédès.”
 
“you have had too much already, drunkard,” said danglars; “and if you
 continue, you will be compelled to sleep here, because unable to stand
 on your legs.”
 
“i?” said caderousse, rising with all the offended dignity of drunken
 man, “i can’t keep on my legs? why, i’ll wager i can go up into the
 belfry of the accoules, and without staggering, too!”
 
“done!” said danglars, “i’ll take your bet; but tomorrow—today it is
 time to return. give your arm, and let us go.”
 
“very well, let us go,” said caderousse; “but i don’t want your arm at
 all. come, fernand, won’t you return to marseilles with us?”
 
“no,” said fernand; “i shall return to the catalans.”
 
“you’re wrong. come with us to marseilles—come along.”
 
“i will not.”
 
“what do you mean? you will not? well, just as you like, my prince;
 there’s liberty for all the world. come along, danglars, and let the
 young gentleman return to the catalans if chooses.”
 
danglars took advantage of caderousse’s temper at the moment, to take
 him off towards marseilles by the porte saint-victor, staggering as he
 went.
 
when they had advanced about twenty yards, danglars looked back and saw
 fernand stoop, pick up the crumpled paper, and putting it into his
 pocket then rush out of the arbor towards pillon.
 
“well,” said caderousse, “why, what lie told! said was going
 to the catalans, and is going to the city. hallo, fernand! you are
 coming, my boy!”
 
“oh, you don’t see straight,” said danglars; “he’s gone right by the
 road to the vieilles infirmeries.”
 
“well,” said caderousse, “i should have sworn that turned to the
 right—how treacherous wine is!”
 
“come, come,” said danglars to himself, “now the thing is at work and
 it will effect its purpose unassisted.”
 


chapter 5. the marriage feast
 
the morning’s sun rose clear and resplendent, touching the foamy waves
 into network of ruby-tinted light.
 
the feast had been made ready on the second floor at réserve, with
 whose arbor the reader is already familiar. the apartment destined for
 the purpose was spacious and lighted by number of windows, over each
 of which was written in golden letters for some inexplicable reason the
 name of one of the principal cities of france; beneath these windows a
 wooden balcony extended the entire length of the house. and although
 the entertainment was fixed for twelve o’clock, an hour previous to
 that time the balcony was filled with impatient and expectant guests,
 consisting of the favored part of the crew of the _pharaon_, and other
 personal friends of the bridegroom, the whole of whom had arrayed
 themselves in their choicest costumes, in order to do greater honor to
 the occasion.
 
various rumors were afloat to the effect that the owners of the
 _pharaon_ had promised to attend the nuptial feast; but all seemed
 unanimous in doubting that an act of such rare and exceeding
 condescension could possibly be intended.
 
danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompanied by
 caderousse, effectually confirmed the report, stating that had
 recently conversed with m. morrel, who had himself assured him of his
 intention to dine at réserve.
 
in fact, moment later m. morrel appeared and was saluted with an
 enthusiastic burst of applause from the crew of the _pharaon_, who
 hailed the visit of the shipowner as sure indication that the man
 whose wedding feast thus delighted to honor would ere long be first
 in command of the ship; and as dantès was universally beloved on board
 his vessel, the sailors put restraint on their tumultuous joy at
 finding that the opinion and choice of their superiors so exactly
 coincided with their own.
 
with the entrance of m. morrel, danglars and caderousse were despatched
 in search of the bridegroom to convey to him the intelligence of the
 arrival of the important personage whose coming had created such a
 lively sensation, and to beseech him to make haste.
 
danglars and caderousse set off upon their errand at full speed; but
 ere they had gone many steps they perceived group advancing towards
 them, composed of the betrothed pair, party of young girls in
 attendance on the bride, by whose side walked dantès’ father; the whole
 brought up by fernand, whose lips wore their usual sinister smile.
 
neither mercédès nor edmond observed the strange expression of his
 countenance; they were so happy that they were conscious only of the
 sunshine and the presence of each other.
 
having acquitted themselves of their errand, and exchanged hearty
 shake of the hand with edmond, danglars and caderousse took their
 places beside fernand and old dantès,—the latter of whom attracted
 universal notice.
 
the old man was attired in suit of glistening watered silk, trimmed
 with steel buttons, beautifully cut and polished. his thin but wiry
 legs were arrayed in pair of richly embroidered clocked stockings,
 evidently of english manufacture, while from his three-cornered hat
 depended long streaming knot of white and blue ribbons. thus came
 along, supporting himself on curiously carved stick, his aged
 countenance lit up with happiness, looking for all the world like one
 of the aged dandies of 1796, parading the newly opened gardens of the
 luxembourg and tuileries.
 
beside him glided caderousse, whose desire to partake of the good
 things provided for the wedding party had induced him to become
 reconciled to the dantès, father and son, although there still lingered
 in his mind faint and unperfect recollection of the events of the
 preceding night; just as the brain retains on waking in the morning the
 dim and misty outline of dream.
 
0065m
 


as danglars approached the disappointed lover, cast on him look of
 deep meaning, while fernand, as slowly paced behind the happy pair,
 who seemed, in their own unmixed content, to have entirely forgotten
 that such being as himself existed, was pale and abstracted;
 occasionally, however, deep flush would overspread his countenance,
 and nervous contraction distort his features, while, with an agitated
 and restless gaze, would glance in the direction of marseilles, like
 one who either anticipated or foresaw some great and important event.
 
dantès himself was simply, but becomingly, clad in the dress peculiar
 to the merchant service—a costume somewhat between military and a
 civil garb; and with his fine countenance, radiant with joy and
 happiness, more perfect specimen of manly beauty could scarcely be
 imagined.
 
lovely as the greek girls of cyprus or chios, mercédès boasted the same
 bright flashing eyes of jet, and ripe, round, coral lips. she moved
 with the light, free step of an arlesienne or an andalusian. one more
 practiced in the arts of great cities would have hid her blushes
 beneath veil, or, at least, have cast down her thickly fringed
 lashes, so as to have concealed the liquid lustre of her animated eyes;
 but, on the contrary, the delighted girl looked around her with smile
 that seemed to say: “if you are my friends, rejoice with me, for i am
 very happy.”
 
as soon as the bridal party came in sight of réserve, m. morrel
 descended and came forth to meet it, followed by the soldiers and
 sailors there assembled, to whom had repeated the promise already
 given, that dantès should be the successor to the late captain leclere.
 edmond, at the approach of his patron, respectfully placed the arm of
 his affianced bride within that of m. morrel, who, forthwith conducting
 her up the flight of wooden steps leading to the chamber in which the
 feast was prepared, was gayly followed by the guests, beneath whose
 heavy tread the slight structure creaked and groaned for the space of
 several minutes.
 
“father,” said mercédès, stopping when she had reached the centre of
 the table, “sit, i pray you, on my right hand; on my left i will place
 him who has ever been as brother to me,” pointing with soft and
 gentle smile to fernand; but her words and look seemed to inflict the
 direst torture on him, for his lips became ghastly pale, and even
 beneath the dark hue of his complexion the blood might be seen
 retreating as though some sudden pang drove it back to the heart.
 
during this time, dantès, at the opposite side of the table, had been
 occupied in similarly placing his most honored guests. m. morrel was
 seated at his right hand, danglars at his left; while, at sign from
 edmond, the rest of the company ranged themselves as they found it most
 agreeable.
 
then they began to pass around the dusky, piquant, arlesian sausages,
 and lobsters in their dazzling red cuirasses, prawns of large size and
 brilliant color, the echinus with its prickly outside and dainty morsel
 within, the clovis, esteemed by the epicures of the south as more than
 rivalling the exquisite flavor of the oyster, north. all the
 delicacies, in fact, that are cast up by the wash of waters on the
 sandy beach, and styled by the grateful fishermen “fruits of the sea.”
 
“a pretty silence truly!” said the old father of the bridegroom, as he
 carried to his lips glass of wine of the hue and brightness of the
 topaz, and which had just been placed before mercédès herself. “now,
 would anybody think that this room contained happy, merry party, who
 desire nothing better than to laugh and dance the hours away?”
 
“ah,” sighed caderousse, “a man cannot always feel happy because is
 about to be married.”
 
“the truth is,” replied dantès, “that i am too happy for noisy mirth;
 if that is what you meant by your observation, my worthy friend, you
 are right; joy takes strange effect at times, it seems to oppress us
 almost the same as sorrow.”
 
danglars looked towards fernand, whose excitable nature received and
 betrayed each fresh impression.
 
“why, what ails you?” asked of edmond. “do you fear any approaching
 evil? i should say that you were the happiest man alive at this
 instant.”
 
“and that is the very thing that alarms me,” returned dantès. “man does
 not appear to to be intended to enjoy felicity so unmixed; happiness
 is like the enchanted palaces we read of in our childhood, where
 fierce, fiery dragons defend the entrance and approach; and monsters of
 all shapes and kinds, requiring to be overcome ere victory is ours. i
 own that i am lost in wonder to find myself promoted to an honor of
 which i feel myself unworthy—that of being the husband of mercédès.”
 
“nay, nay!” cried caderousse, smiling, “you have not attained that
 honor yet. mercédès is not yet your wife. just assume the tone and
 manner of husband, and see how she will remind you that your hour is
 not yet come!”
 
the bride blushed, while fernand, restless and uneasy, seemed to start
 at every fresh sound, and from time to time wiped away the large drops
 of perspiration that gathered on his brow.
 
“well, never mind that, neighbor caderousse; it is not worthwhile to
 contradict for such trifle as that. ’tis true that mercédès is not
 actually my wife; but,” added he, drawing out his watch, “in an hour
 and half she will be.”
 
general exclamation of surprise ran round the table, with the
 exception of the elder dantès, whose laugh displayed the still perfect
 beauty of his large white teeth. mercédès looked pleased and gratified,
 while fernand grasped the handle of his knife with convulsive clutch.
 
“in an hour?” inquired danglars, turning pale. “how is that, my
 friend?”
 
“why, thus it is,” replied dantès. “thanks to the influence of m.
 morrel, to whom, next to my father, i owe every blessing i enjoy, every
 difficulty has been removed. we have purchased permission to waive the
 usual delay; and at half-past two o’clock the mayor of marseilles will
 be waiting for us at the city hall. now, as quarter-past one has
 already struck, i do not consider i have asserted too much in saying,
 that, in another hour and thirty minutes mercédès will have become
 madame dantès.”
 
0069m
 


fernand closed his eyes, burning sensation passed across his brow,
 and was compelled to support himself by the table to prevent his
 falling from his chair; but in spite of all his efforts, could not
 refrain from uttering deep groan, which, however, was lost amid the
 noisy felicitations of the company.
 
“upon my word,” cried the old man, “you make short work of this kind of
 affair. arrived here only yesterday morning, and married today at three
 o’clock! commend to sailor for going the quick way to work!”
 
“but,” asked danglars, in timid tone, “how did you manage about the
 other formalities—the contract—the settlement?”
 
“the contract,” answered dantès, laughingly, “it didn’t take long to
 fix that. mercédès has fortune; i have none to settle on her. so,
 you see, our papers were quickly written out, and certainly do not come
 very expensive.” this joke elicited fresh burst of applause.
 
“so that what we presumed to be merely the betrothal feast turns out to
 be the actual wedding dinner!” said danglars.
 
“no, no,” answered dantès; “don’t imagine i am going to put you off in
 that shabby manner. tomorrow morning i start for paris; four days to
 go, and the same to return, with one day to discharge the commission
 entrusted to me, is all the time i shall be absent. i shall be back
 here by the first of march, and on the second i give my real marriage
 feast.”
 
this prospect of fresh festivity redoubled the hilarity of the guests
 to such degree, that the elder dantès, who, at the commencement of
 the repast, had commented upon the silence that prevailed, now found it
 difficult, amid the general din of voices, to obtain moment’s
 tranquillity in which to drink to the health and prosperity of the
 bride and bridegroom.
 
dantès, perceiving the affectionate eagerness of his father, responded
 by look of grateful pleasure; while mercédès glanced at the clock and
 made an expressive gesture to edmond.
 
around the table reigned that noisy hilarity which usually prevails at
 such time among people sufficiently free from the demands of social
 position not to feel the trammels of etiquette. such as at the
 commencement of the repast had not been able to seat themselves
 according to their inclination rose unceremoniously, and sought out
 more agreeable companions. everybody talked at once, without waiting
 for reply and each one seemed to be contented with expressing his or
 her own thoughts.
 
fernand’s paleness appeared to have communicated itself to danglars. as
 for fernand himself, seemed to be enduring the tortures of the
 damned; unable to rest, was among the first to quit the table, and,
 as though seeking to avoid the hilarious mirth that rose in such
 deafening sounds, continued, in utter silence, to pace the farther
 end of the salon.
 
caderousse approached him just as danglars, whom fernand seemed most
 anxious to avoid, had joined him in corner of the room.
 
“upon my word,” said caderousse, from whose mind the friendly treatment
 of dantès, united with the effect of the excellent wine had partaken
 of, had effaced every feeling of envy or jealousy at dantès’ good
 fortune,—“upon my word, dantès is downright good fellow, and when i
 see him sitting there beside his pretty wife that is so soon to be. i
 cannot help thinking it would have been great pity to have served him
 that trick you were planning yesterday.”
 
“oh, there was harm meant,” answered danglars; “at first i certainly
 did feel somewhat uneasy as to what fernand might be tempted to do; but
 when i saw how completely had mastered his feelings, even so far as
 to become one of his rival’s attendants, i knew there was further
 cause for apprehension.” caderousse looked full at fernand—he was
 ghastly pale.
 
“certainly,” continued danglars, “the sacrifice was trifling one,
 when the beauty of the bride is concerned. upon my soul, that future
 captain of mine is lucky dog! gad! i only wish would let take
 his place.”
 
“shall we not set forth?” asked the sweet, silvery voice of mercédès;
 “two o’clock has just struck, and you know we are expected in quarter
 of an hour.”
 
0071m
 


“to be sure!—to be sure!” cried dantès, eagerly quitting the table;
 “let us go directly!”
 
his words were re-echoed by the whole party, with vociferous cheers.
 
at this moment danglars, who had been incessantly observing every
 change in fernand’s look and manner, saw him stagger and fall back,
 with an almost convulsive spasm, against seat placed near one of the
 open windows. at the same instant his ear caught sort of indistinct
 sound on the stairs, followed by the measured tread of soldiery, with
 the clanking of swords and military accoutrements; then came hum and
 buzz as of many voices, so as to deaden even the noisy mirth of the
 bridal party, among whom vague feeling of curiosity and apprehension
 quelled every disposition to talk, and almost instantaneously the most
 deathlike stillness prevailed.
 
the sounds drew nearer. three blows were struck upon the panel of the
 door. the company looked at each other in consternation.
 
“i demand admittance,” said loud voice outside the room, “in the name
 of the law!” as attempt was made to prevent it, the door was opened,
 and magistrate, wearing his official scarf, presented himself,
 followed by four soldiers and corporal. uneasiness now yielded to the
 most extreme dread on the part of those present.
 
“may i venture to inquire the reason of this unexpected visit?” said m.
 morrel, addressing the magistrate, whom evidently knew; “there is
 doubtless some mistake easily explained.”
 
“if it be so,” replied the magistrate, “rely upon every reparation
 being made; meanwhile, i am the bearer of an order of arrest, and
 although i most reluctantly perform the task assigned me, it must,
 nevertheless, be fulfilled. who among the persons here assembled
 answers to the name of edmond dantès?”
 
every eye was turned towards the young man who, spite of the agitation
 could not but feel, advanced with dignity, and said, in firm
 voice:
 
“i am he; what is your pleasure with me?”
 
“edmond dantès,” replied the magistrate, “i arrest you in the name of
 the law!”
 
“me!” repeated edmond, slightly changing color, “and wherefore, i
 pray?”
 
“i cannot inform you, but you will be duly acquainted with the reasons
 that have rendered such step necessary at the preliminary
 examination.”
 
m. morrel felt that further resistance or remonstrance was useless. he
 saw before him an officer delegated to enforce the law, and perfectly
 well knew that it would be as unavailing to seek pity from magistrate
 decked with his official scarf, as to address petition to some cold
 marble effigy. old dantès, however, sprang forward. there are
 situations which the heart of father or mother cannot be made to
 understand. prayed and supplicated in terms so moving, that even the
 officer was touched, and, although firm in his duty, kindly said,
 “my worthy friend, let beg of you to calm your apprehensions. your
 has probably neglected some prescribed form or attention in
 registering his cargo, and it is more than probable will be set at
 liberty directly has given the information required, whether
 touching the health of his crew, or the value of his freight.”
 
“what is the meaning of all this?” inquired caderousse, frowningly, of
 danglars, who had assumed an air of utter surprise.
 
0073m
 


“how can i tell you?” replied he; “i am, like yourself, utterly
 bewildered at all that is going on, and cannot in the least make out
 what it is about.” caderousse then looked around for fernand, but he
 had disappeared.
 
the scene of the previous night now came back to his mind with
 startling clearness. the painful catastrophe had just witnessed
 appeared effectually to have rent away the veil which the intoxication
 of the evening before had raised between himself and his memory.
 
“so, so,” said he, in hoarse and choking voice, to danglars, “this,
 then, i suppose, is part of the trick you were concerting yesterday?
 all i can say is, that if it be so, ’tis an ill turn, and well deserves
 to bring double evil on those who have projected it.”
 
“nonsense,” returned danglars, “i tell you again i have nothing
 whatever to do with it; besides, you know very well that i tore the
 paper to pieces.”
 
“no, you did not!” answered caderousse, “you merely threw it by—i saw
 it lying in corner.”
 
“hold your tongue, you fool!—what should you know about it?—why, you
 were drunk!”
 
“where is fernand?” inquired caderousse.
 
“how do i know?” replied danglars; “gone, as every prudent man ought to
 be, to look after his own affairs, most likely. never mind where is,
 let you and i go and see what is to be done for our poor friends.”
 
during this conversation, dantès, after having exchanged cheerful
 shake of the hand with all his sympathizing friends, had surrendered
 himself to the officer sent to arrest him, merely saying, “make
 yourselves quite easy, my good fellows, there is some little mistake to
 clear up, that’s all, depend upon it; and very likely i may not have to
 go so far as the prison to effect that.”
 
0075m
 


“oh, to be sure!” responded danglars, who had now approached the group,
 “nothing more than mistake, i feel quite certain.”
 
dantès descended the staircase, preceded by the magistrate, and
 followed by the soldiers. carriage awaited him at the door; got
 in, followed by two soldiers and the magistrate, and the vehicle drove
 off towards marseilles.
 
“adieu, adieu, dearest edmond!” cried mercédès, stretching out her arms
 to him from the balcony.
 
the prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of broken
 heart, and leaning from the coach called out, “good-bye, mercédès—we
 shall soon meet again!” then the vehicle disappeared round one of the
 turnings of fort saint nicholas.
 
“wait for here, all of you!” cried m. morrel; “i will take the first
 conveyance i find, and hurry to marseilles, whence i will bring you
 word how all is going on.”
 
“that’s right!” exclaimed multitude of voices, “go, and return as
 quickly as you can!”
 
this second departure was followed by long and fearful state of
 terrified silence on the part of those who were left behind. the old
 father and mercédès remained for some time apart, each absorbed in
 grief; but at length the two poor victims of the same blow raised their
 eyes, and with simultaneous burst of feeling rushed into each other’s
 arms.
 
meanwhile fernand made his appearance, poured out for himself glass
 of water with trembling hand; then hastily swallowing it, went to sit
 down at the first vacant place, and this was, by mere chance, placed
 next to the seat on which poor mercédès had fallen half fainting, when
 released from the warm and affectionate embrace of old dantès.
 instinctively fernand drew back his chair.
 
“he is the cause of all this misery—i am quite sure of it,” whispered
 caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off fernand, to danglars.
 
“i don’t think so,” answered the other; “he’s too stupid to imagine
 such scheme. i only hope the mischief will fall upon the head of
 whoever wrought it.”
 
“you don’t mention those who aided and abetted the deed,” said
 caderousse.
 
“surely,” answered danglars, “one cannot be held responsible for every
 chance arrow shot into the air.”
 
“you can, indeed, when the arrow lights point downward on somebody’s
 head.”
 
meantime the subject of the arrest was being canvassed in every
 different form.
 
“what think you, danglars,” said one of the party, turning towards him,
 “of this event?”
 
“why,” replied he, “i think it just possible dantès may have been
 detected with some trifling article on board ship considered here as
 contraband.”
 
“but how could have done so without your knowledge, danglars, since
 you are the ship’s supercargo?”
 
“why, as for that, i could only know what i was told respecting the
 merchandise with which the vessel was laden. i know she was loaded with
 cotton, and that she took in her freight at alexandria from pastret’s
 warehouse, and at smyrna from pascal’s; that is all i was obliged to
 know, and i beg i may not be asked for any further particulars.”
 
“now i recollect,” said the afflicted old father; “my poor boy told me
 yesterday had got small case of coffee, and another of tobacco for
 me!”
 
“there, you see,” exclaimed danglars. “now the mischief is out; depend
 upon it the custom-house people went rummaging about the ship in our
 absence, and discovered poor dantès’ hidden treasures.”
 
mercédès, however, paid heed to this explanation of her lover’s
 arrest. her grief, which she had hitherto tried to restrain, now burst
 out in violent fit of hysterical sobbing.
 
“come, come,” said the old man, “be comforted, my poor child; there is
 still hope!”
 
“hope!” repeated danglars.
 
“hope!” faintly murmured fernand, but the word seemed to die away on
 his pale agitated lips, and convulsive spasm passed over his
 countenance.
 
“good news! good news!” shouted forth one of the party stationed in the
 balcony on the lookout. “here comes m. morrel back. doubt, now, we
 shall hear that our friend is released!”
 
mercédès and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner and greeted him
 at the door. was very pale.
 
“what news?” exclaimed general burst of voices.
 
“alas, my friends,” replied m. morrel, with mournful shake of his
 head, “the thing has assumed more serious aspect than i expected.”
 
“oh, indeed—indeed, sir, is innocent!” sobbed forth mercédès.
 
“that i believe!” answered m. morrel; “but still is charged——”
 
“with what?” inquired the elder dantès.
 
“with being an agent of the bonapartist faction!” many of our readers
 may be able to recollect how formidable such an accusation became in
 the period at which our story is dated.
 
despairing cry escaped the pale lips of mercédès; the old man sank
 into chair.
 
“ah, danglars!” whispered caderousse, “you have deceived me—the trick
 you spoke of last night has been played; but i cannot suffer poor old
 man or an innocent girl to die of grief through your fault. i am
 determined to tell them all about it.”
 
“be silent, you simpleton!” cried danglars, grasping him by the arm,
 “or i will not answer even for your own safety. who can tell whether
 dantès be innocent or guilty? the vessel did touch at elba, where he
 quitted it, and passed whole day in the island. now, should any
 letters or other documents of compromising character be found upon
 him, will it not be taken for granted that all who uphold him are his
 accomplices?”
 
with the rapid instinct of selfishness, caderousse readily perceived
 the solidity of this mode of reasoning; gazed, doubtfully,
 wistfully, on danglars, and then caution supplanted generosity.
 
“suppose we wait while, and see what comes of it,” said he, casting a
 bewildered look on his companion.
 
“to be sure!” answered danglars. “let us wait, by all means. if be
 innocent, of course will be set at liberty; if guilty, why, it is no
 use involving ourselves in conspiracy.”
 
“let us go, then. i cannot stay here any longer.”
 
“with all my heart!” replied danglars, pleased to find the other so
 tractable. “let us take ourselves out of the way, and leave things for
 the present to take their course.”
 
after their departure, fernand, who had now again become the friend and
 protector of mercédès, led the girl to her home, while some friends of
 dantès conducted his father, nearly lifeless, to the allées meilhan.
 
the rumor of edmond’s arrest as bonapartist agent was not slow in
 circulating throughout the city.
 
“could you ever have credited such thing, my dear danglars?” asked m.
 morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaning fresh
 tidings of dantès, from m. villefort, the assistant procureur, he
 overtook his supercargo and caderousse. “could you have believed such a
 thing possible?”
 
“why, you know i told you,” replied danglars, “that i considered the
 circumstance of his having anchored at the island of elba as very
 suspicious circumstance.”
 
“and did you mention these suspicions to any person beside myself?”
 
0079m
 


“certainly not!” returned danglars. then added in low whisper, “you
 understand that, on account of your uncle, m. policar morrel, who
 served under the _other_ government, and who does not altogether
 conceal what thinks on the subject, you are strongly suspected of
 regretting the abdication of napoleon. i should have feared to injure
 both edmond and yourself, had i divulged my own apprehensions to a
 soul. i am too well aware that though subordinate, like myself, is
 bound to acquaint the shipowner with everything that occurs, there are
 many things ought most carefully to conceal from all else.”
 
“’tis well, danglars—’tis well!” replied m. morrel. “you are worthy
 fellow; and i had already thought of your interests in the event of
 poor edmond having become captain of the _pharaon_.”
 
“is it possible you were so kind?”
 
“yes, indeed; i had previously inquired of dantès what was his opinion
 of you, and if should have any reluctance to continue you in your
 post, for somehow i have perceived sort of coolness between you.”
 
“and what was his reply?”
 
“that certainly did think had given you offence in an affair
 which merely referred to without entering into particulars, but that
 whoever possessed the good opinion and confidence of the ship’s owners
 would have his preference also.”
 
“the hypocrite!” murmured danglars.
 
“poor dantès!” said caderousse. “no one can deny his being a
 noble-hearted young fellow.”
 
“but meanwhile,” continued m. morrel, “here is the _pharaon_ without a
 captain.”
 
“oh,” replied danglars, “since we cannot leave this port for the next
 three months, let us hope that ere the expiration of that period dantès
 will be set at liberty.”
 
“no doubt; but in the meantime?”
 
“i am entirely at your service, m. morrel,” answered danglars. “you
 know that i am as capable of managing ship as the most experienced
 captain in the service; and it will be so far advantageous to you to
 accept my services, that upon edmond’s release from prison further
 change will be requisite on board the _pharaon_ than for dantès and
 myself each to resume our respective posts.”
 
“thanks, danglars—that will smooth over all difficulties. i fully
 authorize you at once to assume the command of the _pharaon_, and look
 carefully to the unloading of her freight. private misfortunes must
 never be allowed to interfere with business.”
 
“be easy on that score, m. morrel; but do you think we shall be
 permitted to see our poor edmond?”
 
“i will let you know that directly i have seen m. villefort, whom i
 shall endeavor to interest in edmond’s favor. i am aware is a
 furious royalist; but, in spite of that, and of his being king’s
 attorney, is man like ourselves, and i fancy not bad sort of
 one.”
 
“perhaps not,” replied danglars; “but i hear that is ambitious, and
 that’s rather against him.”
 
“well, well,” returned m. morrel, “we shall see. but now hasten on
 board, i will join you there ere long.”
 
so saying, the worthy shipowner quitted the two allies, and proceeded
 in the direction of the palais justice.
 
0081m
 


“you see,” said danglars, addressing caderousse, “the turn things have
 taken. do you still feel any desire to stand up in his defence?”
 
“not the slightest, but yet it seems to shocking thing that mere
 joke should lead to such consequences.”
 
“but who perpetrated that joke, let ask? neither you nor myself, but
 fernand; you knew very well that i threw the paper into corner of the
 room—indeed, i fancied i had destroyed it.”
 
“oh, no,” replied caderousse, “that i can answer for, you did not. i
 only wish i could see it now as plainly as i saw it lying all crushed
 and crumpled in corner of the arbor.”
 
“well, then, if you did, depend upon it, fernand picked it up, and
 either copied it or caused it to be copied; perhaps, even, did not
 take the trouble of recopying it. and now i think of it, by heavens, he
 may have sent the letter itself! fortunately, for me, the handwriting
 was disguised.”
 
“then you were aware of dantès being engaged in conspiracy?”
 
“not i. as i before said, i thought the whole thing was joke, nothing
 more. it seems, however, that i have unconsciously stumbled upon the
 truth.”
 
“still,” argued caderousse, “i would give great deal if nothing of
 the kind had happened; or, at least, that i had had hand in it. you
 will see, danglars, that it will turn out an unlucky job for both of
 us.”
 
“nonsense! if any harm come of it, it should fall on the guilty person;
 and that, you know, is fernand. how can we be implicated in any way?
 all we have got to do is, to keep our own counsel, and remain perfectly
 quiet, not breathing word to any living soul; and you will see that
 the storm will pass away without in the least affecting us.”
 
“amen!” responded caderousse, waving his hand in token of adieu to
 danglars, and bending his steps towards the allées meilhan, moving
 his head to and fro, and muttering as went, after the manner of one
 whose mind was overcharged with one absorbing idea.
 
“so far, then,” said danglars, mentally, “all has gone as i would have
 it. i am, temporarily, commander of the _pharaon_, with the certainty
 of being permanently so, if that fool of caderousse can be persuaded
 to hold his tongue. my only fear is the chance of dantès being
 released. but, there, is in the hands of justice; and,” added he
 with smile, “she will take her own.” so saying, leaped into a
 boat, desiring to be rowed on board the _pharaon_, where m. morrel had
 agreed to meet him.
 


chapter 6. the deputy procureur du roi
 
in one of the aristocratic mansions built by puget in the rue du grand
 cours opposite the medusa fountain, second marriage feast was being
 celebrated, almost at the same hour with the nuptial repast given by
 dantès. in this case, however, although the occasion of the
 entertainment was similar, the company was strikingly dissimilar.
 instead of rude mixture of sailors, soldiers, and those belonging to
 the humblest grade of life, the present assembly was composed of the
 very flower of marseilles society,—magistrates who had resigned their
 office during the usurper’s reign; officers who had deserted from the
 imperial army and joined forces with condé; and younger members of
 families, brought up to hate and execrate the man whom five years of
 exile would convert into martyr, and fifteen of restoration elevate
 to the rank of god.
 
the guests were still at table, and the heated and energetic
 conversation that prevailed betrayed the violent and vindictive
 passions that then agitated each dweller of the south, where unhappily,
 for five centuries religious strife had long given increased bitterness
 to the violence of party feeling.
 
the emperor, now king of the petty island of elba, after having held
 sovereign sway over one-half of the world, counting as his subjects a
 small population of five or six thousand souls,—after having been
 accustomed to hear the “_vive napoléons_” of hundred and twenty
 millions of human beings, uttered in ten different languages,—was
 looked upon here as ruined man, separated forever from any fresh
 connection with france or claim to her throne.
 
the magistrates freely discussed their political views; the military
 part of the company talked unreservedly of moscow and leipsic, while
 the women commented on the divorce of josephine. it was not over the
 downfall of the man, but over the defeat of the napoleonic idea, that
 they rejoiced, and in this they foresaw for themselves the bright and
 cheering prospect of revivified political existence.
 
an old man, decorated with the cross of saint louis, now rose and
 proposed the health of king louis xviii. it was the marquis de
 saint-méran. this toast, recalling at once the patient exile of
 hartwell and the peace-loving king of france, excited universal
 enthusiasm; glasses were elevated in the air _à l’anglaise_, and the
 ladies, snatching their bouquets from their fair bosoms, strewed the
 table with their floral treasures. in word, an almost poetical fervor
 prevailed.
 
“ah,” said the marquise saint-méran, woman with stern,
 forbidding eye, though still noble and distinguished in appearance,
 despite her fifty years—“ah, these revolutionists, who have driven us
 from those very possessions they afterwards purchased for mere trifle
 during the reign of terror, would be compelled to own, were they here,
 that all true devotion was on our side, since we were content to follow
 the fortunes of falling monarch, while they, on the contrary, made
 their fortune by worshipping the rising sun; yes, yes, they could not
 help admitting that the king, for whom we sacrificed rank, wealth, and
 station was truly our ‘louis the well-beloved,’ while their wretched
 usurper has been, and ever will be, to them their evil genius, their
 ‘napoleon the accursed.’ am i not right, villefort?”
 
“i beg your pardon, madame. i really must pray you to excuse me, but—in
 truth—i was not attending to the conversation.”
 
“marquise, marquise!” interposed the old nobleman who had proposed the
 toast, “let the young people alone; let tell you, on one’s wedding
 day there are more agreeable subjects of conversation than dry
 politics.”
 
“never mind, dearest mother,” said young and lovely girl, with a
 profusion of light brown hair, and eyes that seemed to float in liquid
 crystal, “’tis all my fault for seizing upon m. villefort, so as to
 prevent his listening to what you said. but there—now take him—he is
 your own for as long as you like. m. villefort, i beg to remind you my
 mother speaks to you.”
 
“if the marquise will deign to repeat the words i but imperfectly
 caught, i shall be delighted to answer,” said m. villefort.
 
“never mind, renée,” replied the marquise, with look of tenderness
 that seemed out of keeping with her harsh dry features; but, however
 all other feelings may be withered in woman’s nature, there is always
 one bright smiling spot in the desert of her heart, and that is the
 shrine of maternal love. “i forgive you. what i was saying, villefort,
 was, that the bonapartists had not our sincerity, enthusiasm, or
 devotion.”
 
“they had, however, what supplied the place of those fine qualities,”
 replied the young man, “and that was fanaticism. napoleon is the
 mahomet of the west, and is worshipped by his commonplace but ambitious
 followers, not only as leader and lawgiver, but also as the
 personification of equality.”
 
“he!” cried the marquise: “napoleon the type of equality! for mercy’s
 sake, then, what would you call robespierre? come, come, do not strip
 the latter of his just rights to bestow them on the corsican, who, to
 my mind, has usurped quite enough.”
 
0085m
 


“nay, madame; i would place each of these heroes on his right
 pedestal—that of robespierre on his scaffold in the place louis quinze;
 that of napoleon on the column of the place vendôme. the only
 difference consists in the opposite character of the equality advocated
 by these two men; one is the equality that elevates, the other is the
 equality that degrades; one brings king within reach of the
 guillotine, the other elevates the people to level with the throne.
 observe,” said villefort, smiling, “i do not mean to deny that both
 these men were revolutionary scoundrels, and that the 9th thermidor and
 the 4th of april, in the year 1814, were lucky days for france, worthy
 of being gratefully remembered by every friend to monarchy and civil
 order; and that explains how it comes to pass that, fallen, as i trust
 is forever, napoleon has still retained train of parasitical
 satellites. still, marquise, it has been so with other
 usurpers—cromwell, for instance, who was not half so bad as napoleon,
 had his partisans and advocates.”
 
“do you know, villefort, that you are talking in most dreadfully
 revolutionary strain? but i excuse it, it is impossible to expect the
 of girondin to be free from small spice of the old leaven.” a
 deep crimson suffused the countenance of villefort.
 
“’tis true, madame,” answered he, “that my father was girondin, but
 was not among the number of those who voted for the king’s death; he
 was an equal sufferer with yourself during the reign of terror, and had
 well-nigh lost his head on the same scaffold on which your father
 perished.”
 
“true,” replied the marquise, without wincing in the slightest degree
 at the tragic remembrance thus called up; “but bear in mind, if you
 please, that our respective parents underwent persecution and
 proscription from diametrically opposite principles; in proof of which
 i may remark, that while my family remained among the staunchest
 adherents of the exiled princes, your father lost time in joining
 the new government; and that while the citizen noirtier was girondin,
 the count noirtier became senator.”
 
“dear mother,” interposed renée, “you know very well it was agreed that
 all these disagreeable reminiscences should forever be laid aside.”
 
“suffer me, also, madame,” replied villefort, “to add my earnest
 request to mademoiselle saint-méran’s, that you will kindly allow
 the veil of oblivion to cover and conceal the past. what avails
 recrimination over matters wholly past recall? for my own part, i have
 laid aside even the name of my father, and altogether disown his
 political principles. was—nay, probably may still be—a bonapartist,
 and is called noirtier; i, on the contrary, am staunch royalist, and
 style myself villefort. let what may remain of revolutionary sap
 exhaust itself and die away with the old trunk, and condescend only to
 regard the young shoot which has started up at distance from the
 parent tree, without having the power, any more than the wish, to
 separate entirely from the stock from which it sprung.”
 
“bravo, villefort!” cried the marquis; “excellently well said! come,
 now, i have hopes of obtaining what i have been for years endeavoring
 to persuade the marquise to promise; namely, perfect amnesty and
 forgetfulness of the past.”
 
“with all my heart,” replied the marquise; “let the past be forever
 forgotten. i promise you it affords _me_ as little pleasure to revive
 it as it does you. all i ask is, that villefort will be firm and
 inflexible for the future in his political principles. remember, also,
 villefort, that we have pledged ourselves to his majesty for your
 fealty and strict loyalty, and that at our recommendation the king
 consented to forget the past, as i do” (and here she extended to him
 her hand)—“as i now do at your entreaty. but bear in mind, that should
 there fall in your way anyone guilty of conspiring against the
 government, you will be so much the more bound to visit the offence
 with rigorous punishment, as it is known you belong to suspected
 family.”
 
“alas, madame,” returned villefort, “my profession, as well as the
 times in which we live, compels to be severe. i have already
 successfully conducted several public prosecutions, and brought the
 offenders to merited punishment. but we have not done with the thing
 yet.”
 
0087m
 


“do you, indeed, think so?” inquired the marquise.
 
“i am, at least, fearful of it. napoleon, in the island of elba, is too
 near france, and his proximity keeps up the hopes of his partisans.
 marseilles is filled with half-pay officers, who are daily, under one
 frivolous pretext or other, getting up quarrels with the royalists;
 from hence arise continual and fatal duels among the higher classes of
 persons, and assassinations in the lower.”
 
“you have heard, perhaps,” said the comte salvieux, one of m. de
 saint-méran’s oldest friends, and chamberlain to the comte d’artois,
 “that the holy alliance purpose removing him from thence?”
 
“yes; they were talking about it when we left paris,” said m. de
 saint-méran; “and where is it decided to transfer him?”
 
“to saint helena.”
 
“for heaven’s sake, where is that?” asked the marquise.
 
“an island situated on the other side of the equator, at least two
 thousand leagues from here,” replied the count.
 
“so much the better. as villefort observes, it is great act of folly
 to have left such man between corsica, where was born, and naples,
 of which his brother-in-law is king, and face to face with italy, the
 sovereignty of which coveted for his son.”
 
“unfortunately,” said villefort, “there are the treaties of 1814, and
 we cannot molest napoleon without breaking those compacts.”
 
“oh, well, we shall find some way out of it,” responded m. salvieux.
 “there wasn’t any trouble over treaties when it was question of
 shooting the poor duc d’enghien.”
 
“well,” said the marquise, “it seems probable that, by the aid of the
 holy alliance, we shall be rid of napoleon; and we must trust to the
 vigilance of m. villefort to purify marseilles of his partisans. the
 king is either king or king; if be acknowledged as sovereign of
 france, should be upheld in peace and tranquillity; and this can
 best be effected by employing the most inflexible agents to put down
 every attempt at conspiracy—’tis the best and surest means of
 preventing mischief.”
 
“unfortunately, madame,” answered villefort, “the strong arm of the law
 is not called upon to interfere until the evil has taken place.”
 
“then all has got to do is to endeavor to repair it.”
 
“nay, madame, the law is frequently powerless to effect this; all it
 can do is to avenge the wrong done.”
 
“oh, m. villefort,” cried beautiful young creature, daughter to
 the comte salvieux, and the cherished friend of mademoiselle de
 saint-méran, “do try and get up some famous trial while we are at
 marseilles. i never was in law-court; i am told it is so very
 amusing!”
 
“amusing, certainly,” replied the young man, “inasmuch as, instead of
 shedding tears as at the fictitious tale of woe produced at theatre,
 you behold in law-court case of real and genuine distress—a drama
 of life. the prisoner whom you there see pale, agitated, and alarmed,
 instead of—as is the case when curtain falls on tragedy—going home
 to sup peacefully with his family, and then retiring to rest, that he
 may recommence his mimic woes on the morrow,—is removed from your sight
 merely to be reconducted to his prison and delivered up to the
 executioner. i leave you to judge how far your nerves are calculated to
 bear you through such scene. of this, however, be assured, that
 should any favorable opportunity present itself, i will not fail to
 offer you the choice of being present.”
 
“for shame, m. villefort!” said renée, becoming quite pale; “don’t
 you see how you are frightening us?—and yet you laugh.”
 
“what would you have? ’tis like duel. i have already recorded
 sentence of death, five or six times, against the movers of political
 conspiracies, and who can say how many daggers may be ready sharpened,
 and only waiting favorable opportunity to be buried in my heart?”
 
“gracious heavens, m. villefort,” said renée, becoming more and more
 terrified; “you surely are not in earnest.”
 
“indeed i am,” replied the young magistrate with smile; “and in the
 interesting trial that young lady is anxious to witness, the case would
 only be still more aggravated. suppose, for instance, the prisoner, as
 is more than probable, to have served under napoleon—well, can you
 expect for an instant, that one accustomed, at the word of his
 commander, to rush fearlessly on the very bayonets of his foe, will
 scruple more to drive stiletto into the heart of one knows to be
 his personal enemy, than to slaughter his fellow-creatures, merely
 because bidden to do so by one is bound to obey? besides, one
 requires the excitement of being hateful in the eyes of the accused, in
 order to lash one’s self into state of sufficient vehemence and
 power. i would not choose to see the man against whom i pleaded smile,
 as though in mockery of my words. no; my pride is to see the accused
 pale, agitated, and as though beaten out of all composure by the fire
 of my eloquence.” renée uttered smothered exclamation.
 
“bravo!” cried one of the guests; “that is what i call talking to some
 purpose.”
 
“just the person we require at time like the present,” said second.
 
“what splendid business that last case of yours was, my dear
 villefort!” remarked third; “i mean the trial of the man for
 murdering his father. upon my word, you killed him ere the executioner
 had laid his hand upon him.”
 
“oh, as for parricides, and such dreadful people as that,” interposed
 renée, “it matters very little what is done to them; but as regards
 poor unfortunate creatures whose only crime consists in having mixed
 themselves up in political intrigues——”
 
“why, that is the very worst offence they could possibly commit; for,
 don’t you see, renée, the king is the father of his people, and who
 shall plot or contrive aught against the life and safety of the parent
 of thirty-two millions of souls, is parricide upon fearfully great
 scale?”
 
“i don’t know anything about that,” replied renée; “but, m. de
 villefort, you have promised me—have you not?—always to show mercy to
 those i plead for.”
 
“make yourself quite easy on that point,” answered villefort, with one
 of his sweetest smiles; “you and i will always consult upon our
 verdicts.”
 
“my love,” said the marquise, “attend to your doves, your lap-dogs, and
 embroidery, but do not meddle with what you do not understand. nowadays
 the military profession is in abeyance and the magisterial robe is the
 badge of honor. there is wise latin proverb that is very much in
 point.”
 
“_cedant arma togæ_,” said villefort with bow.
 
“i cannot speak latin,” responded the marquise.
 
“well,” said renée, “i cannot help regretting you had not chosen some
 other profession than your own—a physician, for instance. do you know i
 always felt shudder at the idea of even _destroying_ angel?”
 
“dear, good renée,” whispered villefort, as gazed with unutterable
 tenderness on the lovely speaker.
 
“let us hope, my child,” cried the marquis, “that m. villefort may
 prove the moral and political physician of this province; if so, he
 will have achieved noble work.”
 
“and one which will go far to efface the recollection of his father’s
 conduct,” added the incorrigible marquise.
 
“madame,” replied villefort, with mournful smile, “i have already had
 the honor to observe that my father has—at least, i hope so—abjured his
 past errors, and that is, at the present moment, firm and zealous
 friend to religion and order—a better royalist, possibly, than his son;
 for has to atone for past dereliction, while i have other impulse
 than warm, decided preference and conviction.” having made this
 well-turned speech, villefort looked carefully around to mark the
 effect of his oratory, much as would have done had been
 addressing the bench in open court.
 
“do you know, my dear villefort,” cried the comte salvieux, “that is
 exactly what i myself said the other day at the tuileries, when
 questioned by his majesty’s principal chamberlain touching the
 singularity of an alliance between the of girondin and the
 daughter of an officer of the duc condé; and i assure you seemed
 fully to comprehend that this mode of reconciling political differences
 was based upon sound and excellent principles. then the king, who,
 without our suspecting it, had overheard our conversation, interrupted
 us by saying, ‘villefort’—observe that the king did not pronounce the
 word noirtier, but, on the contrary, placed considerable emphasis on
 that of villefort—‘villefort,’ said his majesty, ‘is young man of
 great judgment and discretion, who will be sure to make figure in his
 profession; i like him much, and it gave great pleasure to hear that
 was about to become the son-in-law of the marquis and marquise de
 saint-méran. i should myself have recommended the match, had not the
 noble marquis anticipated my wishes by requesting my consent to it.’”
 
“is it possible the king could have condescended so far as to express
 himself so favorably of me?” asked the enraptured villefort.
 
“i give you his very words; and if the marquis chooses to be candid, he
 will confess that they perfectly agree with what his majesty said to
 him, when went six months ago to consult him upon the subject of
 your espousing his daughter.”
 
0091m
 


“that is true,” answered the marquis.
 
“how much do i owe this gracious prince! what is there i would not do
 to evince my earnest gratitude!”
 
“that is right,” cried the marquise. “i love to see you thus. now,
 then, were conspirator to fall into your hands, would be most
 welcome.”
 
“for my part, dear mother,” interposed renée, “i trust your wishes will
 not prosper, and that providence will only permit petty offenders, poor
 debtors, and miserable cheats to fall into m. villefort’s
 hands,—then i shall be contented.”
 
“just the same as though you prayed that physician might only be
 called upon to prescribe for headaches, measles, and the stings of
 wasps, or any other slight affection of the epidermis. if you wish to
 see the king’s attorney, you must desire for some of those
 violent and dangerous diseases from the cure of which so much honor
 redounds to the physician.”
 
at this moment, and as though the utterance of villefort’s wish had
 sufficed to effect its accomplishment, servant entered the room, and
 whispered few words in his ear. villefort immediately rose from table
 and quitted the room upon the plea of urgent business; soon,
 however, returned, his whole face beaming with delight. renée regarded
 him with fond affection; and certainly his handsome features, lit up as
 they then were with more than usual fire and animation, seemed formed
 to excite the innocent admiration with which she gazed on her graceful
 and intelligent lover.
 
“you were wishing just now,” said villefort, addressing her, “that i
 were doctor instead of lawyer. well, i at least resemble the
 disciples of esculapius in one thing [people spoke in this style in
 1815], that of not being able to call day my own, not even that of my
 betrothal.”
 
“and wherefore were you called away just now?” asked mademoiselle de
 saint-méran, with an air of deep interest.
 
“for very serious matter, which bids fair to make work for the
 executioner.”
 
“how dreadful!” exclaimed renée, turning pale.
 
“is it possible?” burst simultaneously from all who were near enough to
 the magistrate to hear his words.
 
“why, if my information prove correct, sort of bonapartist conspiracy
 has just been discovered.”
 
“can i believe my ears?” cried the marquise.
 
“i will read you the letter containing the accusation, at least,” said
 villefort:
 
“‘the king’s attorney is informed by friend to the throne and the
 religious institutions of his country, that one named edmond dantès,
 mate of the ship _pharaon_, this day arrived from smyrna, after having
 touched at naples and porto-ferrajo, has been the bearer of letter
 from murat to the usurper, and again taken charge of another letter
 from the usurper to the bonapartist club in paris. ample corroboration
 of this statement may be obtained by arresting the above-mentioned
 edmond dantès, who either carries the letter for paris about with him,
 or has it at his father’s abode. should it not be found in the
 possession of father or son, then it will assuredly be discovered in
 the cabin belonging to the said dantès on board the _pharaon_.’”
 
“but,” said renée, “this letter, which, after all, is but an anonymous
 scrawl, is not even addressed to you, but to the king’s attorney.”
 
0093m
 


“true; but that gentleman being absent, his secretary, by his orders,
 opened his letters; thinking this one of importance, sent for me,
 but not finding me, took upon himself to give the necessary orders for
 arresting the accused party.”
 
“then the guilty person is absolutely in custody?” said the marquise.
 
“nay, dear mother, say the accused person. you know we cannot yet
 pronounce him guilty.”
 
“he is in safe custody,” answered villefort; “and rely upon it, if the
 letter is found, will not be likely to be trusted abroad again,
 unless goes forth under the especial protection of the headsman.”
 
“and where is the unfortunate being?” asked renée.
 
“he is at my house.”
 
“come, come, my friend,” interrupted the marquise, “do not neglect your
 duty to linger with us. you are the king’s servant, and must go
 wherever that service calls you.”
 
“oh, villefort!” cried renée, clasping her hands, and looking towards
 her lover with piteous earnestness, “be merciful on this the day of our
 betrothal.”
 
the young man passed round to the side of the table where the fair
 pleader sat, and leaning over her chair said tenderly:
 
“to give you pleasure, my sweet renée, i promise to show all the lenity
 in my power; but if the charges brought against this bonapartist hero
 prove correct, why, then, you really must give leave to order his
 head to be cut off.”
 
renée shuddered at the word _cut_, for the growth in question had a
 head.
 
“never mind that foolish girl, villefort,” said the marquise. “she will
 soon get over these things.” so saying, madame saint-méran extended
 her dry bony hand to villefort, who, while imprinting son-in-law’s
 respectful salute on it, looked at renée, as much as to say, “i must
 try and fancy ’tis your dear hand i kiss, as it should have been.”
 
“these are mournful auspices to accompany betrothal,” sighed poor
 renée.
 
“upon my word, child!” exclaimed the angry marquise, “your folly
 exceeds all bounds. i should be glad to know what connection there can
 possibly be between your sickly sentimentality and the affairs of the
 state!”
 
“oh, mother!” murmured renée.
 
“nay, madame, i pray you pardon this little traitor. i promise you that
 to make up for her want of loyalty, i will be most inflexibly severe;”
 then casting an expressive glance at his betrothed, which seemed to
 say, “fear not, for your dear sake my justice shall be tempered with
 mercy,” and receiving sweet and approving smile in return, villefort
 departed with paradise in his heart.
 


chapter 7. the examination
 
sooner had villefort left the salon, than assumed the grave air
 of man who holds the balance of life and death in his hands. now, in
 spite of the nobility of his countenance, the command of which, like a
 finished actor, had carefully studied before the glass, it was by no
 means easy for him to assume an air of judicial severity. except the
 recollection of the line of politics his father had adopted, and which
 might interfere, unless acted with the greatest prudence, with his
 own career, gérard villefort was as happy as man could be. already
 rich, held high official situation, though only twenty-seven. he
 was about to marry young and charming woman, whom loved, not
 passionately, but reasonably, as became deputy attorney of the king;
 and besides her personal attractions, which were very great,
 mademoiselle saint-méran’s family possessed considerable political
 influence, which they would, of course, exert in his favor. the dowry
 of his wife amounted to fifty thousand crowns, and had, besides, the
 prospect of seeing her fortune increased to half million at her
 father’s death. these considerations naturally gave villefort feeling
 of such complete felicity that his mind was fairly dazzled in its
 contemplation.
 
at the door met the commissary of police, who was waiting for him.
 the sight of this officer recalled villefort from the third heaven to
 earth; composed his face, as we have before described, and said, “i
 have read the letter, sir, and you have acted rightly in arresting this
 man; now inform what you have discovered concerning him and the
 conspiracy.”
 
“we know nothing as yet of the conspiracy, monsieur; all the papers
 found have been sealed up and placed on your desk. the prisoner himself
 is named edmond dantès, mate on board the three-master the _pharaon_,
 trading in cotton with alexandria and smyrna, and belonging to morrel &
 son, of marseilles.”
 
“before entered the merchant service, had ever served in the
 marines?”
 
“oh, no, monsieur, is very young.”
 
“how old?”
 
“nineteen or twenty at the most.”
 
at this moment, and as villefort had arrived at the corner of the rue
 des conseils, man, who seemed to have been waiting for him,
 approached; it was m. morrel.
 
“ah, m. villefort,” cried he, “i am delighted to see you. some of
 your people have committed the strangest mistake—they have just
 arrested edmond dantès, mate of my vessel.”
 
“i know it, monsieur,” replied villefort, “and i am now going to
 examine him.”
 
“oh,” said morrel, carried away by his friendship, “you do not know
 him, and i do. is the most estimable, the most trustworthy creature
 in the world, and i will venture to say, there is not better seaman
 in all the merchant service. oh, m. villefort, i beseech your
 indulgence for him.”
 
villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocratic party at
 marseilles, morrel to the plebeian; the first was royalist, the other
 suspected of bonapartism. villefort looked disdainfully at morrel, and
 replied coldly:
 
“you are aware, monsieur, that man may be estimable and trustworthy
 in private life, and the best seaman in the merchant service, and yet
 be, politically speaking, great criminal. is it not true?”
 
the magistrate laid emphasis on these words, as if wished to apply
 them to the owner himself, while his eyes seemed to plunge into the
 heart of one who, interceding for another, had himself need of
 indulgence. morrel reddened, for his own conscience was not quite clear
 on politics; besides, what dantès had told him of his interview with
 the grand-marshal, and what the emperor had said to him, embarrassed
 him. replied, however, in tone of deep interest:
 
“i entreat you, m. villefort, be, as you always are, kind and
 equitable, and give him back to us soon.” this _give us_ sounded
 revolutionary in the deputy’s ears.
 
“ah, ah,” murmured he, “is dantès then member of some carbonari
 society, that his protector thus employs the collective form? was,
 if i recollect, arrested in tavern, in company with great many
 others.” then added, “monsieur, you may rest assured i shall perform
 my duty impartially, and that if be innocent you shall not have
 appealed to in vain; should he, however, be guilty, in this present
 epoch, impunity would furnish dangerous example, and i must do my
 duty.”
 
0097m
 


as had now arrived at the door of his own house, which adjoined the
 palais justice, entered, after having, coldly saluted the
 shipowner, who stood, as if petrified, on the spot where villefort had
 left him. the antechamber was full of police agents and gendarmes, in
 the midst of whom, carefully watched, but calm and smiling, stood the
 prisoner. villefort traversed the antechamber, cast side glance at
 dantès, and taking packet which gendarme offered him, disappeared,
 saying, “bring in the prisoner.”
 
rapid as had been villefort’s glance, it had served to give him an idea
 of the man was about to interrogate. had recognized intelligence
 in the high forehead, courage in the dark eye and bent brow, and
 frankness in the thick lips that showed set of pearly teeth.
 villefort’s first impression was favorable; but had been so often
 warned to mistrust first impulses, that applied the maxim to the
 impression, forgetting the difference between the two words. he
 stifled, therefore, the feelings of compassion that were rising,
 composed his features, and sat down, grim and sombre, at his desk. an
 instant after dantès entered. was pale, but calm and collected, and
 saluting his judge with easy politeness, looked round for seat, as if
 had been in m. morrel’s salon. it was then that encountered for
 the first time villefort’s look,—that look peculiar to the magistrate,
 who, while seeming to read the thoughts of others, betrays nothing of
 his own.
 
“who and what are you?” demanded villefort, turning over pile of
 papers, containing information relative to the prisoner, that police
 agent had given to him on his entry, and that, already, in an hour’s
 time, had swelled to voluminous proportions, thanks to the corrupt
 espionage of which “the accused” is always made the victim.
 
“my name is edmond dantès,” replied the young man calmly; “i am mate of
 the _pharaon_, belonging to messrs. morrel & son.”
 
“your age?” continued villefort.
 
“nineteen,” returned dantès.
 
“what were you doing at the moment you were arrested?”
 
“i was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur,” said the young man,
 his voice slightly tremulous, so great was the contrast between that
 happy moment and the painful ceremony was now undergoing; so great
 was the contrast between the sombre aspect of m. villefort and the
 radiant face of mercédès.
 
“you were at the festival of your marriage?” said the deputy,
 shuddering in spite of himself.
 
“yes, monsieur; i am on the point of marrying young girl i have been
 attached to for three years.” villefort, impassive as was, was
 struck with this coincidence; and the tremulous voice of dantès,
 surprised in the midst of his happiness, struck sympathetic chord in
 his own bosom—he also was on the point of being married, and was
 summoned from his own happiness to destroy that of another. “this
 philosophic reflection,” thought he, “will make great sensation at m.
 saint-méran’s;” and arranged mentally, while dantès awaited
 further questions, the antithesis by which orators often create a
 reputation for eloquence. when this speech was arranged, villefort
 turned to dantès.
 
0099m
 


“go on, sir,” said he.
 
“what would you have say?”
 
“give all the information in your power.”
 
“tell on which point you desire information, and i will tell all i
 know; only,” added he, with smile, “i warn you i know very little.”
 
“have you served under the usurper?”
 
“i was about to be mustered into the royal marines when fell.”
 
“it is reported your political opinions are extreme,” said villefort,
 who had never heard anything of the kind, but was not sorry to make
 this inquiry, as if it were an accusation.
 
“my political opinions!” replied dantès. “alas, sir, i never had any
 opinions. i am hardly nineteen; i know nothing; i have part to play.
 if i obtain the situation i desire, i shall owe it to m. morrel. thus
 all my opinions—i will not say public, but private—are confined to
 these three sentiments,—i love my father, i respect m. morrel, and i
 adore mercédès. this, sir, is all i can tell you, and you see how
 uninteresting it is.” as dantès spoke, villefort gazed at his ingenuous
 and open countenance, and recollected the words of renée, who, without
 knowing who the culprit was, had besought his indulgence for him. with
 the deputy’s knowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young man
 uttered convinced him more and more of his innocence. this lad, for he
 was scarcely man,—simple, natural, eloquent with that eloquence of
 the heart never found when sought for; full of affection for everybody,
 because was happy, and because happiness renders even the wicked
 good—extended his affection even to his judge, spite of villefort’s
 severe look and stern accent. dantès seemed full of kindness.
 
_“pardieu!”_ said villefort, “he is noble fellow. i hope i shall gain
 renée’s favor easily by obeying the first command she ever imposed on
 me. i shall have at least pressure of the hand in public, and sweet
 kiss in private.” full of this idea, villefort’s face became so joyous,
 that when turned to dantès, the latter, who had watched the change
 on his physiognomy, was smiling also.
 
“sir,” said villefort, “have you any enemies, at least, that you know.”
 
“i have enemies?” replied dantès; “my position is not sufficiently
 elevated for that. as for my disposition, that is, perhaps, somewhat
 too hasty; but i have striven to repress it. i have had ten or twelve
 sailors under me, and if you question them, they will tell you that
 they love and respect me, not as father, for i am too young, but as
 an elder brother.”
 
“but you may have excited jealousy. you are about to become captain at
 nineteen—an elevated post; you are about to marry pretty girl, who
 loves you; and these two pieces of good fortune may have excited the
 envy of someone.”
 
“you are right; you know men better than i do, and what you say may
 possibly be the case, i confess; but if such persons are among my
 acquaintances i prefer not to know it, because then i should be forced
 to hate them.”
 
“you are wrong; you should always strive to see clearly around you. you
 seem worthy young man; i will depart from the strict line of my duty
 to aid you in discovering the author of this accusation. here is the
 paper; do you know the writing?” as spoke, villefort drew the letter
 from his pocket, and presented it to dantès. dantès read it. cloud
 passed over his brow as said:
 
“no, monsieur, i do not know the writing, and yet it is tolerably
 plain. whoever did it writes well. i am very fortunate,” added he,
 looking gratefully at villefort, “to be examined by such man as you;
 for this envious person is real enemy.” and by the rapid glance that
 the young man’s eyes shot forth, villefort saw how much energy lay hid
 beneath this mildness.
 
“now,” said the deputy, “answer frankly, not as prisoner to a
 judge, but as one man to another who takes an interest in him, what
 truth is there in the accusation contained in this anonymous letter?”
 and villefort threw disdainfully on his desk the letter dantès had just
 given back to him.
 
“none at all. i will tell you the real facts. i swear by my honor as a
 sailor, by my love for mercédès, by the life of my father——”
 
“speak, monsieur,” said villefort. then, internally, “if renée could
 see me, i hope she would be satisfied, and would longer call a
 decapitator.”
 
“well, when we quitted naples, captain leclere was attacked with a
 brain fever. as we had doctor on board, and was so anxious to
 arrive at elba, that would not touch at any other port, his disorder
 rose to such height, that at the end of the third day, feeling was
 dying, called to him. ‘my dear dantès,’ said he, ‘swear to
 perform what i am going to tell you, for it is matter of the deepest
 importance.’
 
“‘i swear, captain,’ replied i.
 
“‘well, as after my death the command devolves on you as mate, assume
 the command, and bear up for the island of elba, disembark at
 porto-ferrajo, ask for the grand-marshal, give him this letter—perhaps
 they will give you another letter, and charge you with commission.
 you will accomplish what i was to have done, and derive all the honor
 and profit from it.’
 
“‘i will do it, captain; but perhaps i shall not be admitted to the
 grand-marshal’s presence as easily as you expect?’
 
“‘here is ring that will obtain audience of him, and remove every
 difficulty,’ said the captain. at these words gave ring. it was
 time—two hours after was delirious; the next day died.”
 
“and what did you do then?”
 
“what i ought to have done, and what everyone would have done in my
 place. everywhere the last requests of dying man are sacred; but with
 sailor the last requests of his superior are commands. i sailed for
 the island of elba, where i arrived the next day; i ordered everybody
 to remain on board, and went on shore alone. as i had expected, i found
 some difficulty in obtaining access to the grand-marshal; but i sent
 the ring i had received from the captain to him, and was instantly
 admitted. questioned concerning captain leclere’s death; and, as
 the latter had told me, gave letter to carry on to person in
 paris. i undertook it because it was what my captain had bade do. i
 landed here, regulated the affairs of the vessel, and hastened to visit
 my affianced bride, whom i found more lovely than ever. thanks to m.
 morrel, all the forms were got over; in word i was, as i told you, at
 my marriage feast; and i should have been married in an hour, and
 tomorrow i intended to start for paris, had i not been arrested on this
 charge which you as well as i now see to be unjust.”
 
“ah,” said villefort, “this seems to the truth. if you have been
 culpable, it was imprudence, and this imprudence was in obedience to
 the orders of your captain. give up this letter you have brought from
 elba, and pass your word you will appear should you be required, and go
 and rejoin your friends.
 
“i am free, then, sir?” cried dantès joyfully.
 
“yes; but first give this letter.”
 
“you have it already, for it was taken from with some others which i
 see in that packet.”
 
“stop moment,” said the deputy, as dantès took his hat and gloves.
 “to whom is it addressed?”
 
_“to monsieur noirtier, rue coq-héron, paris.”_ had thunderbolt
 fallen into the room, villefort could not have been more stupefied. he
 sank into his seat, and hastily turning over the packet, drew forth the
 fatal letter, at which glanced with an expression of terror.
 
“m. noirtier, rue coq-héron, no. 13,” murmured he, growing still paler.
 
“yes,” said dantès; “do you know him?”
 
“no,” replied villefort; “a faithful servant of the king does not know
 conspirators.”
 
0103m
 


“it is conspiracy, then?” asked dantès, who after believing himself
 free, now began to feel tenfold alarm. “i have, however, already told
 you, sir, i was entirely ignorant of the contents of the letter.”
 
“yes; but you knew the name of the person to whom it was addressed,”
 said villefort.
 
“i was forced to read the address to know to whom to give it.”
 
“have you shown this letter to anyone?” asked villefort, becoming still
 more pale.
 
“to one, on my honor.”
 
“everybody is ignorant that you are the bearer of letter from the
 island of elba, and addressed to m. noirtier?”
 
“everybody, except the person who gave it to me.”
 
“and that was too much, far too much,” murmured villefort. villefort’s
 brow darkened more and more, his white lips and clenched teeth filled
 dantès with apprehension. after reading the letter, villefort covered
 his face with his hands.
 
“oh,” said dantès timidly, “what is the matter?” villefort made no
 answer, but raised his head at the expiration of few seconds, and
 again perused the letter.
 
“and you say that you are ignorant of the contents of this letter?”
 
“i give you my word of honor, sir,” said dantès; “but what is the
 matter? you are ill—shall i ring for assistance?—shall i call?”
 
“no,” said villefort, rising hastily; “stay where you are. it is for me
 to give orders here, and not you.”
 
“monsieur,” replied dantès proudly, “it was only to summon assistance
 for you.”
 
“i want none; it was temporary indisposition. attend to yourself;
 answer me.” dantès waited, expecting question, but in vain. villefort
 fell back on his chair, passed his hand over his brow, moist with
 perspiration, and, for the third time, read the letter.
 
“oh, if knows the contents of this!” murmured he, “and that noirtier
 is the father of villefort, i am lost!” and fixed his eyes upon
 edmond as if would have penetrated his thoughts.
 
“oh, it is impossible to doubt it,” cried he, suddenly.
 
“in heaven’s name!” cried the unhappy young man, “if you doubt me,
 question me; i will answer you.” villefort made violent effort, and
 in tone strove to render firm:
 
“sir,” said he, “i am longer able, as i had hoped, to restore you
 immediately to liberty; before doing so, i must consult the trial
 justice; what my own feeling is you already know.”
 
“oh, monsieur,” cried dantès, “you have been rather friend than a
 judge.”
 
0105m
 


“well, i must detain you some time longer, but i will strive to make it
 as short as possible. the principal charge against you is this letter,
 and you see——” villefort approached the fire, cast it in, and waited
 until it was entirely consumed.
 
“you see, i destroy it?”
 
“oh,” exclaimed dantès, “you are goodness itself.”
 
“listen,” continued villefort; “you can now have confidence in after
 what i have done.”
 
“oh, command, and i will obey.”
 
“listen; this is not command, but advice i give you.”
 
“speak, and i will follow your advice.”
 
“i shall detain you until this evening in the palais justice. should
 anyone else interrogate you, say to him what you have said to me, but
 do not breathe word of this letter.”
 
“i promise.” it was villefort who seemed to entreat, and the prisoner
 who reassured him.
 
“you see,” continued he, glancing toward the grate, where fragments of
 burnt paper fluttered in the flames, “the letter is destroyed; you and
 i alone know of its existence; should you, therefore, be questioned,
 deny all knowledge of it—deny it boldly, and you are saved.”
 
“be satisfied; i will deny it.”
 
“it was the only letter you had?”
 
“it was.”
 
“swear it.”
 
“i swear it.”
 
villefort rang. police agent entered. villefort whispered some words
 in his ear, to which the officer replied by motion of his head.
 
“follow him,” said villefort to dantès. dantès saluted villefort and
 retired. hardly had the door closed when villefort threw himself
 half-fainting into chair.
 
“alas, alas,” murmured he, “if the procureur himself had been at
 marseilles i should have been ruined. this accursed letter would have
 destroyed all my hopes. oh, my father, must your past career always
 interfere with my successes?” suddenly light passed over his face, a
 smile played round his set mouth, and his haggard eyes were fixed in
 thought.
 
“this will do,” said he, “and from this letter, which might have ruined
 me, i will make my fortune. now to the work i have in hand.” and after
 having assured himself that the prisoner was gone, the deputy procureur
 hastened to the house of his betrothed.
 
0107m
 



chapter 8. the château d’if
 
the commissary of police, as traversed the antechamber, made sign
 to two gendarmes, who placed themselves one on dantès’ right and the
 other on his left. door that communicated with the palais justice
 was opened, and they went through long range of gloomy corridors,
 whose appearance might have made even the boldest shudder. the palais
 justice communicated with the prison,—a sombre edifice, that from
 its grated windows looks on the clock-tower of the accoules. after
 numberless windings, dantès saw door with an iron wicket. the
 commissary took up an iron mallet and knocked thrice, every blow
 seeming to dantès as if struck on his heart. the door opened, the two
 gendarmes gently pushed him forward, and the door closed with loud
 sound behind him. the air inhaled was longer pure, but thick and
 mephitic,—he was in prison.
 
was conducted to tolerably neat chamber, but grated and barred,
 and its appearance, therefore, did not greatly alarm him; besides, the
 words of villefort, who seemed to interest himself so much, resounded
 still in his ears like promise of freedom. it was four o’clock when
 dantès was placed in this chamber. it was, as we have said, the 1st of
 march, and the prisoner was soon buried in darkness. the obscurity
 augmented the acuteness of his hearing; at the slightest sound rose
 and hastened to the door, convinced they were about to liberate him,
 but the sound died away, and dantès sank again into his seat. at last,
 about ten o’clock, and just as dantès began to despair, steps were
 heard in the corridor, key turned in the lock, the bolts creaked, the
 massy oaken door flew open, and flood of light from two torches
 pervaded the apartment.
 
by the torchlight dantès saw the glittering sabres and carbines of four
 gendarmes. had advanced at first, but stopped at the sight of this
 display of force.
 
“are you come to fetch me?” asked he.
 
“yes,” replied gendarme.
 
“by the orders of the deputy procureur?”
 
“i believe so.” the conviction that they came from m. villefort
 relieved all dantès’ apprehensions; advanced calmly, and placed
 himself in the centre of the escort. carriage waited at the door, the
 coachman was on the box, and police officer sat beside him.
 
“is this carriage for me?” said dantès.
 
“it is for you,” replied gendarme.
 
dantès was about to speak; but feeling himself urged forward, and
 having neither the power nor the intention to resist, mounted the
 steps, and was in an instant seated inside between two gendarmes; the
 two others took their places opposite, and the carriage rolled heavily
 over the stones.
 
the prisoner glanced at the windows—they were grated; had changed
 his prison for another that was conveying him knew not whither.
 through the grating, however, dantès saw they were passing through the
 rue caisserie, and by the rue saint-laurent and the rue taramis, to the
 quay. soon saw the lights of consigne.
 
the carriage stopped, the officer descended, approached the guardhouse,
 dozen soldiers came out and formed themselves in order; dantès saw
 the reflection of their muskets by the light of the lamps on the quay.
 
“can all this force be summoned on my account?” thought he.
 
the officer opened the door, which was locked, and, without speaking a
 word, answered dantès’ question; for saw between the ranks of the
 soldiers passage formed from the carriage to the port. the two
 gendarmes who were opposite to him descended first, then was ordered
 to alight and the gendarmes on each side of him followed his example.
 they advanced towards boat, which custom-house officer held by a
 chain, near the quay.
 
the soldiers looked at dantès with an air of stupid curiosity. in an
 instant was placed in the stern-sheets of the boat, between the
 gendarmes, while the officer stationed himself at the bow; shove sent
 the boat adrift, and four sturdy oarsmen impelled it rapidly towards
 the pilon. at shout from the boat, the chain that closes the mouth of
 the port was lowered and in second they were, as dantès knew, in the
 frioul and outside the inner harbor.
 
the prisoner’s first feeling was of joy at again breathing the pure
 air—for air is freedom; but soon sighed, for passed before la
 réserve, where had that morning been so happy, and now through the
 open windows came the laughter and revelry of ball. dantès folded his
 hands, raised his eyes to heaven, and prayed fervently.
 
0111m
 


the boat continued her voyage. they had passed the tête mort, were
 now off the anse du pharo, and about to double the battery. this
 manœuvre was incomprehensible to dantès.
 
“whither are you taking me?” asked he.
 
“you will soon know.”
 
“but still——”
 
“we are forbidden to give you any explanation.” dantès, trained in
 discipline, knew that nothing would be more absurd than to question
 subordinates, who were forbidden to reply; and so remained silent.
 
the most vague and wild thoughts passed through his mind. the boat they
 were in could not make long voyage; there was vessel at anchor
 outside the harbor; thought, perhaps, they were going to leave him
 on some distant point. was not bound, nor had they made any attempt
 to handcuff him; this seemed good augury. besides, had not the
 deputy, who had been so kind to him, told him that provided did not
 pronounce the dreaded name of noirtier, had nothing to apprehend?
 had not villefort in his presence destroyed the fatal letter, the only
 proof against him?
 
waited silently, striving to pierce through the darkness.
 
they had left the ile ratonneau, where the lighthouse stood, on the
 right, and were now opposite the point des catalans. it seemed to the
 prisoner that could distinguish feminine form on the beach, for it
 was there mercédès dwelt. how was it that presentiment did not warn
 mercédès that her lover was within three hundred yards of her?
 
one light alone was visible; and dantès saw that it came from mercédès’
 chamber. mercédès was the only one awake in the whole settlement. a
 loud cry could be heard by her. but pride restrained him and did not
 utter it. what would his guards think if they heard him shout like a
 madman?
 
remained silent, his eyes fixed upon the light; the boat went on,
 but the prisoner thought only of mercédès. an intervening elevation of
 land hid the light. dantès turned and perceived that they had got out
 to sea. while had been absorbed in thought, they had shipped their
 oars and hoisted sail; the boat was now moving with the wind.
 
in spite of his repugnance to address the guards, dantès turned to the
 nearest gendarme, and taking his hand,
 
“comrade,” said he, “i adjure you, as christian and soldier, to
 tell where we are going. i am captain dantès, loyal frenchman,
 thought accused of treason; tell where you are conducting me, and i
 promise you on my honor i will submit to my fate.”
 
the gendarme looked irresolutely at his companion, who returned for
 answer sign that said, “i see great harm in telling him now,” and
 the gendarme replied:
 
“you are native of marseilles, and sailor, and yet you do not know
 where you are going?”
 
“on my honor, i have idea.”
 
“have you idea whatever?”
 
“none at all.”
 
“that is impossible.”
 
“i swear to you it is true. tell me, i entreat.”
 
“but my orders.”
 
“your orders do not forbid your telling what i must know in ten
 minutes, in half an hour, or an hour. you see i cannot escape, even if
 i intended.”
 
“unless you are blind, or have never been outside the harbor, you must
 know.”
 
“i do not.”
 
“look round you then.” dantès rose and looked forward, when saw rise
 within hundred yards of him the black and frowning rock on which
 stands the château d’if. this gloomy fortress, which has for more than
 three hundred years furnished food for so many wild legends, seemed to
 dantès like scaffold to malefactor.
 
“the château d’if?” cried he, “what are we going there for?”
 
the gendarme smiled.
 
“i am not going there to be imprisoned,” said dantès; “it is only used
 for political prisoners. i have committed crime. are there any
 magistrates or judges at the château d’if?”
 
“there are only,” said the gendarme, “a governor, garrison, turnkeys,
 and good thick walls. come, come, do not look so astonished, or you
 will make think you are laughing at in return for my good
 nature.”
 
dantès pressed the gendarme’s hand as though would crush it.
 
“you think, then,” said he, “that i am taken to the château d’if to be
 imprisoned there?”
 
“it is probable; but there is occasion to squeeze so hard.”
 
“without any inquiry, without any formality?”
 
“all the formalities have been gone through; the inquiry is already
 made.”
 
“and so, in spite of m. villefort’s promises?”
 
“i do not know what m. villefort promised you,” said the gendarme,
 “but i know we are taking you to the château d’if. but what are you
 doing? help, comrades, help!”
 
by rapid movement, which the gendarme’s practiced eye had perceived,
 dantès sprang forward to precipitate himself into the sea; but four
 vigorous arms seized him as his feet quitted the bottom of the boat. he
 fell back cursing with rage.
 
“good!” said the gendarme, placing his knee on his chest; “this is the
 way you keep your word as sailor! believe soft-spoken gentlemen
 again! hark ye, my friend, i have disobeyed my first order, but i will
 not disobey the second; and if you move, i will blow your brains out.”
 and levelled his carbine at dantès, who felt the muzzle against his
 temple.
 
for moment the idea of struggling crossed his mind, and of so ending
 the unexpected evil that had overtaken him. but bethought him of m.
 villefort’s promise; and, besides, death in boat from the hand of
 gendarme seemed too terrible. remained motionless, but gnashing
 his teeth and wringing his hands with fury.
 
at this moment the boat came to landing with violent shock. one of
 the sailors leaped on shore, cord creaked as it ran through pulley,
 and dantès guessed they were at the end of the voyage, and that they
 were mooring the boat.
 
his guards, taking him by the arms and coat-collar, forced him to rise,
 and dragged him towards the steps that lead to the gate of the
 fortress, while the police officer carrying musket with fixed bayonet
 followed behind.
 
dantès made resistance; was like man in dream; saw
 soldiers drawn up on the embankment; knew vaguely that was
 ascending flight of steps; was conscious that passed through a
 door, and that the door closed behind him; but all this indistinctly as
 through mist. did not even see the ocean, that terrible barrier
 against freedom, which the prisoners look upon with utter despair.
 
they halted for minute, during which strove to collect his
 thoughts. looked around; was in court surrounded by high walls;
 heard the measured tread of sentinels, and as they passed before the
 light saw the barrels of their muskets shine.
 
they waited upwards of ten minutes. certain dantès could not escape,
 the gendarmes released him. they seemed awaiting orders. the orders
 came.
 
“where is the prisoner?” said voice.
 
“here,” replied the gendarmes.
 
“let him follow me; i will take him to his cell.”
 
“go!” said the gendarmes, thrusting dantès forward.
 
the prisoner followed his guide, who led him into room almost under
 ground, whose bare and reeking walls seemed as though impregnated with
 tears; lamp placed on stool illumined the apartment faintly, and
 showed dantès the features of his conductor, an under-jailer,
 ill-clothed, and of sullen appearance.
 
0113m
 


“here is your chamber for tonight,” said he. “it is late, and the
 governor is asleep. tomorrow, perhaps, may change you. in the
 meantime there is bread, water, and fresh straw; and that is all a
 prisoner can wish for. goodnight.” and before dantès could open his
 mouth—before had noticed where the jailer placed his bread or the
 water—before had glanced towards the corner where the straw was, the
 jailer disappeared, taking with him the lamp and closing the door,
 leaving stamped upon the prisoner’s mind the dim reflection of the
 dripping walls of his dungeon.
 
dantès was alone in darkness and in silence—cold as the shadows that he
 felt breathe on his burning forehead. with the first dawn of day the
 jailer returned, with orders to leave dantès where was. found the
 prisoner in the same position, as if fixed there, his eyes swollen with
 weeping. had passed the night standing, and without sleep. the
 jailer advanced; dantès appeared not to perceive him. touched him on
 the shoulder. edmond started.
 
“have you not slept?” said the jailer.
 
“i do not know,” replied dantès. the jailer stared.
 
“are you hungry?” continued he.
 
“i do not know.”
 
“do you wish for anything?”
 
“i wish to see the governor.”
 
the jailer shrugged his shoulders and left the chamber.
 
dantès followed him with his eyes, and stretched forth his hands
 towards the open door; but the door closed. all his emotion then burst
 forth; cast himself on the ground, weeping bitterly, and asking
 himself what crime had committed that was thus punished.
 
the day passed thus; scarcely tasted food, but walked round and
 round the cell like wild beast in its cage. one thought in particular
 tormented him: namely, that during his journey hither had sat so
 still, whereas might, dozen times, have plunged into the sea, and,
 thanks to his powers of swimming, for which was famous, have gained
 the shore, concealed himself until the arrival of genoese or spanish
 vessel, escaped to spain or italy, where mercédès and his father could
 have joined him. had fears as to how should live—good seamen
 are welcome everywhere. spoke italian like tuscan, and spanish
 like castilian; would have been free, and happy with mercédès and
 his father, whereas was now confined in the château d’if, that
 impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny of his father and
 mercédès; and all this because had trusted to villefort’s promise.
 the thought was maddening, and dantès threw himself furiously down on
 his straw. the next morning at the same hour, the jailer came again.
 
“well,” said the jailer, “are you more reasonable today?” dantès made
 reply.
 
“come, cheer up; is there anything that i can do for you?”
 
“i wish to see the governor.”
 
“i have already told you it was impossible.”
 
“why so?”
 
“because it is against prison rules, and prisoners must not even ask
 for it.”
 
“what is allowed, then?”
 
“better fare, if you pay for it, books, and leave to walk about.”
 
“i do not want books, i am satisfied with my food, and do not care to
 walk about; but i wish to see the governor.”
 
“if you worry by repeating the same thing, i will not bring you any
 more to eat.”
 
“well, then,” said edmond, “if you do not, i shall die of hunger—that
 is all.”
 
the jailer saw by his tone would be happy to die; and as every
 prisoner is worth ten sous day to his jailer, replied in more
 subdued tone.
 
“what you ask is impossible; but if you are very well behaved you will
 be allowed to walk about, and some day you will meet the governor, and
 if chooses to reply, that is his affair.”
 
“but,” asked dantès, “how long shall i have to wait?”
 
“ah, month—six months—a year.”
 
“it is too long time. i wish to see him at once.”
 
“ah,” said the jailer, “do not always brood over what is impossible, or
 you will be mad in fortnight.”
 
“you think so?”
 
“yes; we have an instance here; it was by always offering million of
 francs to the governor for his liberty that an abbé became mad, who was
 in this chamber before you.”
 
0119m
 


“how long has left it?”
 
“two years.”
 
“was liberated, then?”
 
“no; was put in dungeon.”
 
“listen!” said dantès. “i am not an abbé, i am not mad; perhaps i shall
 be, but at present, unfortunately, i am not. i will make you another
 offer.”
 
“what is that?”
 
“i do not offer you million, because i have it not; but i will give
 you hundred crowns if, the first time you go to marseilles, you will
 seek out young girl named mercédès, at the catalans, and give her two
 lines from me.”
 
0120m
 


“if i took them, and were detected, i should lose my place, which is
 worth two thousand francs year; so that i should be great fool to
 run such risk for three hundred.”
 
“well,” said dantès, “mark this; if you refuse at least to tell
 mercédès i am here, i will some day hide myself behind the door, and
 when you enter i will dash out your brains with this stool.”
 
“threats!” cried the jailer, retreating and putting himself on the
 defensive; “you are certainly going mad. the abbé began like you, and
 in three days you will be like him, mad enough to tie up; but,
 fortunately, there are dungeons here.”
 
dantès whirled the stool round his head.
 
“all right, all right,” said the jailer; “all right, since you will
 have it so. i will send word to the governor.”
 
“very well,” returned dantès, dropping the stool and sitting on it as
 if were in reality mad. the jailer went out, and returned in an
 instant with corporal and four soldiers.
 
“by the governor’s orders,” said he, “conduct the prisoner to the tier
 beneath.”
 
“to the dungeon, then,” said the corporal.
 
“yes; we must put the madman with the madmen.” the soldiers seized
 dantès, who followed passively.
 
descended fifteen steps, and the door of dungeon was opened, and
 was thrust in. the door closed, and dantès advanced with
 outstretched hands until touched the wall; then sat down in the
 corner until his eyes became accustomed to the darkness. the jailer was
 right; dantès wanted but little of being utterly mad.
 


chapter 9. the evening of the betrothal
 
villefort had, as we have said, hastened back to madame de
 saint-méran’s in the place du grand cours, and on entering the house
 found that the guests whom had left at table were taking coffee in
 the salon. renée was, with all the rest of the company, anxiously
 awaiting him, and his entrance was followed by general exclamation.
 
“well, decapitator, guardian of the state, royalist, brutus, what is
 the matter?” said one. “speak out.”
 
“are we threatened with fresh reign of terror?” asked another.
 
“has the corsican ogre broken loose?” cried third.
 
“marquise,” said villefort, approaching his future mother-in-law, “i
 request your pardon for thus leaving you. will the marquis honor by
 few moments’ private conversation?”
 
“ah, it is really serious matter, then?” asked the marquis, remarking
 the cloud on villefort’s brow.
 
“so serious that i must take leave of you for few days; so,” added
 he, turning to renée, “judge for yourself if it be not important.”
 
“you are going to leave us?” cried renée, unable to hide her emotion at
 this unexpected announcement.
 
“alas,” returned villefort, “i must!”
 
“where, then, are you going?” asked the marquise.
 
“that, madame, is an official secret; but if you have any commissions
 for paris, friend of mine is going there tonight, and will with
 pleasure undertake them.” the guests looked at each other.
 
“you wish to speak to alone?” said the marquis.
 
“yes, let us go to the library, please.” the marquis took his arm, and
 they left the salon.
 
“well,” asked he, as soon as they were by themselves, “tell what it
 is?”
 
“an affair of the greatest importance, that demands my immediate
 presence in paris. now, excuse the indiscretion, marquis, but have you
 any landed property?”
 
“all my fortune is in the funds; seven or eight hundred thousand
 francs.”
 
“then sell out—sell out, marquis, or you will lose it all.”
 
0123m
 


“but how can i sell out here?”
 
“you have broker, have you not?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then give letter to him, and tell him to sell out without an
 instant’s delay, perhaps even now i shall arrive too late.”
 
“the deuce you say!” replied the marquis, “let us lose time, then!”
 
and, sitting down, wrote letter to his broker, ordering him to
 sell out at the market price.
 
“now, then,” said villefort, placing the letter in his pocketbook, “i
 must have another!”
 
“to whom?”
 
“to the king.”
 
“to the king?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i dare not write to his majesty.”
 
“i do not ask you to write to his majesty, but ask m. salvieux to do
 so. i want letter that will enable to reach the king’s presence
 without all the formalities of demanding an audience; that would
 occasion loss of precious time.”
 
“but address yourself to the keeper of the seals; has the right of
 entry at the tuileries, and can procure you audience at any hour of the
 day or night.”
 
“doubtless; but there is occasion to divide the honors of my
 discovery with him. the keeper would leave in the background, and
 take all the glory to himself. i tell you, marquis, my fortune is made
 if i only reach the tuileries the first, for the king will not forget
 the service i do him.”
 
“in that case go and get ready. i will call salvieux and make him write
 the letter.”
 
“be as quick as possible, i must be on the road in quarter of an
 hour.”
 
“tell your coachman to stop at the door.”
 
“you will present my excuses to the marquise and mademoiselle renée,
 whom i leave on such day with great regret.”
 
“you will find them both here, and can make your farewells in person.”
 
“a thousand thanks—and now for the letter.”
 
the marquis rang, servant entered.
 
“say to the comte salvieux that i would like to see him.”
 
“now, then, go,” said the marquis.
 
“i shall be gone only few moments.”
 
villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting that the sight
 of the deputy procureur running through the streets would be enough to
 throw the whole city into confusion, resumed his ordinary pace. at
 his door perceived figure in the shadow that seemed to wait for
 him. it was mercédès, who, hearing news of her lover, had come
 unobserved to inquire after him.
 
as villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him. dantès had
 spoken of mercédès, and villefort instantly recognized her. her beauty
 and high bearing surprised him, and when she inquired what had become
 of her lover, it seemed to him that she was the judge, and the
 accused.
 
“the young man you speak of,” said villefort abruptly, “is great
 criminal, and i can do nothing for him, mademoiselle.” mercédès burst
 into tears, and, as villefort strove to pass her, again addressed him.
 
“but, at least, tell where is, that i may know whether is
 alive or dead,” said she.
 
0125m
 


“i do not know; is longer in my hands,” replied villefort.
 
and desirous of putting an end to the interview, pushed by her, and
 closed the door, as if to exclude the pain felt. but remorse is not
 thus banished; like virgil’s wounded hero, carried the arrow in his
 wound, and, arrived at the salon, villefort uttered sigh that was
 almost sob, and sank into chair.
 
then the first pangs of an unending torture seized upon his heart. the
 man sacrificed to his ambition, that innocent victim immolated on
 the altar of his father’s faults, appeared to him pale and threatening,
 leading his affianced bride by the hand, and bringing with him remorse,
 not such as the ancients figured, furious and terrible, but that slow
 and consuming agony whose pangs are intensified from hour to hour up to
 the very moment of death. then had moment’s hesitation. had
 frequently called for capital punishment on criminals, and owing to his
 irresistible eloquence they had been condemned, and yet the slightest
 shadow of remorse had never clouded villefort’s brow, because they were
 guilty; at least, believed so; but here was an innocent man whose
 happiness had destroyed. in this case was not the judge, but the
 executioner.
 
as thus reflected, felt the sensation we have described, and
 which had hitherto been unknown to him, arise in his bosom, and fill
 him with vague apprehensions. it is thus that wounded man trembles
 instinctively at the approach of the finger to his wound until it be
 healed, but villefort’s was one of those that never close, or if they
 do, only close to reopen more agonizing than ever. if at this moment
 the sweet voice of renée had sounded in his ears pleading for mercy, or
 the fair mercédès had entered and said, “in the name of god, i conjure
 you to restore my affianced husband,” his cold and trembling hands
 would have signed his release; but voice broke the stillness of the
 chamber, and the door was opened only by villefort’s valet, who came to
 tell him that the travelling carriage was in readiness.
 
villefort rose, or rather sprang, from his chair, hastily opened one of
 the drawers of his desk, emptied all the gold it contained into his
 pocket, stood motionless an instant, his hand pressed to his head,
 muttered few inarticulate sounds, and then, perceiving that his
 servant had placed his cloak on his shoulders, sprang into the
 carriage, ordering the postilions to drive to m. saint-méran’s. the
 hapless dantès was doomed.
 
as the marquis had promised, villefort found the marquise and renée in
 waiting. started when saw renée, for fancied she was again
 about to plead for dantès. alas, her emotions were wholly personal: she
 was thinking only of villefort’s departure.
 
she loved villefort, and left her at the moment was about to
 become her husband. villefort knew not when should return, and
 renée, far from pleading for dantès, hated the man whose crime
 separated her from her lover.
 
0127m
 


meanwhile what of mercédès? she had met fernand at the corner of the
 rue loge; she had returned to the catalans, and had despairingly
 cast herself on her couch. fernand, kneeling by her side, took her
 hand, and covered it with kisses that mercédès did not even feel. she
 passed the night thus. the lamp went out for want of oil, but she paid
 heed to the darkness, and dawn came, but she knew not that it was
 day. grief had made her blind to all but one object—that was edmond.
 
“ah, you are there,” said she, at length, turning towards fernand.
 
“i have not quitted you since yesterday,” returned fernand sorrowfully.
 
m. morrel had not readily given up the fight. had learned that
 dantès had been taken to prison, and had gone to all his friends,
 and the influential persons of the city; but the report was already in
 circulation that dantès was arrested as bonapartist agent; and as the
 most sanguine looked upon any attempt of napoleon to remount the throne
 as impossible, met with nothing but refusal, and had returned home
 in despair, declaring that the matter was serious and that nothing more
 could be done.
 
caderousse was equally restless and uneasy, but instead of seeking,
 like m. morrel, to aid dantès, had shut himself up with two bottles
 of black currant brandy, in the hope of drowning reflection. but did
 not succeed, and became too intoxicated to fetch any more drink, and
 yet not so intoxicated as to forget what had happened. with his elbows
 on the table sat between the two empty bottles, while spectres
 danced in the light of the unsnuffed candle—spectres such as hoffmann
 strews over his punch-drenched pages, like black, fantastic dust.
 
danglars alone was content and joyous—he had got rid of an enemy and
 made his own situation on the _pharaon_ secure. danglars was one of
 those men born with pen behind the ear, and an inkstand in place of a
 heart. everything with him was multiplication or subtraction. the life
 of man was to him of far less value than numeral, especially when,
 by taking it away, could increase the sum total of his own desires.
 went to bed at his usual hour, and slept in peace.
 
villefort, after having received m. salvieux’s letter, embraced
 renée, kissed the marquise’s hand, and shaken that of the marquis,
 started for paris along the aix road.
 
old dantès was dying with anxiety to know what had become of edmond.
 but we know very well what had become of edmond.
 


chapter 10. the king’s closet at the tuileries
 
we will leave villefort on the road to paris, travelling—thanks to
 trebled fees—with all speed, and passing through two or three
 apartments, enter at the tuileries the little room with the arched
 window, so well known as having been the favorite closet of napoleon
 and louis xviii., and now of louis philippe.
 
there, seated before walnut table had brought with him from
 hartwell, and to which, from one of those fancies not uncommon to great
 people, was particularly attached, the king, louis xviii., was
 carelessly listening to man of fifty or fifty-two years of age, with
 gray hair, aristocratic bearing, and exceedingly gentlemanly attire,
 and meanwhile making marginal note in volume of gryphius’s rather
 inaccurate, but much sought-after, edition of horace—a work which was
 much indebted to the sagacious observations of the philosophical
 monarch.
 
“you say, sir——” said the king.
 
“that i am exceedingly disquieted, sire.”
 
“really, have you had vision of the seven fat kine and the seven lean
 kine?”
 
“no, sire, for that would only betoken for us seven years of plenty and
 seven years of scarcity; and with king as full of foresight as your
 majesty, scarcity is not thing to be feared.”
 
“then of what other scourge are you afraid, my dear blacas?”
 
“sire, i have every reason to believe that storm is brewing in the
 south.”
 
“well, my dear duke,” replied louis xviii., “i think you are wrongly
 informed, and know positively that, on the contrary, it is very fine
 weather in that direction.” man of ability as was, louis xviii.
 liked pleasant jest.
 
“sire,” continued m. blacas, “if it only be to reassure faithful
 servant, will your majesty send into languedoc, provence, and dauphiné,
 trusty men, who will bring you back faithful report as to the feeling
 in these three provinces?”
 
“_canimus surdis_,” replied the king, continuing the annotations in his
 horace.
 
“sire,” replied the courtier, laughing, in order that might seem to
 comprehend the quotation, “your majesty may be perfectly right in
 relying on the good feeling of france, but i fear i am not altogether
 wrong in dreading some desperate attempt.”
 
“by whom?”
 
“by bonaparte, or, at least, by his adherents.”
 
“my dear blacas,” said the king, “you with your alarms prevent from
 working.”
 
“and you, sire, prevent from sleeping with your security.”
 
“wait, my dear sir, wait moment; for i have such delightful note on
 the _pastor quum traheret_—wait, and i will listen to you afterwards.”
 
there was brief pause, during which louis xviii. wrote, in hand as
 small as possible, another note on the margin of his horace, and then
 looking at the duke with the air of man who thinks has an idea of
 his own, while is only commenting upon the idea of another, said:
 
“go on, my dear duke, go on—i listen.”
 
“sire,” said blacas, who had for moment the hope of sacrificing
 villefort to his own profit, “i am compelled to tell you that these are
 not mere rumors destitute of foundation which thus disquiet me; but a
 serious-minded man, deserving all my confidence, and charged by to
 watch over the south” (the duke hesitated as pronounced these
 words), “has arrived by post to tell that great peril threatens
 the king, and so i hastened to you, sire.”
 
“_mala ducis avi domum_,” continued louis xviii., still annotating.
 
“does your majesty wish to drop the subject?”
 
“by means, my dear duke; but just stretch out your hand.”
 
“which?”
 
“whichever you please—there to the left.”
 
“here, sire?”
 
“i tell you to the left, and you are looking to the right; i mean on my
 left—yes, there. you will find yesterday’s report of the minister of
 police. but here is m. dandré himself;” and m. dandré, announced by the
 chamberlain-in-waiting, entered.
 
“come in,” said louis xviii., with repressed smile, “come in, baron,
 and tell the duke all you know—the latest news of m. bonaparte; do
 not conceal anything, however serious,—let us see, the island of elba
 is volcano, and we may expect to have issuing thence flaming and
 bristling war—_bella, horrida bella_.”
 
m. dandré leaned very respectfully on the back of chair with his two
 hands, and said:
 
“has your majesty perused yesterday’s report?”
 
“yes, yes; but tell the duke himself, who cannot find anything, what
 the report contains—give him the particulars of what the usurper is
 doing in his islet.”
 
“monsieur,” said the baron to the duke, “all the servants of his
 majesty must approve of the latest intelligence which we have from the
 island of elba. bonaparte——”
 
m. dandré looked at louis xviii., who, employed in writing note, did
 not even raise his head. “bonaparte,” continued the baron, “is mortally
 wearied, and passes whole days in watching his miners at work at
 porto-longone.”
 
“and scratches himself for amusement,” added the king.
 
“scratches himself?” inquired the duke, “what does your majesty mean?”
 
“yes, indeed, my dear duke. did you forget that this great man, this
 hero, this demigod, is attacked with malady of the skin which worries
 him to death, _prurigo_?”
 
“and, moreover, my dear duke,” continued the minister of police, “we
 are almost assured that, in very short time, the usurper will be
 insane.”
 
“insane?”
 
“raving mad; his head becomes weaker. sometimes weeps bitterly,
 sometimes laughs boisterously, at other time passes hours on the
 seashore, flinging stones in the water and when the flint makes
 ‘duck-and-drake’ five or six times, appears as delighted as if he
 had gained another marengo or austerlitz. now, you must agree that
 these are indubitable symptoms of insanity.”
 
“or of wisdom, my dear baron—or of wisdom,” said louis xviii.,
 laughing; “the greatest captains of antiquity amused themselves by
 casting pebbles into the ocean—see plutarch’s life of scipio
 africanus.”
 
m. blacas pondered deeply between the confident monarch and the
 truthful minister. villefort, who did not choose to reveal the whole
 secret, lest another should reap all the benefit of the disclosure, had
 yet communicated enough to cause him the greatest uneasiness.
 
“well, well, dandré,” said louis xviii., “blacas is not yet convinced;
 let us proceed, therefore, to the usurper’s conversion.” the minister
 of police bowed.
 
“the usurper’s conversion!” murmured the duke, looking at the king and
 dandré, who spoke alternately, like virgil’s shepherds. “the usurper
 converted!”
 
“decidedly, my dear duke.”
 
“in what way converted?”
 
“to good principles. tell him all about it, baron.”
 
“why, this is the way of it,” said the minister, with the gravest air
 in the world: “napoleon lately had review, and as two or three of his
 old veterans expressed desire to return to france, gave them their
 dismissal, and exhorted them to ‘serve the good king.’ these were his
 own words, of that i am certain.”
 
“well, blacas, what think you of this?” inquired the king triumphantly,
 and pausing for moment from the voluminous scholiast before him.
 
“i say, sire, that the minister of police is greatly deceived or i am;
 and as it is impossible it can be the minister of police as has the
 guardianship of the safety and honor of your majesty, it is probable
 that i am in error. however, sire, if i might advise, your majesty will
 interrogate the person of whom i spoke to you, and i will urge your
 majesty to do him this honor.”
 
“most willingly, duke; under your auspices i will receive any person
 you please, but you must not expect to be too confiding. baron, have
 you any report more recent than this, dated the 20th february, and this
 is the 3rd of march?”
 
“no, sire, but i am hourly expecting one; it may have arrived since i
 left my office.”
 
“go thither, and if there be none—well, well,” continued louis xviii.,
 “make one; that is the usual way, is it not?” and the king laughed
 facetiously.
 
“oh, sire,” replied the minister, “we have occasion to invent any;
 every day our desks are loaded with most circumstantial denunciations,
 coming from hosts of people who hope for some return for services which
 they seek to render, but cannot; they trust to fortune, and rely upon
 some unexpected event in some way to justify their predictions.”
 
“well, sir, go,” said louis xviii., “and remember that i am waiting for
 you.”
 
“i will but go and return, sire; i shall be back in ten minutes.”
 
“and i, sire,” said m. blacas, “will go and find my messenger.”
 
“wait, sir, wait,” said louis xviii. “really, m. blacas, i must
 change your armorial bearings; i will give you an eagle with
 outstretched wings, holding in its claws prey which tries in vain to
 escape, and bearing this device—_tenax_.”
 
0133m
 


“sire, i listen,” said blacas, biting his nails with impatience.
 
“i wish to consult you on this passage, ‘_molli fugiens anhelitu_,’ you
 know it refers to stag flying from wolf. are you not sportsman
 and great wolf-hunter? well, then, what do you think of the _molli
 anhelitu_?”
 
“admirable, sire; but my messenger is like the stag you refer to, for
 has posted two hundred and twenty leagues in scarcely three days.”
 
“which is undergoing great fatigue and anxiety, my dear duke, when we
 have telegraph which transmits messages in three or four hours, and
 that without getting in the least out of breath.”
 
“ah, sire, you recompense but badly this poor young man, who has come
 so far, and with so much ardor, to give your majesty useful
 information. if only for the sake of m. salvieux, who recommends him
 to me, i entreat your majesty to receive him graciously.”
 
“m. salvieux, my brother’s chamberlain?”
 
“yes, sire.”
 
“he is at marseilles.”
 
“and writes thence.”
 
“does speak to you of this conspiracy?”
 
“no; but strongly recommends m. villefort, and begs to present
 him to your majesty.”
 
“m. villefort!” cried the king, “is the messenger’s name m. de
 villefort?”
 
“yes, sire.”
 
“and comes from marseilles?”
 
“in person.”
 
“why did you not mention his name at once?” replied the king, betraying
 some uneasiness.
 
“sire, i thought his name was unknown to your majesty.”
 
“no, no, blacas; is man of strong and elevated understanding,
 ambitious, too, and, _pardieu!_ you know his father’s name!”
 
“his father?”
 
“yes, noirtier.”
 
“noirtier the girondin?—noirtier the senator?”
 
“he himself.”
 
“and your majesty has employed the of such man?”
 
“blacas, my friend, you have but limited comprehension. i told you
 villefort was ambitious, and to attain this ambition villefort would
 sacrifice everything, even his father.”
 
“then, sire, may i present him?”
 
“this instant, duke! where is he?”
 
“waiting below, in my carriage.”
 
“seek him at once.”
 
“i hasten to do so.”
 
the duke left the royal presence with the speed of young man; his
 really sincere royalism made him youthful again. louis xviii. remained
 alone, and turning his eyes on his half-opened horace, muttered:
 
“_justum et tenacem propositi virum_.”
 
m. blacas returned as speedily as had departed, but in the
 antechamber was forced to appeal to the king’s authority.
 villefort’s dusty garb, his costume, which was not of courtly cut,
 excited the susceptibility of m. brezé, who was all astonishment at
 finding that this young man had the audacity to enter before the king
 in such attire. the duke, however, overcame all difficulties with a
 word—his majesty’s order; and, in spite of the protestations which the
 master of ceremonies made for the honor of his office and principles,
 villefort was introduced.
 
the king was seated in the same place where the duke had left him. on
 opening the door, villefort found himself facing him, and the young
 magistrate’s first impulse was to pause.
 
“come in, m. villefort,” said the king, “come in.”
 
villefort bowed, and advancing few steps, waited until the king
 should interrogate him.
 
“m. villefort,” said louis xviii., “the duc blacas assures you
 have some interesting information to communicate.”
 
“sire, the duke is right, and i believe your majesty will think it
 equally important.”
 
0137m
 


“in the first place, and before everything else, sir, is the news as
 bad in your opinion as i am asked to believe?”
 
“sire, i believe it to be most urgent, but i hope, by the speed i have
 used, that it is not irreparable.”
 
“speak as fully as you please, sir,” said the king, who began to give
 way to the emotion which had showed itself in blacas’s face and
 affected villefort’s voice. “speak, sir, and pray begin at the
 beginning; i like order in everything.”
 
“sire,” said villefort, “i will render faithful report to your
 majesty, but i must entreat your forgiveness if my anxiety leads to
 some obscurity in my language.” glance at the king after this
 discreet and subtle exordium, assured villefort of the benignity of his
 august auditor, and went on:
 
“sire, i have come as rapidly to paris as possible, to inform your
 majesty that i have discovered, in the exercise of my duties, not a
 commonplace and insignificant plot, such as is every day got up in the
 lower ranks of the people and in the army, but an actual conspiracy—a
 storm which menaces less than your majesty’s throne. sire, the
 usurper is arming three ships, meditates some project, which,
 however mad, is yet, perhaps, terrible. at this moment will have
 left elba, to go whither i know not, but assuredly to attempt landing
 either at naples, or on the coast of tuscany, or perhaps on the shores
 of france. your majesty is well aware that the sovereign of the island
 of elba has maintained his relations with italy and france?”
 
“i am, sir,” said the king, much agitated; “and recently we have had
 information that the bonapartist clubs have had meetings in the rue
 saint-jacques. but proceed, i beg of you. how did you obtain these
 details?”
 
“sire, they are the results of an examination which i have made of a
 man of marseilles, whom i have watched for some time, and arrested on
 the day of my departure. this person, sailor, of turbulent character,
 and whom i suspected of bonapartism, has been secretly to the island of
 elba. there saw the grand-marshal, who charged him with an oral
 message to bonapartist in paris, whose name i could not extract from
 him; but this mission was to prepare men’s minds for return (it is
 the man who says this, sire)—a return which will soon occur.”
 
“and where is this man?”
 
“in prison, sire.”
 
“and the matter seems serious to you?”
 
“so serious, sire, that when the circumstance surprised in the midst
 of family festival, on the very day of my betrothal, i left my bride
 and friends, postponing everything, that i might hasten to lay at your
 majesty’s feet the fears which impressed me, and the assurance of my
 devotion.”
 
“true,” said louis xviii., “was there not marriage engagement between
 you and mademoiselle saint-méran?”
 
“daughter of one of your majesty’s most faithful servants.”
 
“yes, yes; but let us talk of this plot, m. villefort.”
 
“sire, i fear it is more than plot; i fear it is conspiracy.”
 
“a conspiracy in these times,” said louis xviii., smiling, “is thing
 very easy to meditate, but more difficult to conduct to an end,
 inasmuch as, re-established so recently on the throne of our ancestors,
 we have our eyes open at once upon the past, the present, and the
 future. for the last ten months my ministers have redoubled their
 vigilance, in order to watch the shore of the mediterranean. if
 bonaparte landed at naples, the whole coalition would be on foot before
 could even reach piombino; if land in tuscany, will be in an
 unfriendly territory; if land in france, it must be with handful
 of men, and the result of that is easily foretold, execrated as is
 by the population. take courage, sir; but at the same time rely on our
 royal gratitude.”
 
“ah, here is m. dandré!” cried blacas. at this instant the minister
 of police appeared at the door, pale, trembling, and as if ready to
 faint. villefort was about to retire, but m. blacas, taking his
 hand, restrained him.
 


chapter 11. the corsican ogre
 
at the sight of this agitation louis xviii. pushed from him violently
 the table at which was sitting.
 
“what ails you, baron?” exclaimed. “you appear quite aghast. has
 your uneasiness anything to do with what m. blacas has told me, and
 m. villefort has just confirmed?” m. blacas moved suddenly
 towards the baron, but the fright of the courtier pleaded for the
 forbearance of the statesman; and besides, as matters were, it was much
 more to his advantage that the prefect of police should triumph over
 him than that should humiliate the prefect.
 
“sire,——” stammered the baron.
 
“well, what is it?” asked louis xviii. the minister of police, giving
 way to an impulse of despair, was about to throw himself at the feet of
 louis xviii., who retreated step and frowned.
 
“will you speak?” said.
 
“oh, sire, what dreadful misfortune! i am, indeed, to be pitied. i
 can never forgive myself!”
 
“monsieur,” said louis xviii., “i command you to speak.”
 
“well, sire, the usurper left elba on the 26th february, and landed on
 the 1st of march.”
 
“and where? in italy?” asked the king eagerly.
 
“in france, sire,—at small port, near antibes, in the gulf of juan.”
 
“the usurper landed in france, near antibes, in the gulf of juan, two
 hundred and fifty leagues from paris, on the 1st of march, and you only
 acquired this information today, the 3rd of march! well, sir, what you
 tell is impossible. you must have received false report, or you
 have gone mad.”
 
“alas, sire, it is but too true!” louis made gesture of indescribable
 anger and alarm, and then drew himself up as if this sudden blow had
 struck him at the same moment in heart and countenance.
 
“in france!” cried, “the usurper in france! then they did not watch
 over this man. who knows? they were, perhaps, in league with him.”
 
“oh, sire,” exclaimed the duc blacas, “m. dandré is not man to be
 accused of treason! sire, we have all been blind, and the minister of
 police has shared the general blindness, that is all.”
 
“but——” said villefort, and then suddenly checking himself, was
 silent; then continued, “your pardon, sire,” said, bowing, “my
 zeal carried away. will your majesty deign to excuse me?”
 
“speak, sir, speak boldly,” replied louis. “you alone forewarned us of
 the evil; now try and aid us with the remedy.”
 
“sire,” said villefort, “the usurper is detested in the south; and it
 seems to that if ventured into the south, it would be easy to
 raise languedoc and provence against him.”
 
“yes, assuredly,” replied the minister; “but is advancing by gap and
 sisteron.”
 
“advancing—he is advancing!” said louis xviii. “is then advancing on
 paris?” the minister of police maintained silence which was
 equivalent to complete avowal.
 
“and dauphiné, sir?” inquired the king, of villefort. “do you think it
 possible to rouse that as well as provence?”
 
“sire, i am sorry to tell your majesty cruel fact; but the feeling in
 dauphiné is quite the reverse of that in provence or languedoc. the
 mountaineers are bonapartists, sire.”
 
“then,” murmured louis, “he was well informed. and how many men had he
 with him?”
 
“i do not know, sire,” answered the minister of police.
 
“what, you do not know! have you neglected to obtain information on
 that point? of course it is of consequence,” added, with a
 withering smile.
 
“sire, it was impossible to learn; the despatch simply stated the fact
 of the landing and the route taken by the usurper.”
 
“and how did this despatch reach you?” inquired the king. the minister
 bowed his head, and while deep color overspread his cheeks, he
 stammered out:
 
“by the telegraph, sire.” louis xviii. advanced step, and folded his
 arms over his chest as napoleon would have done.
 
0141m
 


“so then,” exclaimed, turning pale with anger, “seven conjoined and
 allied armies overthrew that man. miracle of heaven replaced on
 the throne of my fathers after five-and-twenty years of exile. i have,
 during those five-and-twenty years, spared pains to understand the
 people of france and the interests which were confided to me; and now,
 when i see the fruition of my wishes almost within reach, the power i
 hold in my hands bursts and shatters to atoms!”
 
“sire, it is fatality!” murmured the minister, feeling that the
 pressure of circumstances, however light thing to destiny, was too
 much for any human strength to endure.
 
“what our enemies say of us is then true. we have learnt nothing,
 forgotten nothing! if i were betrayed as was, i would console
 myself; but to be in the midst of persons elevated by myself to places
 of honor, who ought to watch over more carefully than over
 themselves,—for my fortune is theirs—before they were nothing—after
 they will be nothing, and perish miserably from
 incapacity—ineptitude! oh, yes, sir, you are right—it is fatality!”
 
the minister quailed before this outburst of sarcasm. m. blacas
 wiped the moisture from his brow. villefort smiled within himself, for
 felt his increased importance.
 
“to fall,” continued king louis, who at the first glance had sounded
 the abyss on which the monarchy hung suspended,—“to fall, and learn of
 that fall by telegraph! oh, i would rather mount the scaffold of my
 brother, louis xvi., than thus descend the staircase at the tuileries
 driven away by ridicule. ridicule, sir—why, you know not its power in
 france, and yet you ought to know it!”
 
“sire, sire,” murmured the minister, “for pity’s——”
 
“approach, m. villefort,” resumed the king, addressing the young
 man, who, motionless and breathless, was listening to conversation on
 which depended the destiny of kingdom. “approach, and tell monsieur
 that it is possible to know beforehand all that has not known.”
 
“sire, it was really impossible to learn secrets which that man
 concealed from all the world.”
 
“really impossible! yes—that is great word, sir. unfortunately, there
 are great words, as there are great men; i have measured them. really
 impossible for minister who has an office, agents, spies, and fifteen
 hundred thousand francs for secret service money, to know what is going
 on at sixty leagues from the coast of france! well, then, see, here is
 gentleman who had none of these resources at his disposal—a
 gentleman, only simple magistrate, who learned more than you with all
 your police, and who would have saved my crown, if, like you, had
 the power of directing telegraph.” the look of the minister of police
 was turned with concentrated spite on villefort, who bent his head in
 modest triumph.
 
“i do not mean that for you, blacas,” continued louis xviii.; “for if
 you have discovered nothing, at least you have had the good sense to
 persevere in your suspicions. any other than yourself would have
 considered the disclosure of m. villefort insignificant, or else
 dictated by venal ambition.” these words were an allusion to the
 sentiments which the minister of police had uttered with so much
 confidence an hour before.
 
villefort understood the king’s intent. any other person would,
 perhaps, have been overcome by such an intoxicating draught of praise;
 but feared to make for himself mortal enemy of the police
 minister, although saw that dandré was irrevocably lost. in fact,
 the minister, who, in the plenitude of his power, had been unable to
 unearth napoleon’s secret, might in despair at his own downfall
 interrogate dantès and so lay bare the motives of villefort’s plot.
 realizing this, villefort came to the rescue of the crest-fallen
 minister, instead of aiding to crush him.
 
“sire,” said villefort, “the suddenness of this event must prove to
 your majesty that the issue is in the hands of providence; what your
 majesty is pleased to attribute to as profound perspicacity is
 simply owing to chance, and i have profited by that chance, like good
 and devoted servant—that’s all. do not attribute to more than i
 deserve, sire, that your majesty may never have occasion to recall the
 first opinion you have been pleased to form of me.” the minister of
 police thanked the young man by an eloquent look, and villefort
 understood that had succeeded in his design; that is to say, that
 without forfeiting the gratitude of the king, had made friend of
 one on whom, in case of necessity, might rely.
 
“’tis well,” resumed the king. “and now, gentlemen,” continued,
 turning towards m. blacas and the minister of police, “i have no
 further occasion for you, and you may retire; what now remains to do is
 in the department of the minister of war.”
 
“fortunately, sire,” said m. blacas, “we can rely on the army; your
 majesty knows how every report confirms their loyalty and attachment.”
 
“do not mention reports, duke, to me, for i know now what confidence to
 place in them. yet, speaking of reports, baron, what have you learned
 with regard to the affair in the rue saint-jacques?”
 
“the affair in the rue saint-jacques!” exclaimed villefort, unable to
 repress an exclamation. then, suddenly pausing, added, “your pardon,
 sire, but my devotion to your majesty has made forget, not the
 respect i have, for that is too deeply engraved in my heart, but the
 rules of etiquette.”
 
“go on, go on, sir,” replied the king; “you have today earned the right
 to make inquiries here.”
 
“sire,” interposed the minister of police, “i came moment ago to give
 your majesty fresh information which i had obtained on this head, when
 your majesty’s attention was attracted by the terrible event that has
 occurred in the gulf, and now these facts will cease to interest your
 majesty.”
 
“on the contrary, sir,—on the contrary,” said louis xviii., “this
 affair seems to to have decided connection with that which
 occupies our attention, and the death of general quesnel will, perhaps,
 put us on the direct track of great internal conspiracy.” at the name
 of general quesnel, villefort trembled.
 
“everything points to the conclusion, sire,” said the minister of
 police, “that death was not the result of suicide, as we first
 believed, but of assassination. general quesnel, it appears, had just
 left bonapartist club when disappeared. an unknown person had been
 with him that morning, and made an appointment with him in the rue
 saint-jacques; unfortunately, the general’s valet, who was dressing his
 hair at the moment when the stranger entered, heard the street
 mentioned, but did not catch the number.” as the police minister
 related this to the king, villefort, who looked as if his very life
 hung on the speaker’s lips, turned alternately red and pale. the king
 looked towards him.
 
“do you not think with me, m. villefort, that general quesnel, whom
 they believed attached to the usurper, but who was really entirely
 devoted to me, has perished the victim of bonapartist ambush?”
 
“it is probable, sire,” replied villefort. “but is this all that is
 known?”
 
“they are on the track of the man who appointed the meeting with him.”
 
“on his track?” said villefort.
 
“yes, the servant has given his description. is man of from fifty
 to fifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyes covered with shaggy
 eyebrows, and thick moustache. was dressed in blue frock-coat,
 buttoned up to the chin, and wore at his button-hole the rosette of an
 officer of the legion of honor. yesterday person exactly
 corresponding with this description was followed, but was lost sight
 of at the corner of the rue jussienne and the rue coq-héron.”
 villefort leaned on the back of an armchair, for as the minister of
 police went on speaking felt his legs bend under him; but when he
 learned that the unknown had escaped the vigilance of the agent who
 followed him, breathed again.
 
“continue to seek for this man, sir,” said the king to the minister of
 police; “for if, as i am all but convinced, general quesnel, who would
 have been so useful to us at this moment, has been murdered, his
 assassins, bonapartists or not, shall be cruelly punished.” it required
 all villefort’s coolness not to betray the terror with which this
 declaration of the king inspired him.
 
“how strange,” continued the king, with some asperity; “the police
 think that they have disposed of the whole matter when they say, ‘a
 murder has been committed,’ and especially so when they can add, ‘and
 we are on the track of the guilty persons.’”
 
“sire, your majesty will, i trust, be amply satisfied on this point at
 least.”
 
“we shall see. i will longer detain you, m. villefort, for you
 must be fatigued after so long journey; go and rest. of course you
 stopped at your father’s?” feeling of faintness came over villefort.
 
0145m
 


“no, sire,” replied, “i alighted at the hotel madrid, in the rue
 tournon.”
 
“but you have seen him?”
 
“sire, i went straight to the duc blacas.”
 
“but you will see him, then?”
 
“i think not, sire.”
 
“ah, i forgot,” said louis, smiling in manner which proved that all
 these questions were not made without motive; “i forgot you and m.
 noirtier are not on the best terms possible, and that is another
 sacrifice made to the royal cause, and for which you should be
 recompensed.”
 
“sire, the kindness your majesty deigns to evince towards is a
 recompense which so far surpasses my utmost ambition that i have
 nothing more to ask for.”
 
“never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mind easy. in the
 meanwhile” (the king here detached the cross of the legion of honor
 which usually wore over his blue coat, near the cross of st. louis,
 above the order of notre-dame-du-mont-carmel and st. lazare, and gave
 it to villefort)—“in the meanwhile take this cross.”
 
“sire,” said villefort, “your majesty mistakes; this is an officer’s
 cross.”
 
“_ma foi!_” said louis xviii., “take it, such as it is, for i have not
 the time to procure you another. blacas, let it be your care to see
 that the brevet is made out and sent to m. villefort.” villefort’s
 eyes were filled with tears of joy and pride; took the cross and
 kissed it.
 
“and now,” said, “may i inquire what are the orders with which your
 majesty deigns to honor me?”
 
“take what rest you require, and remember that if you are not able to
 serve here in paris, you may be of the greatest service to at
 marseilles.”
 
“sire,” replied villefort, bowing, “in an hour i shall have quitted
 paris.”
 
“go, sir,” said the king; “and should i forget you (kings’ memories are
 short), do not be afraid to bring yourself to my recollection. baron,
 send for the minister of war. blacas, remain.”
 
“ah, sir,” said the minister of police to villefort, as they left the
 tuileries, “you entered by luck’s door—your fortune is made.”
 
“will it be long first?” muttered villefort, saluting the minister,
 whose career was ended, and looking about him for hackney-coach. one
 passed at the moment, which hailed; gave his address to the
 driver, and springing in, threw himself on the seat, and gave loose to
 dreams of ambition.
 
ten minutes afterwards villefort reached his hotel, ordered horses to
 be ready in two hours, and asked to have his breakfast brought to him.
 was about to begin his repast when the sound of the bell rang sharp
 and loud. the valet opened the door, and villefort heard someone speak
 his name.
 
0147m
 


“who could know that i was here already?” said the young man. the valet
 entered.
 
“well,” said villefort, “what is it?—who rang?—who asked for me?”
 
“a stranger who will not send in his name.”
 
“a stranger who will not send in his name! what can want with me?”
 
“he wishes to speak to you.”
 
“to me?”
 
“yes.”
 
“did mention my name?”
 
“yes.”
 
“what sort of person is he?”
 
“why, sir, man of about fifty.”
 
“short or tall?”
 
“about your own height, sir.”
 
“dark or fair?”
 
“dark,—very dark; with black eyes, black hair, black eyebrows.”
 
“and how dressed?” asked villefort quickly.
 
“in blue frock-coat, buttoned up close, decorated with the legion of
 honor.”
 
“it is he!” said villefort, turning pale.
 
0148m
 


“eh, _pardieu!_” said the individual whose description we have twice
 given, entering the door, “what great deal of ceremony! is it the
 custom in marseilles for sons to keep their fathers waiting in their
 anterooms?”
 
“father!” cried villefort, “then i was not deceived; i felt sure it
 must be you.”
 
“well, then, if you felt so sure,” replied the new-comer, putting his
 cane in corner and his hat on chair, “allow to say, my dear
 gérard, that it was not very filial of you to keep waiting at the
 door.”
 
“leave us, germain,” said villefort. the servant quitted the apartment
 with evident signs of astonishment.
 


chapter 12. father and son
 
m. noirtier—for it was, indeed, who entered—looked after the servant
 until the door was closed, and then, fearing, doubt, that might
 be overheard in the antechamber, opened the door again, nor was the
 precaution useless, as appeared from the rapid retreat of germain, who
 proved that was not exempt from the which ruined our first
 parents. m. noirtier then took the trouble to close and bolt the
 antechamber door, then that of the bedchamber, and then extended his
 hand to villefort, who had followed all his motions with surprise which
 could not conceal.
 
“well, now, my dear gérard,” said to the young man, with very
 significant look, “do you know, you seem as if you were not very glad
 to see me?”
 
“my dear father,” said villefort, “i am, on the contrary, delighted;
 but i so little expected your visit, that it has somewhat overcome me.”
 
“but, my dear fellow,” replied m. noirtier, seating himself, “i might
 say the same thing to you, when you announce to your wedding for the
 28th of february, and on the 3rd of march you turn up here in paris.”
 
“and if i have come, my dear father,” said gérard, drawing closer to m.
 noirtier, “do not complain, for it is for you that i came, and my
 journey will be your salvation.”
 
“ah, indeed!” said m. noirtier, stretching himself out at his ease in
 the chair. “really, pray tell all about it, for it must be
 interesting.”
 
“father, you have heard speak of certain bonapartist club in the rue
 saint-jacques?”
 
“no. 53; yes, i am vice-president.”
 
“father, your coolness makes shudder.”
 
“why, my dear boy, when man has been proscribed by the mountaineers,
 has escaped from paris in hay-cart, been hunted over the plains of
 bordeaux by robespierre’s bloodhounds, becomes accustomed to most
 things. but go on, what about the club in the rue saint-jacques?”
 
“why, they induced general quesnel to go there, and general quesnel,
 who quitted his own house at nine o’clock in the evening, was found the
 next day in the seine.”
 
0151m
 


“and who told you this fine story?”
 
“the king himself.”
 
“well, then, in return for your story,” continued noirtier, “i will
 tell you another.”
 
“my dear father, i think i already know what you are about to tell me.”
 
“ah, you have heard of the landing of the emperor?”
 
“not so loud, father, i entreat of you—for your own sake as well as
 mine. yes, i heard this news, and knew it even before you could; for
 three days ago i posted from marseilles to paris with all possible
 speed, half-desperate at the enforced delay.”
 
“three days ago? you are crazy. why, three days ago the emperor had not
 landed.”
 
“no matter, i was aware of his intention.”
 
“how did you know about it?”
 
“by letter addressed to you from the island of elba.”
 
“to me?”
 
“to you; and which i discovered in the pocket-book of the messenger.
 had that letter fallen into the hands of another, you, my dear father,
 would probably ere this have been shot.” villefort’s father laughed.
 
“come, come,” said he, “will the restoration adopt imperial methods so
 promptly? shot, my dear boy? what an idea! where is the letter you
 speak of? i know you too well to suppose you would allow such thing
 to pass you.”
 
“i burnt it, for fear that even fragment should remain; for that
 letter must have led to your condemnation.”
 
“and the destruction of your future prospects,” replied noirtier; “yes,
 i can easily comprehend that. but i have nothing to fear while i have
 you to protect me.”
 
“i do better than that, sir—i save you.”
 
“you do? why, really, the thing becomes more and more dramatic—explain
 yourself.”
 
“i must refer again to the club in the rue saint-jacques.”
 
“it appears that this club is rather bore to the police. why didn’t
 they search more vigilantly? they would have found——”
 
“they have not found; but they are on the track.”
 
“yes, that the usual phrase; i am quite familiar with it. when the
 police is at fault, it declares that it is on the track; and the
 government patiently awaits the day when it comes to say, with a
 sneaking air, that the track is lost.”
 
“yes, but they have found corpse; the general has been killed, and in
 all countries they call that murder.”
 
“a murder do you call it? why, there is nothing to prove that the
 general was murdered. people are found every day in the seine, having
 thrown themselves in, or having been drowned from not knowing how to
 swim.”
 
“father, you know very well that the general was not man to drown
 himself in despair, and people do not bathe in the seine in the month
 of january. no, no, do not be deceived; this was murder in every sense
 of the word.”
 
“and who thus designated it?”
 
“the king himself.”
 
“the king! i thought was philosopher enough to allow that there was
 murder in politics. in politics, my dear fellow, you know, as well
 as i do, there are men, but ideas—no feelings, but interests; in
 politics we do not kill man, we only remove an obstacle, that is all.
 would you like to know how matters have progressed? well, i will tell
 you. it was thought reliance might be placed in general quesnel; was
 recommended to us from the island of elba; one of us went to him, and
 invited him to the rue saint-jacques, where would find some friends.
 came there, and the plan was unfolded to him for leaving elba, the
 projected landing, etc. when had heard and comprehended all to the
 fullest extent, replied that was royalist. then all looked at
 each other,—he was made to take an oath, and did so, but with such an
 ill grace that it was really tempting providence to swear thus, and
 yet, in spite of that, the general was allowed to depart free—perfectly
 free. yet did not return home. what could that mean? why, my dear
 fellow, that on leaving us lost his way, that’s all. murder?
 really, villefort, you surprise me. you, deputy procureur, to found
 an accusation on such bad premises! did i ever say to you, when you
 were fulfilling your character as royalist, and cut off the head of
 one of my party, ‘my son, you have committed murder?’ no, i said,
 ‘very well, sir, you have gained the victory; tomorrow, perchance, it
 will be our turn.’”
 
“but, father, take care; when our turn comes, our revenge will be
 sweeping.”
 
“i do not understand you.”
 
“you rely on the usurper’s return?”
 
“we do.”
 
“you are mistaken; will not advance two leagues into the interior of
 france without being followed, tracked, and caught like wild beast.”
 
“my dear fellow, the emperor is at this moment on the way to grenoble;
 on the 10th or 12th will be at lyons, and on the 20th or 25th at
 paris.”
 
“the people will rise.”
 
“yes, to go and meet him.”
 
“he has but handful of men with him, and armies will be despatched
 against him.”
 
“yes, to escort him into the capital. really, my dear gérard, you are
 but child; you think yourself well informed because the telegraph has
 told you, three days after the landing, ‘the usurper has landed at
 cannes with several men. is pursued.’ but where is he? what is he
 doing? you do not know at all, and in this way they will chase him to
 paris, without drawing trigger.”
 
“grenoble and lyons are faithful cities, and will oppose to him an
 impassable barrier.”
 
“grenoble will open her gates to him with enthusiasm—all lyons will
 hasten to welcome him. believe me, we are as well informed as you, and
 our police are as good as your own. would you like proof of it? well,
 you wished to conceal your journey from me, and yet i knew of your
 arrival half an hour after you had passed the barrier. you gave your
 direction to one but your postilion, yet i have your address, and in
 proof i am here the very instant you are going to sit at table. ring,
 then, if you please, for second knife, fork, and plate, and we will
 dine together.”
 
“indeed!” replied villefort, looking at his father with astonishment,
 “you really do seem very well informed.”
 
“eh? the thing is simple enough. you who are in power have only the
 means that money produces—we who are in expectation, have those which
 devotion prompts.”
 
“devotion!” said villefort, with sneer.
 
“yes, devotion; for that is, i believe, the phrase for hopeful
 ambition.”
 
and villefort’s father extended his hand to the bell-rope, to summon
 the servant whom his had not called. villefort caught his arm.
 
“wait, my dear father,” said the young man, “one word more.”
 
“say on.”
 
“however stupid the royalist police may be, they do know one terrible
 thing.”
 
“what is that?”
 
“the description of the man who, on the morning of the day when general
 quesnel disappeared, presented himself at his house.”
 
“oh, the admirable police have found that out, have they? and what may
 be that description?”
 
“dark complexion; hair, eyebrows, and whiskers black; blue frock-coat,
 buttoned up to the chin; rosette of an officer of the legion of honor
 in his button-hole; hat with wide brim, and cane.”
 
“ah, ha, that’s it, is it?” said noirtier; “and why, then, have they
 not laid hands on him?”
 
“because yesterday, or the day before, they lost sight of him at the
 corner of the rue coq-héron.”
 
“didn’t i say that your police were good for nothing?”
 
“yes; but they may catch him yet.”
 
“true,” said noirtier, looking carelessly around him, “true, if this
 person were not on his guard, as is;” and added with smile, “he
 will consequently make few changes in his personal appearance.” at
 these words rose, and put off his frock-coat and cravat, went
 towards table on which lay his son’s toilet articles, lathered his
 face, took razor, and, with firm hand, cut off the compromising
 whiskers. villefort watched him with alarm not devoid of admiration.
 
his whiskers cut off, noirtier gave another turn to his hair; took,
 instead of his black cravat, colored neckerchief which lay at the top
 of an open portmanteau; put on, in lieu of his blue and high-buttoned
 frock-coat, coat of villefort’s of dark brown, and cut away in front;
 tried on before the glass narrow-brimmed hat of his son’s, which
 appeared to fit him perfectly, and, leaving his cane in the corner
 where had deposited it, took up small bamboo switch, cut the
 air with it once or twice, and walked about with that easy swagger
 which was one of his principal characteristics.
 
“well,” said, turning towards his wondering son, when this disguise
 was completed, “well, do you think your police will recognize now.”
 
“no, father,” stammered villefort; “at least, i hope not.”
 
“and now, my dear boy,” continued noirtier, “i rely on your prudence to
 remove all the things which i leave in your care.”
 
“oh, rely on me,” said villefort.
 
“yes, yes; and now i believe you are right, and that you have really
 saved my life; be assured i will return the favor hereafter.”
 
villefort shook his head.
 
“you are not convinced yet?”
 
“i hope at least, that you may be mistaken.”
 
“shall you see the king again?”
 
“perhaps.”
 
“would you pass in his eyes for prophet?”
 
“prophets of evil are not in favor at the court, father.”
 
“true, but some day they do them justice; and supposing second
 restoration, you would then pass for great man.”
 
“well, what should i say to the king?”
 
“say this to him: ‘sire, you are deceived as to the feeling in france,
 as to the opinions of the towns, and the prejudices of the army; he
 whom in paris you call the corsican ogre, who at nevers is styled the
 usurper, is already saluted as bonaparte at lyons, and emperor at
 grenoble. you think is tracked, pursued, captured; is advancing
 as rapidly as his own eagles. the soldiers you believe to be dying with
 hunger, worn out with fatigue, ready to desert, gather like atoms of
 snow about the rolling ball as it hastens onward. sire, go, leave
 france to its real master, to him who acquired it, not by purchase, but
 by right of conquest; go, sire, not that you incur any risk, for your
 adversary is powerful enough to show you mercy, but because it would be
 humiliating for grandson of saint louis to owe his life to the man of
 arcola, marengo, austerlitz.’ tell him this, gérard; or, rather, tell
 him nothing. keep your journey secret; do not boast of what you have
 come to paris to do, or have done; return with all speed; enter
 marseilles at night, and your house by the back-door, and there remain,
 quiet, submissive, secret, and, above all, inoffensive; for this time,
 i swear to you, we shall act like powerful men who know their enemies.
 go, my son—go, my dear gérard, and by your obedience to my paternal
 orders, or, if you prefer it, friendly counsels, we will keep you in
 your place. this will be,” added noirtier, with smile, “one means by
 which you may second time save me, if the political balance should
 some day take another turn, and cast you aloft while hurling down.
 adieu, my dear gérard, and at your next journey alight at my door.”
 
noirtier left the room when had finished, with the same calmness
 that had characterized him during the whole of this remarkable and
 trying conversation. villefort, pale and agitated, ran to the window,
 put aside the curtain, and saw him pass, cool and collected, by two or
 three ill-looking men at the corner of the street, who were there,
 perhaps, to arrest man with black whiskers, and blue frock-coat,
 and hat with broad brim.
 
villefort stood watching, breathless, until his father had disappeared
 at the rue bussy. then turned to the various articles had left
 behind him, put the black cravat and blue frock-coat at the bottom of
 the portmanteau, threw the hat into dark closet, broke the cane into
 small bits and flung it in the fire, put on his travelling-cap, and
 calling his valet, checked with look the thousand questions was
 ready to ask, paid his bill, sprang into his carriage, which was ready,
 learned at lyons that bonaparte had entered grenoble, and in the midst
 of the tumult which prevailed along the road, at length reached
 marseilles, prey to all the hopes and fears which enter into the
 heart of man with ambition and its first successes.
 


chapter 13. the hundred days
 
m. noirtier was true prophet, and things progressed rapidly, as he
 had predicted. everyone knows the history of the famous return from
 elba, return which was unprecedented in the past, and will probably
 remain without counterpart in the future.
 
louis xviii. made but faint attempt to parry this unexpected blow;
 the monarchy had scarcely reconstructed tottered on its precarious
 foundation, and at sign from the emperor the incongruous structure of
 ancient prejudices and new ideas fell to the ground. villefort,
 therefore, gained nothing save the king’s gratitude (which was rather
 likely to injure him at the present time) and the cross of the legion
 of honor, which had the prudence not to wear, although m. blacas
 had duly forwarded the brevet.
 
napoleon would, doubtless, have deprived villefort of his office had it
 not been for noirtier, who was all powerful at court, and thus the
 girondin of ’93 and the senator of 1806 protected him who so lately had
 been his protector. all villefort’s influence barely enabled him to
 stifle the secret dantès had so nearly divulged. the king’s procureur
 alone was deprived of his office, being suspected of royalism.
 
however, scarcely was the imperial power established—that is, scarcely
 had the emperor re-entered the tuileries and begun to issue orders from
 the closet into which we have introduced our readers,—he found on the
 table there louis xviii.’s half-filled snuff-box,—scarcely had this
 occurred when marseilles began, in spite of the authorities, to
 rekindle the flames of civil war, always smouldering in the south, and
 it required but little to excite the populace to acts of far greater
 violence than the shouts and insults with which they assailed the
 royalists whenever they ventured abroad.
 
0159m
 


owing to this change, the worthy shipowner became at that moment—we
 will not say all powerful, because morrel was prudent and rather a
 timid man, so much so, that many of the most zealous partisans of
 bonaparte accused him of “moderation”—but sufficiently influential to
 make demand in favor of dantès.
 
villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put off until more
 favorable opportunity. if the emperor remained on the throne, gérard
 required different alliance to aid his career; if louis xviii.
 returned, the influence of m. saint-méran, like his own, could be
 vastly increased, and the marriage be still more suitable. the deputy
 procureur was, therefore, the first magistrate of marseilles, when one
 morning his door opened, and m. morrel was announced.
 
anyone else would have hastened to receive him; but villefort was man
 of ability, and knew this would be sign of weakness. made
 morrel wait in the antechamber, although had one with him, for
 the simple reason that the king’s procureur always makes everyone wait,
 and after passing quarter of an hour in reading the papers, he
 ordered m. morrel to be admitted.
 
morrel expected villefort would be dejected; found him as had
 found him six weeks before, calm, firm, and full of that glacial
 politeness, that most insurmountable barrier which separates the
 well-bred from the vulgar man.
 
had entered villefort’s office expecting that the magistrate would
 tremble at the sight of him; on the contrary, felt cold shudder
 all over him when saw villefort sitting there with his elbow on his
 desk, and his head leaning on his hand. stopped at the door;
 villefort gazed at him as if had some difficulty in recognizing him;
 then, after brief interval, during which the honest shipowner turned
 his hat in his hands,
 
“m. morrel, i believe?” said villefort.
 
“yes, sir.”
 
“come nearer,” said the magistrate, with patronizing wave of the
 hand, “and tell to what circumstance i owe the honor of this visit.”
 
“do you not guess, monsieur?” asked morrel.
 
“not in the least; but if i can serve you in any way i shall be
 delighted.”
 
“everything depends on you.”
 
“explain yourself, pray.”
 
“monsieur,” said morrel, recovering his assurance as proceeded, “do
 you recollect that few days before the landing of his majesty the
 emperor, i came to intercede for young man, the mate of my ship, who
 was accused of being concerned in correspondence with the island of
 elba? what was the other day crime is today title to favor. you
 then served louis xviii., and you did not show any favor—it was your
 duty; today you serve napoleon, and you ought to protect him—it is
 equally your duty; i come, therefore, to ask what has become of him?”
 
0161m
 


villefort by strong effort sought to control himself. “what is his
 name?” said he. “tell his name.”
 
“edmond dantès.”
 
villefort would probably have rather stood opposite the muzzle of a
 pistol at five-and-twenty paces than have heard this name spoken; but
 did not blanch.
 
“dantès,” repeated he, “edmond dantès.”
 
“yes, monsieur.” villefort opened large register, then went to a
 table, from the table turned to his registers, and then, turning to
 morrel,
 
“are you quite sure you are not mistaken, monsieur?” said he, in the
 most natural tone in the world.
 
had morrel been more quick-sighted man, or better versed in these
 matters, would have been surprised at the king’s procureur answering
 him on such subject, instead of referring him to the governors of the
 prison or the prefect of the department. but morrel, disappointed in
 his expectations of exciting fear, was conscious only of the other’s
 condescension. villefort had calculated rightly.
 
“no,” said morrel; “i am not mistaken. i have known him for ten years,
 the last four of which was in my service. do not you recollect, i
 came about six weeks ago to plead for clemency, as i come today to
 plead for justice. you received very coldly. oh, the royalists were
 very severe with the bonapartists in those days.”
 
“monsieur,” returned villefort, “i was then royalist, because i
 believed the bourbons not only the heirs to the throne, but the chosen
 of the nation. the miraculous return of napoleon has conquered me, the
 legitimate monarch is who is loved by his people.”
 
“that’s right!” cried morrel. “i like to hear you speak thus, and i
 augur well for edmond from it.”
 
“wait moment,” said villefort, turning over the leaves of register;
 “i have it—a sailor, who was about to marry young catalan girl. i
 recollect now; it was very serious charge.”
 
“how so?”
 
“you know that when left here was taken to the palais de
 justice.”
 
“well?”
 
“i made my report to the authorities at paris, and week after was
 carried off.”
 
“carried off!” said morrel. “what can they have done with him?”
 
“oh, has been taken to fenestrelles, to pignerol, or to the
 sainte-marguérite islands. some fine morning will return to take
 command of your vessel.”
 
“come when will, it shall be kept for him. but how is it is not
 already returned? it seems to the first care of government should be
 to set at liberty those who have suffered for their adherence to it.”
 
“do not be too hasty, m. morrel,” replied villefort. “the order of
 imprisonment came from high authority, and the order for his liberation
 must proceed from the same source; and, as napoleon has scarcely been
 reinstated fortnight, the letters have not yet been forwarded.”
 
“but,” said morrel, “is there way of expediting all these
 formalities—of releasing him from arrest?”
 
“there has been arrest.”
 
“how?”
 
“it is sometimes essential to government to cause man’s disappearance
 without leaving any traces, so that written forms or documents may
 defeat their wishes.”
 
“it might be so under the bourbons, but at present——”
 
“it has always been so, my dear morrel, since the reign of louis xiv.
 the emperor is more strict in prison discipline than even louis
 himself, and the number of prisoners whose names are not on the
 register is incalculable.” had morrel even any suspicions, so much
 kindness would have dispelled them.
 
“well, m. villefort, how would you advise to act?” asked he.
 
“petition the minister.”
 
“oh, i know what that is; the minister receives two hundred petitions
 every day, and does not read three.”
 
“that is true; but will read petition countersigned and presented
 by me.”
 
“and will you undertake to deliver it?”
 
“with the greatest pleasure. dantès was then guilty, and now is
 innocent, and it is as much my duty to free him as it was to condemn
 him.” villefort thus forestalled any danger of an inquiry, which,
 however improbable it might be, if it did take place would leave him
 defenceless.
 
“but how shall i address the minister?”
 
“sit down there,” said villefort, giving up his place to morrel, “and
 write what i dictate.”
 
“will you be so good?”
 
“certainly. but lose time; we have lost too much already.”
 
“that is true. only think what the poor fellow may even now be
 suffering.”
 
villefort shuddered at the suggestion; but had gone too far to draw
 back. dantès must be crushed to gratify villefort’s ambition.
 
villefort dictated petition, in which, from an excellent intention,
 doubt, dantès’ patriotic services were exaggerated, and was made
 out one of the most active agents of napoleon’s return. it was evident
 that at the sight of this document the minister would instantly release
 him. the petition finished, villefort read it aloud.
 
“that will do,” said he; “leave the rest to me.”
 
“will the petition go soon?”
 
“today.”
 
“countersigned by you?”
 
“the best thing i can do will be to certify the truth of the contents
 of your petition.” and, sitting down, villefort wrote the certificate
 at the bottom.
 
“what more is to be done?”
 
“i will do whatever is necessary.” this assurance delighted morrel, who
 took leave of villefort, and hastened to announce to old dantès that he
 would soon see his son.
 
as for villefort, instead of sending to paris, carefully preserved
 the petition that so fearfully compromised dantès, in the hopes of an
 event that seemed not unlikely,—that is, second restoration. dantès
 remained prisoner, and heard not the noise of the fall of louis
 xviii.’s throne, or the still more tragic destruction of the empire.
 
twice during the hundred days had morrel renewed his demand, and twice
 had villefort soothed him with promises. at last there was waterloo,
 and morrel came more; had done all that was in his power, and any
 fresh attempt would only compromise himself uselessly.
 
louis xviii. remounted the throne; villefort, to whom marseilles had
 become filled with remorseful memories, sought and obtained the
 situation of king’s procureur at toulouse, and fortnight afterwards
 married mademoiselle saint-méran, whose father now stood higher
 at court than ever.
 
and so dantès, after the hundred days and after waterloo, remained in
 his dungeon, forgotten of earth and heaven.
 
danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fate that
 overwhelmed dantès; and, when napoleon returned to france, he, after
 the manner of mediocre minds, termed the coincidence, _a decree of
 providence_. but when napoleon returned to paris, danglars’ heart
 failed him, and lived in constant fear of dantès’ return on a
 mission of vengeance. therefore informed m. morrel of his wish to
 quit the sea, and obtained recommendation from him to spanish
 merchant, into whose service entered at the end of march, that is,
 ten or twelve days after napoleon’s return. then left for madrid,
 and was more heard of.
 
fernand understood nothing except that dantès was absent. what had
 become of him cared not to inquire. only, during the respite the
 absence of his rival afforded him, reflected, partly on the means of
 deceiving mercédès as to the cause of his absence, partly on plans of
 emigration and abduction, as from time to time sat sad and
 motionless on the summit of cape pharo, at the spot from whence
 marseilles and the catalans are visible, watching for the apparition of
 young and handsome man, who was for him also the messenger of
 vengeance. fernand’s mind was made up; would shoot dantès, and then
 kill himself. but fernand was mistaken; man of his disposition never
 kills himself, for constantly hopes.
 
during this time the empire made its last conscription, and every man
 in france capable of bearing arms rushed to obey the summons of the
 emperor. fernand departed with the rest, bearing with him the terrible
 thought that while was away, his rival would perhaps return and
 marry mercédès. had fernand really meant to kill himself, would have
 done so when parted from mercédès. his devotion, and the compassion
 showed for her misfortunes, produced the effect they always produce
 on noble minds—mercédès had always had sincere regard for fernand,
 and this was now strengthened by gratitude.
 
“my brother,” said she, as she placed his knapsack on his shoulders,
 “be careful of yourself, for if you are killed, i shall be alone in the
 world.” these words carried ray of hope into fernand’s heart. should
 dantès not return, mercédès might one day be his.
 
0165m
 


mercédès was left alone face to face with the vast plain that had never
 seemed so barren, and the that had never seemed so vast. bathed in
 tears she wandered about the catalan village. sometimes she stood mute
 and motionless as statue, looking towards marseilles, at other times
 gazing on the sea, and debating as to whether it were not better to
 cast herself into the abyss of the ocean, and thus end her woes. it was
 not want of courage that prevented her putting this resolution into
 execution; but her religious feelings came to her aid and saved her.
 
caderousse was, like fernand, enrolled in the army, but, being married
 and eight years older, was merely sent to the frontier. old dantès,
 who was only sustained by hope, lost all hope at napoleon’s downfall.
 five months after had been separated from his son, and almost at the
 hour of his arrest, breathed his last in mercédès’ arms. m. morrel
 paid the expenses of his funeral, and few small debts the poor old
 man had contracted.
 
there was more than benevolence in this action; there was courage; the
 south was aflame, and to assist, even on his death-bed, the father of
 so dangerous bonapartist as dantès, was stigmatized as crime.
 


chapter 14. the two prisoners
 
year after louis xviii.’s restoration, visit was made by the
 inspector-general of prisons. dantès in his cell heard the noise of
 preparation,—sounds that at the depth where lay would have been
 inaudible to any but the ear of prisoner, who could hear the splash
 of the drop of water that every hour fell from the roof of his dungeon.
 guessed something uncommon was passing among the living; but had
 so long ceased to have any intercourse with the world, that looked
 upon himself as dead.
 
the inspector visited, one after another, the cells and dungeons of
 several of the prisoners, whose good behavior or stupidity recommended
 them to the clemency of the government. inquired how they were fed,
 and if they had any request to make. the universal response was, that
 the fare was detestable, and that they wanted to be set free.
 
the inspector asked if they had anything else to ask for. they shook
 their heads. what could they desire beyond their liberty? the inspector
 turned smilingly to the governor.
 
“i do not know what reason government can assign for these useless
 visits; when you see one prisoner, you see all,—always the same
 thing,—ill fed and innocent. are there any others?”
 
“yes; the dangerous and mad prisoners are in the dungeons.”
 
“let us visit them,” said the inspector with an air of fatigue. “we
 must play the farce to the end. let us see the dungeons.”
 
“let us first send for two soldiers,” said the governor. “the prisoners
 sometimes, through mere uneasiness of life, and in order to be
 sentenced to death, commit acts of useless violence, and you might fall
 victim.”
 
“take all needful precautions,” replied the inspector.
 
two soldiers were accordingly sent for, and the inspector descended a
 stairway, so foul, so humid, so dark, as to be loathsome to sight,
 smell, and respiration.
 
“oh,” cried the inspector, “who can live here?”
 
“a most dangerous conspirator, man we are ordered to keep the most
 strict watch over, as is daring and resolute.”
 
“he is alone?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“how long has been there?”
 
“nearly year.”
 
“was placed here when first arrived?”
 
“no; not until attempted to kill the turnkey, who took his food to
 him.”
 
“to kill the turnkey?”
 
“yes, the very one who is lighting us. is it not true, antoine?” asked
 the governor.
 
“true enough; wanted to kill me!” returned the turnkey.
 
“he must be mad,” said the inspector.
 
“he is worse than that,—he is devil!” returned the turnkey.
 
“shall i complain of him?” demanded the inspector.
 
“oh, no; it is useless. besides, is almost mad now, and in another
 year will be quite so.”
 
“so much the better for him,—he will suffer less,” said the inspector.
 was, as this remark shows, man full of philanthropy, and in every
 way fit for his office.
 
“you are right, sir,” replied the governor; “and this remark proves
 that you have deeply considered the subject. now we have in dungeon
 about twenty feet distant, and to which you descend by another stair,
 an old abbé, formerly leader of party in italy, who has been here
 since 1811, and in 1813 went mad, and the change is astonishing. he
 used to weep, now laughs; grew thin, now grows fat. you had
 better see him, for his madness is amusing.”
 
“i will see them both,” returned the inspector; “i must conscientiously
 perform my duty.”
 
this was the inspector’s first visit; wished to display his
 authority.
 
“let us visit this one first,” added he.
 
“by all means,” replied the governor, and signed to the turnkey to
 open the door. at the sound of the key turning in the lock, and the
 creaking of the hinges, dantès, who was crouched in corner of the
 dungeon, whence could see the ray of light that came through a
 narrow iron grating above, raised his head. seeing stranger, escorted
 by two turnkeys holding torches and accompanied by two soldiers, and to
 whom the governor spoke bareheaded, dantès, who guessed the truth, and
 that the moment to address himself to the superior authorities was
 come, sprang forward with clasped hands.
 
the soldiers interposed their bayonets, for they thought that was
 about to attack the inspector, and the latter recoiled two or three
 steps. dantès saw that was looked upon as dangerous. then, infusing
 all the humility possessed into his eyes and voice, addressed the
 inspector, and sought to inspire him with pity.
 
the inspector listened attentively; then, turning to the governor,
 observed, “he will become religious—he is already more gentle; is
 afraid, and retreated before the bayonets—madmen are not afraid of
 anything; i made some curious observations on this at charenton.” then,
 turning to the prisoner, “what is it you want?” said he.
 
“i want to know what crime i have committed—to be tried; and if i am
 guilty, to be shot; if innocent, to be set at liberty.”
 
“are you well fed?” said the inspector.
 
“i believe so; i don’t know; it’s of consequence. what matters
 really, not only to me, but to officers of justice and the king, is
 that an innocent man should languish in prison, the victim of an
 infamous denunciation, to die here cursing his executioners.”
 
“you are very humble today,” remarked the governor; “you are not so
 always; the other day, for instance, when you tried to kill the
 turnkey.”
 
“it is true, sir, and i beg his pardon, for has always been very
 good to me, but i was mad.”
 
“and you are not so any longer?”
 
“no; captivity has subdued me—i have been here so long.”
 
“so long?—when were you arrested, then?” asked the inspector.
 
“the 28th of february, 1815, at half-past two in the afternoon.”
 
“today is the 30th of july, 1816,—why, it is but seventeen months.”
 
“only seventeen months,” replied dantès. “oh, you do not know what is
 seventeen months in prison!—seventeen ages rather, especially to man
 who, like me, had arrived at the summit of his ambition—to man, who,
 like me, was on the point of marrying woman adored, who saw an
 honorable career opened before him, and who loses all in an instant—who
 sees his prospects destroyed, and is ignorant of the fate of his
 affianced wife, and whether his aged father be still living! seventeen
 months’ captivity to sailor accustomed to the boundless ocean, is a
 worse punishment than human crime ever merited. have pity on me, then,
 and ask for me, not intelligence, but trial; not pardon, but a
 verdict—a trial, sir, i ask only for trial; that, surely, cannot be
 denied to one who is accused!”
 
“we shall see,” said the inspector; then, turning to the governor, “on
 my word, the poor devil touches me. you must show the proofs against
 him.”
 
“certainly; but you will find terrible charges.”
 
“monsieur,” continued dantès, “i know it is not in your power to
 release me; but you can plead for me—you can have tried—and that is
 all i ask. let know my crime, and the reason why i was condemned.
 uncertainty is worse than all.”
 
“go on with the lights,” said the inspector.
 
“monsieur,” cried dantès, “i can tell by your voice you are touched
 with pity; tell at least to hope.”
 
“i cannot tell you that,” replied the inspector; “i can only promise to
 examine into your case.”
 
“oh, i am free—then i am saved!”
 
“who arrested you?”
 
“m. villefort. see him, and hear what says.”
 
“m. villefort is longer at marseilles; is now at toulouse.”
 
“i am longer surprised at my detention,” murmured dantès, “since my
 only protector is removed.”
 
“had m. villefort any cause of personal dislike to you?”
 
“none; on the contrary, was very kind to me.”
 
“i can, then, rely on the notes has left concerning you?”
 
“entirely.”
 
“that is well; wait patiently, then.”
 
dantès fell on his knees, and prayed earnestly. the door closed; but
 this time fresh inmate was left with dantès—hope.
 
0173m
 


“will you see the register at once,” asked the governor, “or proceed to
 the other cell?”
 
“let us visit them all,” said the inspector. “if i once went up those
 stairs. i should never have the courage to come down again.”
 
“ah, this one is not like the other, and his madness is less affecting
 than this one’s display of reason.”
 
“what is his folly?”
 
“he fancies possesses an immense treasure. the first year offered
 government million of francs for his release; the second, two; the
 third, three; and so on progressively. is now in his fifth year of
 captivity; will ask to speak to you in private, and offer you five
 millions.”
 
“how curious!—what is his name?”
 
“the abbé faria.”
 
“no. 27,” said the inspector.
 
“it is here; unlock the door, antoine.”
 
the turnkey obeyed, and the inspector gazed curiously into the chamber
 of the _mad abbé_, as the prisoner was usually called.
 
in the centre of the cell, in circle traced with fragment of
 plaster detached from the wall, sat man whose tattered garments
 scarcely covered him. was drawing in this circle geometrical lines,
 and seemed as much absorbed in his problem as archimedes was when the
 soldier of marcellus slew him. did not move at the sound of the
 door, and continued his calculations until the flash of the torches
 lighted up with an unwonted glare the sombre walls of his cell; then,
 raising his head, perceived with astonishment the number of persons
 present. hastily seized the coverlet of his bed, and wrapped it
 round him.
 
“what is it you want?” said the inspector.
 
“i, monsieur,” replied the abbé with an air of surprise,—“i want
 nothing.”
 
“you do not understand,” continued the inspector; “i am sent here by
 government to visit the prison, and hear the requests of the
 prisoners.”
 
“oh, that is different,” cried the abbé; “and we shall understand each
 other, i hope.”
 
“there, now,” whispered the governor, “it is just as i told you.”
 
“monsieur,” continued the prisoner, “i am the abbé faria, born at rome.
 i was for twenty years cardinal spada’s secretary; i was arrested, why,
 i know not, toward the beginning of the year 1811; since then i have
 demanded my liberty from the italian and french government.”
 
“why from the french government?”
 
“because i was arrested at piombino, and i presume that, like milan and
 florence, piombino has become the capital of some french department.”
 
“ah,” said the inspector, “you have not the latest news from italy?”
 
“my information dates from the day on which i was arrested,” returned
 the abbé faria; “and as the emperor had created the kingdom of rome for
 his infant son, i presume that has realized the dream of machiavelli
 and cæsar borgia, which was to make italy united kingdom.”
 
“monsieur,” returned the inspector, “providence has changed this
 gigantic plan you advocate so warmly.”
 
“it is the only means of rendering italy strong, happy, and
 independent.”
 
“very possibly; only i am not come to discuss politics, but to inquire
 if you have anything to ask or to complain of.”
 
“the food is the same as in other prisons,—that is, very bad; the
 lodging is very unhealthful, but, on the whole, passable for dungeon;
 but it is not that which i wish to speak of, but secret i have to
 reveal of the greatest importance.”
 
“we are coming to the point,” whispered the governor.
 
“it is for that reason i am delighted to see you,” continued the abbé,
 “although you have disturbed in most important calculation, which,
 if it succeeded, would possibly change newton’s system. could you allow
 few words in private.”
 
“what did i tell you?” said the governor.
 
“you knew him,” returned the inspector with smile.
 
“what you ask is impossible, monsieur,” continued he, addressing faria.
 
0175m
 


“but,” said the abbé, “i would speak to you of large sum, amounting
 to five millions.”
 
“the very sum you named,” whispered the inspector in his turn.
 
“however,” continued faria, seeing that the inspector was about to
 depart, “it is not absolutely necessary for us to be alone; the
 governor can be present.”
 
“unfortunately,” said the governor, “i know beforehand what you are
 about to say; it concerns your treasures, does it not?” faria fixed his
 eyes on him with an expression that would have convinced anyone else of
 his sanity.
 
“of course,” said he; “of what else should i speak?”
 
“mr. inspector,” continued the governor, “i can tell you the story as
 well as he, for it has been dinned in my ears for the last four or five
 years.”
 
“that proves,” returned the abbé, “that you are like those of holy
 writ, who having eyes see not, and having ears hear not.”
 
“my dear sir, the government is rich and does not want your treasures,”
 replied the inspector; “keep them until you are liberated.” the abbé’s
 eyes glistened; seized the inspector’s hand.
 
“but what if i am not liberated,” cried he, “and am detained here until
 my death? this treasure will be lost. had not government better profit
 by it? i will offer six millions, and i will content myself with the
 rest, if they will only give my liberty.”
 
“on my word,” said the inspector in low tone, “had i not been told
 beforehand that this man was mad, i should believe what says.”
 
“i am not mad,” replied faria, with that acuteness of hearing peculiar
 to prisoners. “the treasure i speak of really exists, and i offer to
 sign an agreement with you, in which i promise to lead you to the spot
 where you shall dig; and if i deceive you, bring here again,—i ask
 more.”
 
the governor laughed. “is the spot far from here?”
 
“a hundred leagues.”
 
“it is not ill-planned,” said the governor. “if all the prisoners took
 it into their heads to travel hundred leagues, and their guardians
 consented to accompany them, they would have capital chance of
 escaping.”
 
“the scheme is well known,” said the inspector; “and the abbé’s plan
 has not even the merit of originality.”
 
then turning to faria, “i inquired if you are well fed?” said he.
 
“swear to me,” replied faria, “to free if what i tell you prove
 true, and i will stay here while you go to the spot.”
 
“are you well fed?” repeated the inspector.
 
“monsieur, you run risk, for, as i told you, i will stay here; so
 there is chance of my escaping.”
 
“you do not reply to my question,” replied the inspector impatiently.
 
“nor you to mine,” cried the abbé. “you will not accept my gold; i will
 keep it for myself. you refuse my liberty; god will give it me.” and
 the abbé, casting away his coverlet, resumed his place, and continued
 his calculations.
 
0177m
 


“what is doing there?” said the inspector.
 
“counting his treasures,” replied the governor.
 
faria replied to this sarcasm with glance of profound contempt. they
 went out. the turnkey closed the door behind them.
 
“he was wealthy once, perhaps?” said the inspector.
 
“or dreamed was, and awoke mad.”
 
“after all,” said the inspector, “if had been rich, would not
 have been here.”
 
so the matter ended for the abbé faria. remained in his cell, and
 this visit only increased the belief in his insanity.
 
caligula or nero, those treasure-seekers, those desirers of the
 impossible, would have accorded to the poor wretch, in exchange for his
 wealth, the liberty so earnestly prayed for. but the kings of modern
 times, restrained by the limits of mere probability, have neither
 courage nor desire. they fear the ear that hears their orders, and the
 eye that scrutinizes their actions. formerly they believed themselves
 sprung from jupiter, and shielded by their birth; but nowadays they are
 not inviolable.
 
it has always been against the policy of despotic governments to suffer
 the victims of their persecutions to reappear. as the inquisition
 rarely allowed its victims to be seen with their limbs distorted and
 their flesh lacerated by torture, so madness is always concealed in its
 cell, from whence, should it depart, it is conveyed to some gloomy
 hospital, where the doctor has thought for man or mind in the
 mutilated being the jailer delivers to him. the very madness of the
 abbé faria, gone mad in prison, condemned him to perpetual captivity.
 
the inspector kept his word with dantès; examined the register, and
 found the following note concerning him:
 
_edmond dantès:_
 
violent bonapartist; took an active part in the return from elba.
 
the greatest watchfulness and care to be exercised.
 
this note was in different hand from the rest, which showed that it
 had been added since his confinement. the inspector could not contend
 against this accusation; simply wrote, _nothing to be done._
 
this visit had infused new vigor into dantès; had, till then,
 forgotten the date; but now, with fragment of plaster, wrote the
 date, 30th july, 1816, and made mark every day, in order not to lose
 his reckoning again. days and weeks passed away, then months—dantès
 still waited; at first expected to be freed in fortnight. this
 fortnight expired, decided that the inspector would do nothing until
 his return to paris, and that would not reach there until his
 circuit was finished, therefore fixed three months; three months
 passed away, then six more. finally ten months and half had gone by
 and favorable change had taken place, and dantès began to fancy the
 inspector’s visit but dream, an illusion of the brain.
 
at the expiration of year the governor was transferred; had
 obtained charge of the fortress at ham. took with him several of his
 subordinates, and amongst them dantès’ jailer. new governor arrived;
 it would have been too tedious to acquire the names of the prisoners;
 learned their numbers instead. this horrible place contained fifty
 cells; their inhabitants were designated by the numbers of their cell,
 and the unhappy young man was longer called edmond dantès—he was now
 number 34.
 


chapter 15. number 34 and number 27
 
dantès passed through all the stages of torture natural to prisoners in
 suspense. was sustained at first by that pride of conscious
 innocence which is the sequence to hope; then began to doubt his own
 innocence, which justified in some measure the governor’s belief in his
 mental alienation; and then, relaxing his sentiment of pride, he
 addressed his supplications, not to god, but to man. god is always the
 last resource. unfortunates, who ought to begin with god, do not have
 any hope in him till they have exhausted all other means of
 deliverance.
 
dantès asked to be removed from his present dungeon into another, even
 if it were darker and deeper, for change, however disadvantageous,
 was still change, and would afford him some amusement. entreated
 to be allowed to walk about, to have fresh air, books, and writing
 materials. his requests were not granted, but went on asking all the
 same. accustomed himself to speaking to the new jailer, although the
 latter was, if possible, more taciturn than the old one; but still, to
 speak to man, even though mute, was something. dantès spoke for the
 sake of hearing his own voice; had tried to speak when alone, but
 the sound of his voice terrified him.
 
often, before his captivity, dantès’ mind had revolted at the idea of
 assemblages of prisoners, made up of thieves, vagabonds, and murderers.
 now wished to be amongst them, in order to see some other face
 besides that of his jailer; sighed for the galleys, with the
 infamous costume, the chain, and the brand on the shoulder. the
 galley-slaves breathed the fresh air of heaven, and saw each other.
 they were very happy.
 
besought the jailer one day to let him have companion, were it
 even the mad abbé. the jailer, though rough and hardened by the
 constant sight of so much suffering, was yet man. at the bottom of
 his heart had often had feeling of pity for this unhappy young man
 who suffered so; and laid the request of number 34 before the
 governor; but the latter sapiently imagined that dantès wished to
 conspire or attempt an escape, and refused his request. dantès had
 exhausted all human resources, and then turned to god.
 
all the pious ideas that had been so long forgotten, returned; he
 recollected the prayers his mother had taught him, and discovered new
 meaning in every word; for in prosperity prayers seem but mere medley
 of words, until misfortune comes and the unhappy sufferer first
 understands the meaning of the sublime language in which invokes the
 pity of heaven! prayed, and prayed aloud, longer terrified at the
 sound of his own voice, for fell into sort of ecstasy. laid
 every action of his life before the almighty, proposed tasks to
 accomplish, and at the end of every prayer introduced the entreaty
 oftener addressed to man than to god: “forgive us our trespasses as we
 forgive them that trespass against us.” yet in spite of his earnest
 prayers, dantès remained prisoner.
 
then gloom settled heavily upon him. dantès was man of great
 simplicity of thought, and without education; could not, therefore,
 in the solitude of his dungeon, traverse in mental vision the history
 of the ages, bring to life the nations that had perished, and rebuild
 the ancient cities so vast and stupendous in the light of the
 imagination, and that pass before the eye glowing with celestial colors
 in martin’s babylonian pictures. could not do this, whose past
 life was so short, whose present so melancholy, and his future so
 doubtful. nineteen years of light to reflect upon in eternal darkness!
 distraction could come to his aid; his energetic spirit, that would
 have exalted in thus revisiting the past, was imprisoned like an eagle
 in cage. clung to one idea—that of his happiness, destroyed,
 without apparent cause, by an unheard-of fatality; considered and
 reconsidered this idea, devoured it (so to speak), as the implacable
 ugolino devours the skull of archbishop roger in the inferno of dante.
 
rage supplanted religious fervor. dantès uttered blasphemies that made
 his jailer recoil with horror, dashed himself furiously against the
 walls of his prison, wreaked his anger upon everything, and chiefly
 upon himself, so that the least thing,—a grain of sand, straw, or a
 breath of air that annoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury. then the
 letter that villefort had showed to him recurred to his mind, and every
 line gleamed forth in fiery letters on the wall like the _mene, mene,
 tekel upharsin_ of belshazzar. told himself that it was the enmity
 of man, and not the vengeance of heaven, that had thus plunged him into
 the deepest misery. consigned his unknown persecutors to the most
 horrible tortures could imagine, and found them all insufficient,
 because after torture came death, and after death, if not repose, at
 least the boon of unconsciousness.
 
by dint of constantly dwelling on the idea that tranquillity was death,
 and if punishment were the end in view other tortures than death must
 be invented, began to reflect on suicide. unhappy he, who, on the
 brink of misfortune, broods over ideas like these!
 
before him is dead that stretches in azure calm before the eye;
 but who unwarily ventures within its embrace finds himself
 struggling with monster that would drag him down to perdition. once
 thus ensnared, unless the protecting hand of god snatch him thence, all
 is over, and his struggles but tend to hasten his destruction. this
 state of mental anguish is, however, less terrible than the sufferings
 that precede or the punishment that possibly will follow. there is a
 sort of consolation at the contemplation of the yawning abyss, at the
 bottom of which lie darkness and obscurity.
 
edmond found some solace in these ideas. all his sorrows, all his
 sufferings, with their train of gloomy spectres, fled from his cell
 when the angel of death seemed about to enter. dantès reviewed his past
 life with composure, and, looking forward with terror to his future
 existence, chose that middle line that seemed to afford him refuge.
 
“sometimes,” said he, “in my voyages, when i was man and commanded
 other men, i have seen the heavens overcast, the rage and foam, the
 storm arise, and, like monstrous bird, beating the two horizons with
 its wings. then i felt that my vessel was vain refuge, that trembled
 and shook before the tempest. soon the fury of the waves and the sight
 of the sharp rocks announced the approach of death, and death then
 terrified me, and i used all my skill and intelligence as man and a
 sailor to struggle against the wrath of god. but i did so because i was
 happy, because i had not courted death, because to be cast upon bed
 of rocks and seaweed seemed terrible, because i was unwilling that i, a
 creature made for the service of god, should serve for food to the
 gulls and ravens. but now it is different; i have lost all that bound
 to life, death smiles and invites to repose; i die after my own
 manner, i die exhausted and broken-spirited, as i fall asleep when i
 have paced three thousand times round my cell,—that is thirty thousand
 steps, or about ten leagues.”
 
sooner had this idea taken possession of him than became more
 composed, arranged his couch to the best of his power, ate little and
 slept less, and found existence almost supportable, because felt
 that could throw it off at pleasure, like worn-out garment. two
 methods of self-destruction were at his disposal. could hang himself
 with his handkerchief to the window bars, or refuse food and die of
 starvation. but the first was repugnant to him. dantès had always
 entertained the greatest horror of pirates, who are hung up to the
 yard-arm; would not die by what seemed an infamous death. he
 resolved to adopt the second, and began that day to carry out his
 resolve.
 
0185m
 


nearly four years had passed away; at the end of the second had
 ceased to mark the lapse of time. dantès said, “i wish to die,” and had
 chosen the manner of his death, and fearful of changing his mind, he
 had taken an oath to die. “when my morning and evening meals are
 brought,” thought he, “i will cast them out of the window, and they
 will think that i have eaten them.”
 
kept his word; twice day cast out, through the barred aperture,
 the provisions his jailer brought him—at first gayly, then with
 deliberation, and at last with regret. nothing but the recollection of
 his oath gave him strength to proceed. hunger made viands once
 repugnant, now acceptable; held the plate in his hand for an hour at
 time, and gazed thoughtfully at the morsel of bad meat, of tainted
 fish, of black and mouldy bread. it was the last yearning for life
 contending with the resolution of despair; then his dungeon seemed less
 sombre, his prospects less desperate. was still young—he was only
 four or five-and-twenty—he had nearly fifty years to live. what
 unforseen events might not open his prison door, and restore him to
 liberty? then raised to his lips the repast that, like voluntary
 tantalus, refused himself; but thought of his oath, and would
 not break it. persisted until, at last, had not sufficient
 strength to rise and cast his supper out of the loophole. the next
 morning could not see or hear; the jailer feared was dangerously
 ill. edmond hoped was dying.
 
thus the day passed away. edmond felt sort of stupor creeping over
 him which brought with it feeling almost of content; the gnawing pain
 at his stomach had ceased; his thirst had abated; when closed his
 eyes saw myriads of lights dancing before them like the
 will-o’-the-wisps that play about the marshes. it was the twilight of
 that mysterious country called death!
 
suddenly, about nine o’clock in the evening, edmond heard hollow
 sound in the wall against which was lying.
 
so many loathsome animals inhabited the prison, that their noise did
 not, in general, awake him; but whether abstinence had quickened his
 faculties, or whether the noise was really louder than usual, edmond
 raised his head and listened. it was continual scratching, as if made
 by huge claw, powerful tooth, or some iron instrument attacking the
 stones.
 
although weakened, the young man’s brain instantly responded to the
 idea that haunts all prisoners—liberty! it seemed to him that heaven
 had at length taken pity on him, and had sent this noise to warn him on
 the very brink of the abyss. perhaps one of those beloved ones had
 so often thought of was thinking of him, and striving to diminish the
 distance that separated them.
 
no, no, doubtless was deceived, and it was but one of those dreams
 that forerun death!
 
edmond still heard the sound. it lasted nearly three hours; then
 heard noise of something falling, and all was silent.
 
some hours afterwards it began again, nearer and more distinct. edmond
 was intensely interested. suddenly the jailer entered.
 
for week since had resolved to die, and during the four days that
 had been carrying out his purpose, edmond had not spoken to the
 attendant, had not answered him when inquired what was the matter
 with him, and turned his face to the wall when looked too curiously
 at him; but now the jailer might hear the noise and put an end to it,
 and so destroy ray of something like hope that soothed his last
 moments.
 
the jailer brought him his breakfast. dantès raised himself up and
 began to talk about everything; about the bad quality of the food,
 about the coldness of his dungeon, grumbling and complaining, in order
 to have an excuse for speaking louder, and wearying the patience of his
 jailer, who out of kindness of heart had brought broth and white bread
 for his prisoner.
 
fortunately, fancied that dantès was delirious; and placing the food
 on the rickety table, withdrew. edmond listened, and the sound
 became more and more distinct.
 
“there can be doubt about it,” thought he; “it is some prisoner who
 is striving to obtain his freedom. oh, if i were only there to help
 him!”
 
suddenly another idea took possession of his mind, so used to
 misfortune, that it was scarcely capable of hope—the idea that the
 noise was made by workmen the governor had ordered to repair the
 neighboring dungeon.
 
it was easy to ascertain this; but how could risk the question? it
 was easy to call his jailer’s attention to the noise, and watch his
 countenance as listened; but might not by this means destroy
 hopes far more important than the short-lived satisfaction of his own
 curiosity? unfortunately, edmond’s brain was still so feeble that he
 could not bend his thoughts to anything in particular. saw but one
 means of restoring lucidity and clearness to his judgment. turned
 his eyes towards the soup which the jailer had brought, rose, staggered
 towards it, raised the vessel to his lips, and drank off the contents
 with feeling of indescribable pleasure.
 
had the resolution to stop with this. had often heard that
 shipwrecked persons had died through having eagerly devoured too much
 food. edmond replaced on the table the bread was about to devour,
 and returned to his couch—he did not wish to die. soon felt that his
 ideas became again collected—he could think, and strengthen his
 thoughts by reasoning. then said to himself:
 
“i must put this to the test, but without compromising anybody. if it
 is workman, i need but knock against the wall, and will cease to
 work, in order to find out who is knocking, and why does so; but as
 his occupation is sanctioned by the governor, will soon resume it.
 if, on the contrary, it is prisoner, the noise i make will alarm him,
 will cease, and not begin again until thinks everyone is asleep.”
 
edmond rose again, but this time his legs did not tremble, and his
 sight was clear; went to corner of his dungeon, detached stone,
 and with it knocked against the wall where the sound came. struck
 thrice.
 
at the first blow the sound ceased, as if by magic.
 
edmond listened intently; an hour passed, two hours passed, and no
 sound was heard from the wall—all was silent there.
 
full of hope, edmond swallowed few mouthfuls of bread and water, and,
 thanks to the vigor of his constitution, found himself well-nigh
 recovered.
 
the day passed away in utter silence—night came without recurrence of
 the noise.
 
“it is prisoner,” said edmond joyfully. his brain was on fire, and
 life and energy returned.
 
the night passed in perfect silence. edmond did not close his eyes.
 
in the morning the jailer brought him fresh provisions—he had already
 devoured those of the previous day; ate these listening anxiously
 for the sound, walking round and round his cell, shaking the iron bars
 of the loophole, restoring vigor and agility to his limbs by exercise,
 and so preparing himself for his future destiny. at intervals he
 listened to learn if the noise had not begun again, and grew impatient
 at the prudence of the prisoner, who did not guess had been
 disturbed by captive as anxious for liberty as himself.
 
three days passed—seventy-two long tedious hours which counted off
 by minutes!
 
at length one evening, as the jailer was visiting him for the last time
 that night, dantès, with his ear for the hundredth time at the wall,
 fancied heard an almost imperceptible movement among the stones. he
 moved away, walked up and down his cell to collect his thoughts, and
 then went back and listened.
 
the matter was longer doubtful. something was at work on the other
 side of the wall; the prisoner had discovered the danger, and had
 substituted lever for chisel.
 
encouraged by this discovery, edmond determined to assist the
 indefatigable laborer. began by moving his bed, and looked around
 for anything with which could pierce the wall, penetrate the moist
 cement, and displace stone.
 
saw nothing, had knife or sharp instrument, the window grating
 was of iron, but had too often assured himself of its solidity. all
 his furniture consisted of bed, chair, table, pail, and jug.
 the bed had iron clamps, but they were screwed to the wood, and it
 would have required screw-driver to take them off. the table and
 chair had nothing, the pail had once possessed handle, but that had
 been removed.
 
0189m
 


dantès had but one resource, which was to break the jug, and with one
 of the sharp fragments attack the wall. let the jug fall on the
 floor, and it broke in pieces.
 
dantès concealed two or three of the sharpest fragments in his bed,
 leaving the rest on the floor. the breaking of his jug was too natural
 an accident to excite suspicion. edmond had all the night to work in,
 but in the darkness could not do much, and soon felt that was
 working against something very hard; pushed back his bed, and waited
 for day.
 
all night heard the subterranean workman, who continued to mine his
 way. day came, the jailer entered. dantès told him that the jug had
 fallen from his hands while was drinking, and the jailer went
 grumblingly to fetch another, without giving himself the trouble to
 remove the fragments of the broken one. returned speedily, advised
 the prisoner to be more careful, and departed.
 
dantès heard joyfully the key grate in the lock; listened until the
 sound of steps died away, and then, hastily displacing his bed, saw by
 the faint light that penetrated into his cell, that had labored
 uselessly the previous evening in attacking the stone instead of
 removing the plaster that surrounded it.
 
the damp had rendered it friable, and dantès was able to break it
 off—in small morsels, it is true, but at the end of half an hour had
 scraped off handful; mathematician might have calculated that in
 two years, supposing that the rock was not encountered, passage
 twenty feet long and two feet broad, might be formed.
 
the prisoner reproached himself with not having thus employed the hours
 had passed in vain hopes, prayer, and despondency. during the six
 years that had been imprisoned, what might not have accomplished?
 
this idea imparted new energy, and in three days had succeeded, with
 the utmost precaution, in removing the cement, and exposing the
 stone-work. the wall was built of rough stones, among which, to give
 strength to the structure, blocks of hewn stone were at intervals
 imbedded. it was one of these had uncovered, and which must
 remove from its socket.
 
dantès strove to do this with his nails, but they were too weak. the
 fragments of the jug broke, and after an hour of useless toil, dantès
 paused with anguish on his brow.
 
was to be thus stopped at the beginning, and was to wait inactive
 until his fellow workman had completed his task? suddenly an idea
 occurred to him—he smiled, and the perspiration dried on his forehead.
 
the jailer always brought dantès’ soup in an iron saucepan; this
 saucepan contained soup for both prisoners, for dantès had noticed that
 it was either quite full, or half empty, according as the turnkey gave
 it to him or to his companion first.
 
the handle of this saucepan was of iron; dantès would have given ten
 years of his life in exchange for it.
 
0191m
 


the jailer was accustomed to pour the contents of the saucepan into
 dantès’ plate, and dantès, after eating his soup with wooden spoon,
 washed the plate, which thus served for every day. now when evening
 came dantès put his plate on the ground near the door; the jailer, as
 entered, stepped on it and broke it.
 
this time could not blame dantès. was wrong to leave it there,
 but the jailer was wrong not to have looked before him. the jailer,
 therefore, only grumbled. then looked about for something to pour
 the soup into; dantès’ entire dinner service consisted of one
 plate—there was alternative.
 
“leave the saucepan,” said dantès; “you can take it away when you bring
 my breakfast.”
 
this advice was to the jailer’s taste, as it spared him the necessity
 of making another trip. left the saucepan.
 
dantès was beside himself with joy. rapidly devoured his food, and
 after waiting an hour, lest the jailer should change his mind and
 return, removed his bed, took the handle of the saucepan, inserted
 the point between the hewn stone and rough stones of the wall, and
 employed it as lever. slight oscillation showed dantès that all
 went well. at the end of an hour the stone was extricated from the
 wall, leaving cavity foot and half in diameter.
 
dantès carefully collected the plaster, carried it into the corner of
 his cell, and covered it with earth. then, wishing to make the best use
 of his time while had the means of labor, continued to work
 without ceasing. at the dawn of day replaced the stone, pushed his
 bed against the wall, and lay down. the breakfast consisted of piece
 of bread; the jailer entered and placed the bread on the table.
 
“well, don’t you intend to bring another plate?” said dantès.
 
“no,” replied the turnkey; “you destroy everything. first you break
 your jug, then you make break your plate; if all the prisoners
 followed your example, the government would be ruined. i shall leave
 you the saucepan, and pour your soup into that. so for the future i
 hope you will not be so destructive.”
 
dantès raised his eyes to heaven and clasped his hands beneath the
 coverlet. felt more gratitude for the possession of this piece of
 iron than had ever felt for anything. had noticed, however, that
 the prisoner on the other side had ceased to labor; matter, this was
 greater reason for proceeding—if his neighbor would not come to him,
 would go to his neighbor. all day toiled on untiringly, and by
 the evening had succeeded in extracting ten handfuls of plaster and
 fragments of stone. when the hour for his jailer’s visit arrived,
 dantès straightened the handle of the saucepan as well as could, and
 placed it in its accustomed place. the turnkey poured his ration of
 soup into it, together with the fish—for thrice week the prisoners
 were deprived of meat. this would have been method of reckoning time,
 had not dantès long ceased to do so. having poured out the soup, the
 turnkey retired.
 
dantès wished to ascertain whether his neighbor had really ceased to
 work. listened—all was silent, as it had been for the last three
 days. dantès sighed; it was evident that his neighbor distrusted him.
 however, toiled on all the night without being discouraged; but
 after two or three hours encountered an obstacle. the iron made no
 impression, but met with smooth surface; dantès touched it, and found
 that it was beam. this beam crossed, or rather blocked up, the hole
 dantès had made; it was necessary, therefore, to dig above or under it.
 the unhappy young man had not thought of this.
 
“oh, my god, my god!” murmured he, “i have so earnestly prayed to you,
 that i hoped my prayers had been heard. after having deprived of my
 liberty, after having deprived of death, after having recalled to
 existence, my god, have pity on me, and do not let die in despair!”
 
0193m
 


“who talks of god and despair at the same time?” said voice that
 seemed to come from beneath the earth, and, deadened by the distance,
 sounded hollow and sepulchral in the young man’s ears. edmond’s hair
 stood on end, and rose to his knees.
 
“ah,” said he, “i hear human voice.” edmond had not heard anyone
 speak save his jailer for four or five years; and jailer is man to
 prisoner—he is living door, barrier of flesh and blood adding
 strength to restraints of oak and iron.
 
“in the name of heaven,” cried dantès, “speak again, though the sound
 of your voice terrifies me. who are you?”
 
“who are you?” said the voice.
 
“an unhappy prisoner,” replied dantès, who made hesitation in
 answering.
 
“of what country?”
 
“a frenchman.”
 
“your name?”
 
“edmond dantès.”
 
“your profession?”
 
“a sailor.”
 
“how long have you been here?”
 
“since the 28th of february, 1815.”
 
“your crime?”
 
“i am innocent.”
 
“but of what are you accused?”
 
“of having conspired to aid the emperor’s return.”
 
“what! for the emperor’s return?—the emperor is longer on the
 throne, then?”
 
“he abdicated at fontainebleau in 1814, and was sent to the island of
 elba. but how long have you been here that you are ignorant of all
 this?”
 
“since 1811.”
 
dantès shuddered; this man had been four years longer than himself in
 prison.
 
“do not dig any more,” said the voice; “only tell how high up is
 your excavation?”
 
“on level with the floor.”
 
“how is it concealed?”
 
“behind my bed.”
 
“has your bed been moved since you have been prisoner?”
 
“no.”
 
“what does your chamber open on?”
 
“a corridor.”
 
“and the corridor?”
 
“on court.”
 
“alas!” murmured the voice.
 
“oh, what is the matter?” cried dantès.
 
“i have made mistake owing to an error in my plans. i took the wrong
 angle, and have come out fifteen feet from where i intended. i took the
 wall you are mining for the outer wall of the fortress.”
 
“but then you would be close to the sea?”
 
“that is what i hoped.”
 
“and supposing you had succeeded?”
 
“i should have thrown myself into the sea, gained one of the islands
 near here—the isle daume or the isle tiboulen—and then i should
 have been safe.”
 
“could you have swum so far?”
 
“heaven would have given strength; but now all is lost.”
 
“all?”
 
“yes; stop up your excavation carefully, do not work any more, and wait
 until you hear from me.”
 
“tell me, at least, who you are?”
 
“i am—i am no. 27.”
 
“you mistrust me, then,” said dantès. edmond fancied heard bitter
 laugh resounding from the depths.
 
“oh, i am christian,” cried dantès, guessing instinctively that this
 man meant to abandon him. “i swear to you by him who died for us that
 naught shall induce to breathe one syllable to my jailers; but i
 conjure you do not abandon me. if you do, i swear to you, for i have
 got to the end of my strength, that i will dash my brains out against
 the wall, and you will have my death to reproach yourself with.”
 
“how old are you? your voice is that of young man.”
 
“i do not know my age, for i have not counted the years i have been
 here. all i do know is, that i was just nineteen when i was arrested,
 the 28th of february, 1815.”
 
“not quite twenty-six!” murmured the voice; “at that age cannot be a
 traitor.”
 
“oh, no, no,” cried dantès. “i swear to you again, rather than betray
 you, i would allow myself to be hacked in pieces!”
 
“you have done well to speak to me, and ask for my assistance, for i
 was about to form another plan, and leave you; but your age reassures
 me. i will not forget you. wait.”
 
“how long?”
 
“i must calculate our chances; i will give you the signal.”
 
“but you will not leave me; you will come to me, or you will let me
 come to you. we will escape, and if we cannot escape we will talk; you
 of those whom you love, and i of those whom i love. you must love
 somebody?”
 
“no, i am alone in the world.”
 
“then you will love me. if you are young, i will be your comrade; if
 you are old, i will be your son. i have father who is seventy if he
 yet lives; i only love him and young girl called mercédès. my father
 has not yet forgotten me, i am sure, but god alone knows if she loves
 still; i shall love you as i loved my father.”
 
“it is well,” returned the voice; “tomorrow.”
 
these few words were uttered with an accent that left doubt of his
 sincerity; dantès rose, dispersed the fragments with the same
 precaution as before, and pushed his bed back against the wall. then
 gave himself up to his happiness. would longer be alone. was,
 perhaps, about to regain his liberty; at the worst, would have a
 companion, and captivity that is shared is but half captivity. plaints
 made in common are almost prayers, and prayers where two or three are
 gathered together invoke the mercy of heaven.
 
all day dantès walked up and down his cell. sat down occasionally on
 his bed, pressing his hand on his heart. at the slightest noise he
 bounded towards the door. once or twice the thought crossed his mind
 that might be separated from this unknown, whom loved already;
 and then his mind was made up—when the jailer moved his bed and stooped
 to examine the opening, would kill him with his water jug. would
 be condemned to die, but was about to die of grief and despair when
 this miraculous noise recalled him to life.
 
the jailer came in the evening. dantès was on his bed. it seemed to him
 that thus better guarded the unfinished opening. doubtless there was
 strange expression in his eyes, for the jailer said, “come, are you
 going mad again?”
 
dantès did not answer; feared that the emotion of his voice would
 betray him. the jailer went away shaking his head. night came; dantès
 hoped that his neighbor would profit by the silence to address him, but
 was mistaken. the next morning, however, just as removed his bed
 from the wall, heard three knocks; threw himself on his knees.
 
“is it you?” said he; “i am here.”
 
“is your jailer gone?”
 
“yes,” said dantès; “he will not return until the evening; so that we
 have twelve hours before us.”
 
“i can work, then?” said the voice.
 
“oh, yes, yes; this instant, i entreat you.”
 
in moment that part of the floor on which dantès was resting his two
 hands, as knelt with his head in the opening, suddenly gave way; he
 drew back smartly, while mass of stones and earth disappeared in a
 hole that opened beneath the aperture himself had formed. then from
 the bottom of this passage, the depth of which it was impossible to
 measure, saw appear, first the head, then the shoulders, and lastly
 the body of man, who sprang lightly into his cell.
 
0197m
 



chapter 16. learned italian
 
seizing in his arms the friend so long and ardently desired, dantès
 almost carried him towards the window, in order to obtain better view
 of his features by the aid of the imperfect light that struggled
 through the grating.
 
was man of small stature, with hair blanched rather by suffering
 and sorrow than by age. had deep-set, penetrating eye, almost
 buried beneath the thick gray eyebrow, and long (and still black)
 beard reaching down to his breast. his thin face, deeply furrowed by
 care, and the bold outline of his strongly marked features, betokened a
 man more accustomed to exercise his mental faculties than his physical
 strength. large drops of perspiration were now standing on his brow,
 while the garments that hung about him were so ragged that one could
 only guess at the pattern upon which they had originally been
 fashioned.
 
the stranger might have numbered sixty or sixty-five years; but a
 certain briskness and appearance of vigor in his movements made it
 probable that was aged more from captivity than the course of time.
 received the enthusiastic greeting of his young acquaintance with
 evident pleasure, as though his chilled affections were rekindled and
 invigorated by his contact with one so warm and ardent. thanked him
 with grateful cordiality for his kindly welcome, although must at
 that moment have been suffering bitterly to find another dungeon where
 had fondly reckoned on discovering means of regaining his liberty.
 
“let us first see,” said he, “whether it is possible to remove the
 traces of my entrance here—our future tranquillity depends upon our
 jailers being entirely ignorant of it.”
 
advancing to the opening, stooped and raised the stone easily in
 spite of its weight; then, fitting it into its place, said:
 
“you removed this stone very carelessly; but i suppose you had tools
 to aid you.”
 
“why,” exclaimed dantès, with astonishment, “do you possess any?”
 
“i made myself some; and with the exception of file, i have all that
 are necessary,—a chisel, pincers, and lever.”
 
0201m
 


“oh, how i should like to see these products of your industry and
 patience.”
 
“well, in the first place, here is my chisel.”
 
so saying, displayed sharp strong blade, with handle made of
 beechwood.
 
“and with what did you contrive to make that?” inquired dantès.
 
“with one of the clamps of my bedstead; and this very tool has sufficed
 to hollow out the road by which i came hither, distance of about
 fifty feet.”
 
“fifty feet!” responded dantès, almost terrified.
 
“do not speak so loud, young man—don’t speak so loud. it frequently
 occurs in state prison like this, that persons are stationed outside
 the doors of the cells purposely to overhear the conversation of the
 prisoners.”
 
“but they believe i am shut up alone here.”
 
“that makes difference.”
 
“and you say that you dug your way distance of fifty feet to get
 here?”
 
“i do; that is about the distance that separates your chamber from
 mine; only, unfortunately, i did not curve aright; for want of the
 necessary geometrical instruments to calculate my scale of proportion,
 instead of taking an ellipsis of forty feet, i made it fifty. i
 expected, as i told you, to reach the outer wall, pierce through it,
 and throw myself into the sea; i have, however, kept along the corridor
 on which your chamber opens, instead of going beneath it. my labor is
 all in vain, for i find that the corridor looks into courtyard filled
 with soldiers.”
 
“that’s true,” said dantès; “but the corridor you speak of only bounds
 _one_ side of my cell; there are three others—do you know anything of
 their situation?”
 
“this one is built against the solid rock, and it would take ten
 experienced miners, duly furnished with the requisite tools, as many
 years to perforate it. this adjoins the lower part of the governor’s
 apartments, and were we to work our way through, we should only get
 into some lock-up cellars, where we must necessarily be recaptured. the
 fourth and last side of your cell faces on—faces on—stop minute, now
 where does it face?”
 
the wall of which spoke was the one in which was fixed the loophole
 by which light was admitted to the chamber. this loophole, which
 gradually diminished in size as it approached the outside, to an
 opening through which child could not have passed, was, for better
 security, furnished with three iron bars, so as to quiet all
 apprehensions even in the mind of the most suspicious jailer as to the
 possibility of prisoner’s escape. as the stranger asked the question,
 dragged the table beneath the window.
 
“climb up,” said to dantès.
 
the young man obeyed, mounted on the table, and, divining the wishes of
 his companion, placed his back securely against the wall and held out
 both hands. the stranger, whom as yet dantès knew only by the number of
 his cell, sprang up with an agility by means to be expected in a
 person of his years, and, light and steady on his feet as cat or a
 lizard, climbed from the table to the outstretched hands of dantès, and
 from them to his shoulders; then, bending double, for the ceiling of
 the dungeon prevented him from holding himself erect, managed to
 slip his head between the upper bars of the window, so as to be able to
 command perfect view from top to bottom.
 
an instant afterwards hastily drew back his head, saying, “i thought
 so!” and sliding from the shoulders of dantès as dextrously as had
 ascended, nimbly leaped from the table to the ground.
 
“what was it that you thought?” asked the young man anxiously, in his
 turn descending from the table.
 
the elder prisoner pondered the matter. “yes,” said at length, “it
 is so. this side of your chamber looks out upon kind of open gallery,
 where patrols are continually passing, and sentries keep watch day and
 night.”
 
“are you quite sure of that?”
 
“certain. i saw the soldier’s shape and the top of his musket; that
 made draw in my head so quickly, for i was fearful might also see
 me.”
 
“well?” inquired dantès.
 
“you perceive then the utter impossibility of escaping through your
 dungeon?”
 
“then——” pursued the young man eagerly.
 
“then,” answered the elder prisoner, “the will of god be done!” and as
 the old man slowly pronounced those words, an air of profound
 resignation spread itself over his careworn countenance. dantès gazed
 on the man who could thus philosophically resign hopes so long and
 ardently nourished with an astonishment mingled with admiration.
 
“tell me, i entreat of you, who and what you are?” said at length.
 “never have i met with so remarkable person as yourself.”
 
“willingly,” answered the stranger; “if, indeed, you feel any curiosity
 respecting one, now, alas, powerless to aid you in any way.”
 
“say not so; you can console and support by the strength of your own
 powerful mind. pray let know who you really are?”
 
the stranger smiled melancholy smile. “then listen,” said he. “i am
 the abbé faria, and have been imprisoned as you know in this château
 d’if since the year 1811; previously to which i had been confined for
 three years in the fortress of fenestrelle. in the year 1811 i was
 transferred to piedmont in france. it was at this period i learned that
 the destiny which seemed subservient to every wish formed by napoleon,
 had bestowed on him son, named king of rome even in his cradle. i was
 very far then from expecting the change you have just informed of;
 namely, that four years afterwards, this colossus of power would be
 overthrown. then who reigns in france at this moment—napoleon ii.?”
 
“no, louis xviii.”
 
“the brother of louis xvi.! how inscrutable are the ways of
 providence—for what great and mysterious purpose has it pleased heaven
 to abase the man once so elevated, and raise up him who was so abased?”
 
dantès’ whole attention was riveted on man who could thus forget his
 own misfortunes while occupying himself with the destinies of others.
 
“yes, yes,” continued he, “’twill be the same as it was in england.
 after charles i., cromwell; after cromwell, charles ii., and then james
 ii., and then some son-in-law or relation, some prince of orange, a
 stadtholder who becomes king. then new concessions to the people,
 then constitution, then liberty. ah, my friend!” said the abbé,
 turning towards dantès, and surveying him with the kindling gaze of a
 prophet, “you are young, you will see all this come to pass.”
 
“probably, if ever i get out of prison!”
 
“true,” replied faria, “we are prisoners; but i forget this sometimes,
 and there are even moments when my mental vision transports beyond
 these walls, and i fancy myself at liberty.”
 
“but wherefore are you here?”
 
“because in 1807 i dreamed of the very plan napoleon tried to realize
 in 1811; because, like machiavelli, i desired to alter the political
 face of italy, and instead of allowing it to be split up into a
 quantity of petty principalities, each held by some weak or tyrannical
 ruler, i sought to form one large, compact, and powerful empire; and,
 lastly, because i fancied i had found my cæsar borgia in crowned
 simpleton, who feigned to enter into my views only to betray me. it was
 the plan of alexander vi. and clement vii., but it will never succeed
 now, for they attempted it fruitlessly, and napoleon was unable to
 complete his work. italy seems fated to misfortune.” and the old man
 bowed his head.
 
dantès could not understand man risking his life for such matters.
 napoleon certainly knew something of, inasmuch as had seen and
 spoken with him; but of clement vii. and alexander vi. knew nothing.
 
“are you not,” asked, “the priest who here in the château d’if is
 generally thought to be—ill?”
 
“mad, you mean, don’t you?”
 
“i did not like to say so,” answered dantès, smiling.
 
“well, then,” resumed faria with bitter smile, “let answer your
 question in full, by acknowledging that i am the poor mad prisoner of
 the château d’if, for many years permitted to amuse the different
 visitors with what is said to be my insanity; and, in all probability,
 i should be promoted to the honor of making sport for the children, if
 such innocent beings could be found in an abode devoted like this to
 suffering and despair.”
 
dantès remained for short time mute and motionless; at length he
 said:
 
“then you abandon all hope of escape?”
 
“i perceive its utter impossibility; and i consider it impious to
 attempt that which the almighty evidently does not approve.”
 
“nay, be not discouraged. would it not be expecting too much to hope to
 succeed at your first attempt? why not try to find an opening in
 another direction from that which has so unfortunately failed?”
 
“alas, it shows how little notion you can have of all it has cost to
 effect purpose so unexpectedly frustrated, that you talk of beginning
 over again. in the first place, i was four years making the tools i
 possess, and have been two years scraping and digging out earth, hard
 as granite itself; then what toil and fatigue has it not been to remove
 huge stones i should once have deemed impossible to loosen. whole days
 have i passed in these titanic efforts, considering my labor well
 repaid if, by night-time i had contrived to carry away square inch of
 this hard-bound cement, changed by ages into substance unyielding as
 the stones themselves; then to conceal the mass of earth and rubbish i
 dug up, i was compelled to break through staircase, and throw the
 fruits of my labor into the hollow part of it; but the well is now so
 completely choked up, that i scarcely think it would be possible to add
 another handful of dust without leading to discovery. consider also
 that i fully believed i had accomplished the end and aim of my
 undertaking, for which i had so exactly husbanded my strength as to
 make it just hold out to the termination of my enterprise; and now, at
 the moment when i reckoned upon success, my hopes are forever dashed
 from me. no, i repeat again, that nothing shall induce to renew
 attempts evidently at variance with the almighty’s pleasure.”
 
dantès held down his head, that the other might not see how joy at the
 thought of having companion outweighed the sympathy felt for the
 failure of the abbé’s plans.
 
the abbé sank upon edmond’s bed, while edmond himself remained
 standing. escape had never once occurred to him. there are, indeed,
 some things which appear so impossible that the mind does not dwell on
 them for an instant. to undermine the ground for fifty feet—to devote
 three years to labor which, if successful, would conduct you to a
 precipice overhanging the sea—to plunge into the waves from the height
 of fifty, sixty, perhaps hundred feet, at the risk of being dashed to
 pieces against the rocks, should you have been fortunate enough to have
 escaped the fire of the sentinels; and even, supposing all these perils
 past, then to have to swim for your life distance of at least three
 miles ere you could reach the shore—were difficulties so startling and
 formidable that dantès had never even dreamed of such scheme,
 resigning himself rather to death.
 
but the sight of an old man clinging to life with so desperate a
 courage, gave fresh turn to his ideas, and inspired him with new
 courage. another, older and less strong than he, had attempted what he
 had not had sufficient resolution to undertake, and had failed only
 because of an error in calculation. this same person, with almost
 incredible patience and perseverance, had contrived to provide himself
 with tools requisite for so unparalleled an attempt. another had done
 all this; why, then, was it impossible to dantès? faria had dug his way
 through fifty feet, dantès would dig hundred; faria, at the age of
 fifty, had devoted three years to the task; he, who was but half as
 old, would sacrifice six; faria, priest and savant, had not shrunk
 from the idea of risking his life by trying to swim distance of three
 miles to one of the islands—daume, rattonneau, or lemaire; should a
 hardy sailor, an experienced diver, like himself, shrink from similar
 task; should he, who had so often for mere amusement’s sake plunged to
 the bottom of the to fetch up the bright coral branch, hesitate to
 entertain the same project? could do it in an hour, and how many
 times had he, for pure pastime, continued in the water for more than
 twice as long! at once dantès resolved to follow the brave example of
 his energetic companion, and to remember that what has once been done
 may be done again.
 
after continuing some time in profound meditation, the young man
 suddenly exclaimed, “i have found what you were in search of!”
 
faria started: “have you, indeed?” cried he, raising his head with
 quick anxiety; “pray, let know what it is you have discovered?”
 
“the corridor through which you have bored your way from the cell you
 occupy here, extends in the same direction as the outer gallery, does
 it not?”
 
0207m
 


“it does.”
 
“and is not above fifteen feet from it?”
 
“about that.”
 
“well, then, i will tell you what we must do. we must pierce through
 the corridor by forming side opening about the middle, as it were the
 top part of cross. this time you will lay your plans more accurately;
 we shall get out into the gallery you have described; kill the sentinel
 who guards it, and make our escape. all we require to insure success is
 courage, and that you possess, and strength, which i am not deficient
 in; as for patience, you have abundantly proved yours—you shall now see
 prove mine.”
 
“one instant, my dear friend,” replied the abbé; “it is clear you do
 not understand the nature of the courage with which i am endowed, and
 what use i intend making of my strength. as for patience, i consider
 that i have abundantly exercised that in beginning every morning the
 task of the night before, and every night renewing the task of the day.
 but then, young man (and i pray of you to give your full attention),
 then i thought i could not be doing anything displeasing to the
 almighty in trying to set an innocent being at liberty—one who had
 committed offence, and merited not condemnation.”
 
“and have your notions changed?” asked dantès with much surprise; “do
 you think yourself more guilty in making the attempt since you have
 encountered me?”
 
“no; neither do i wish to incur guilt. hitherto i have fancied myself
 merely waging war against circumstances, not men. i have thought it no
 to bore through wall, or destroy staircase; but i cannot so
 easily persuade myself to pierce heart or take away life.”
 
slight movement of surprise escaped dantès.
 
“is it possible,” said he, “that where your liberty is at stake you can
 allow any such scruple to deter you from obtaining it?”
 
“tell me,” replied faria, “what has hindered you from knocking down
 your jailer with piece of wood torn from your bedstead, dressing
 yourself in his clothes, and endeavoring to escape?”
 
“simply the fact that the idea never occurred to me,” answered dantès.
 
“because,” said the old man, “the natural repugnance to the commission
 of such crime prevented you from thinking of it; and so it ever is
 because in simple and allowable things our natural instincts keep us
 from deviating from the strict line of duty. the tiger, whose nature
 teaches him to delight in shedding blood, needs but the sense of smell
 to show him when his prey is within his reach, and by following this
 instinct is enabled to measure the leap necessary to permit him to
 spring on his victim; but man, on the contrary, loathes the idea of
 blood—it is not alone that the laws of social life inspire him with a
 shrinking dread of taking life; his natural construction and
 physiological formation——”
 
dantès was confused and silent at this explanation of the thoughts
 which had unconsciously been working in his mind, or rather soul; for
 there are two distinct sorts of ideas, those that proceed from the head
 and those that emanate from the heart.
 
0209m
 


“since my imprisonment,” said faria, “i have thought over all the most
 celebrated cases of escape on record. they have rarely been successful.
 those that have been crowned with full success have been long meditated
 upon, and carefully arranged; such, for instance, as the escape of the
 duc beaufort from the château vincennes, that of the abbé
 dubuquoi from for l’evêque; of latude from the bastille. then there are
 those for which chance sometimes affords opportunity, and those are the
 best of all. let us, therefore, wait patiently for some favorable
 moment, and when it presents itself, profit by it.”
 
“ah,” said dantès, “you might well endure the tedious delay; you were
 constantly employed in the task you set yourself, and when weary with
 toil, you had your hopes to refresh and encourage you.”
 
“i assure you,” replied the old man, “i did not turn to that source for
 recreation or support.”
 
“what did you do then?”
 
“i wrote or studied.”
 
“were you then permitted the use of pens, ink, and paper?”
 
“oh, no,” answered the abbé; “i had none but what i made for myself.”
 
“you made paper, pens and ink?”
 
“yes.”
 
dantès gazed with admiration, but had some difficulty in believing.
 faria saw this.
 
“when you pay visit in my cell, my young friend,” said he, “i will
 show you an entire work, the fruits of the thoughts and reflections of
 my whole life; many of them meditated over in the shades of the
 colosseum at rome, at the foot of st. mark’s column at venice, and on
 the borders of the arno at florence, little imagining at the time that
 they would be arranged in order within the walls of the château d’if.
 the work i speak of is called _a treatise on the possibility of a
 general monarchy in italy_, and will make one large quarto volume.”
 
“and on what have you written all this?”
 
“on two of my shirts. i invented preparation that makes linen as
 smooth and as easy to write on as parchment.”
 
“you are, then, chemist?”
 
“somewhat; i know lavoisier, and was the intimate friend of cabanis.”
 
“but for such work you must have needed books—had you any?”
 
“i had nearly five thousand volumes in my library at rome; but after
 reading them over many times, i found out that with one hundred and
 fifty well-chosen books man possesses, if not complete summary of
 all human knowledge, at least all that man need really know. i
 devoted three years of my life to reading and studying these one
 hundred and fifty volumes, till i knew them nearly by heart; so that
 since i have been in prison, very slight effort of memory has enabled
 to recall their contents as readily as though the pages were open
 before me. i could recite you the whole of thucydides, xenophon,
 plutarch, titus livius, tacitus, strada, jornandes, dante, montaigne,
 shakespeare, spinoza, machiavelli, and bossuet. i name only the most
 important.”
 
“you are, doubtless, acquainted with variety of languages, so as to
 have been able to read all these?”
 
“yes, i speak five of the modern tongues—that is to say, german,
 french, italian, english, and spanish; by the aid of ancient greek i
 learned modern greek—i don’t speak it so well as i could wish, but i am
 still trying to improve myself.”
 
“improve yourself!” repeated dantès; “why, how can you manage to do
 so?”
 
“why, i made vocabulary of the words i knew; turned, returned, and
 arranged them, so as to enable to express my thoughts through their
 medium. i know nearly one thousand words, which is all that is
 absolutely necessary, although i believe there are nearly one hundred
 thousand in the dictionaries. i cannot hope to be very fluent, but i
 certainly should have difficulty in explaining my wants and wishes;
 and that would be quite as much as i should ever require.”
 
stronger grew the wonder of dantès, who almost fancied had to do
 with one gifted with supernatural powers; still hoping to find some
 imperfection which might bring him down to level with human beings,
 added, “then if you were not furnished with pens, how did you manage
 to write the work you speak of?”
 
“i made myself some excellent ones, which would be universally
 preferred to all others if once known. you are aware what huge whitings
 are served to us on _maigre_ days. well, i selected the cartilages of
 the heads of these fishes, and you can scarcely imagine the delight
 with which i welcomed the arrival of each wednesday, friday, and
 saturday, as affording the means of increasing my stock of pens; for
 i will freely confess that my historical labors have been my greatest
 solace and relief. while retracing the past, i forget the present; and
 traversing at will the path of history i cease to remember that i am
 myself prisoner.”
 
“but the ink,” said dantès; “of what did you make your ink?”
 
“there was formerly fireplace in my dungeon,” replied faria, “but it
 was closed up long ere i became an occupant of this prison. still, it
 must have been many years in use, for it was thickly covered with a
 coating of soot; this soot i dissolved in portion of the wine brought
 to every sunday, and i assure you better ink cannot be desired.
 for very important notes, for which closer attention is required, i
 pricked one of my fingers, and wrote with my own blood.”
 
“and when,” asked dantès, “may i see all this?”
 
“whenever you please,” replied the abbé.
 
“oh, then let it be directly!” exclaimed the young man.
 
“follow me, then,” said the abbé, as re-entered the subterranean
 passage, in which soon disappeared, followed by dantès.
 


chapter 17. the abbé’s chamber
 
after having passed with tolerable ease through the subterranean
 passage, which, however, did not admit of their holding themselves
 erect, the two friends reached the further end of the corridor, into
 which the abbé’s cell opened; from that point the passage became much
 narrower, and barely permitted one to creep through on hands and knees.
 the floor of the abbé’s cell was paved, and it had been by raising one
 of the stones in the most obscure corner that faria had been able to
 commence the laborious task of which dantès had witnessed the
 completion.
 
as entered the chamber of his friend, dantès cast around one eager
 and searching glance in quest of the expected marvels, but nothing more
 than common met his view.
 
“it is well,” said the abbé; “we have some hours before us—it is now
 just quarter past twelve o’clock.” instinctively dantès turned round
 to observe by what watch or clock the abbé had been able so accurately
 to specify the hour.
 
“look at this ray of light which enters by my window,” said the abbé,
 “and then observe the lines traced on the wall. well, by means of these
 lines, which are in accordance with the double motion of the earth, and
 the ellipse it describes round the sun, i am enabled to ascertain the
 precise hour with more minuteness than if i possessed watch; for that
 might be broken or deranged in its movements, while the sun and earth
 never vary in their appointed paths.”
 
this last explanation was wholly lost upon dantès, who had always
 imagined, from seeing the sun rise from behind the mountains and set in
 the mediterranean, that it moved, and not the earth. double movement
 of the globe inhabited, and of which could feel nothing, appeared
 to him perfectly impossible. each word that fell from his companion’s
 lips seemed fraught with the mysteries of science, as worthy of digging
 out as the gold and diamonds in the mines of guzerat and golconda,
 which could just recollect having visited during voyage made in
 his earliest youth.
 
“come,” said to the abbé, “i am anxious to see your treasures.”
 
the abbé smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace, raised, by
 the help of his chisel, long stone, which had doubtless been the
 hearth, beneath which was cavity of considerable depth, serving as a
 safe depository of the articles mentioned to dantès.
 
0213m
 


“what do you wish to see first?” asked the abbé.
 
“oh, your great work on the monarchy of italy!”
 
faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four rolls of
 linen, laid one over the other, like folds of papyrus. these rolls
 consisted of slips of cloth about four inches wide and eighteen long;
 they were all carefully numbered and closely covered with writing, so
 legible that dantès could easily read it, as well as make out the
 sense—it being in italian, language he, as provençal, perfectly
 understood.
 
“there,” said he, “there is the work complete. i wrote the word _finis_
 at the end of the sixty-eighth strip about week ago. i have torn up
 two of my shirts, and as many handkerchiefs as i was master of, to
 complete the precious pages. should i ever get out of prison and find
 in all italy printer courageous enough to publish what i have
 composed, my literary reputation is forever secured.”
 
“i see,” answered dantès. “now let behold the curious pens with
 which you have written your work.”
 
“look!” said faria, showing to the young man slender stick about six
 inches long, and much resembling the size of the handle of fine
 painting-brush, to the end of which was tied, by piece of thread, one
 of those cartilages of which the abbé had before spoken to dantès; it
 was pointed, and divided at the nib like an ordinary pen. dantès
 examined it with intense admiration, then looked around to see the
 instrument with which it had been shaped so correctly into form.
 
“ah, yes,” said faria; “the penknife. that’s my masterpiece. i made it,
 as well as this larger knife, out of an old iron candlestick.” the
 penknife was sharp and keen as razor; as for the other knife, it
 would serve double purpose, and with it one could cut and thrust.
 
dantès examined the various articles shown to him with the same
 attention that had bestowed on the curiosities and strange tools
 exhibited in the shops at marseilles as the works of the savages in the
 south seas from whence they had been brought by the different trading
 vessels.
 
“as for the ink,” said faria, “i told you how i managed to obtain
 that—and i only just make it from time to time, as i require it.”
 
“one thing still puzzles me,” observed dantès, “and that is how you
 managed to do all this by daylight?”
 
“i worked at night also,” replied faria.
 
“night!—why, for heaven’s sake, are your eyes like cats’, that you can
 see to work in the dark?”
 
“indeed they are not; but god has supplied man with the intelligence
 that enables him to overcome the limitations of natural conditions. i
 furnished myself with light.”
 
“you did? pray tell how.”
 
“i separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it, and so made
 oil—here is my lamp.” so saying, the abbé exhibited sort of torch
 very similar to those used in public illuminations.
 
“but how do you procure light?”
 
“oh, here are two flints and piece of burnt linen.”
 
“and matches?”
 
“i pretended that i had disorder of the skin, and asked for little
 sulphur, which was readily supplied.”
 
dantès laid the different things had been looking at on the table,
 and stood with his head drooping on his breast, as though overwhelmed
 by the perseverance and strength of faria’s mind.
 
0215m
 


“you have not seen all yet,” continued faria, “for i did not think it
 wise to trust all my treasures in the same hiding-place. let us shut
 this one up.” they put the stone back in its place; the abbé sprinkled
 little dust over it to conceal the traces of its having been removed,
 rubbed his foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the
 other, and then, going towards his bed, removed it from the spot it
 stood in. behind the head of the bed, and concealed by stone fitting
 in so closely as to defy all suspicion, was hollow space, and in this
 space ladder of cords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length.
 dantès closely and eagerly examined it; found it firm, solid, and
 compact enough to bear any weight.
 
“who supplied you with the materials for making this wonderful work?”
 
“i tore up several of my shirts, and ripped out the seams in the sheets
 of my bed, during my three years’ imprisonment at fenestrelle; and when
 i was removed to the château d’if, i managed to bring the ravellings
 with me, so that i have been able to finish my work here.”
 
“and was it not discovered that your sheets were unhemmed?”
 
“oh, no, for when i had taken out the thread i required, i hemmed the
 edges over again.”
 
“with what?”
 
“with this needle,” said the abbé, as, opening his ragged vestments, he
 showed dantès long, sharp fish-bone, with small perforated eye for
 the thread, small portion of which still remained in it.
 
“i once thought,” continued faria, “of removing these iron bars, and
 letting myself down from the window, which, as you see, is somewhat
 wider than yours, although i should have enlarged it still more
 preparatory to my flight; however, i discovered that i should merely
 have dropped into sort of inner court, and i therefore renounced the
 project altogether as too full of risk and danger. nevertheless, i
 carefully preserved my ladder against one of those unforeseen
 opportunities of which i spoke just now, and which sudden chance
 frequently brings about.”
 
while affecting to be deeply engaged in examining the ladder, the mind
 of dantès was, in fact, busily occupied by the idea that person so
 intelligent, ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbé might probably be
 able to solve the dark mystery of his own misfortunes, where himself
 could see nothing.
 
“what are you thinking of?” asked the abbé smilingly, imputing the deep
 abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe
 and wonder.
 
“i was reflecting, in the first place,” replied dantès, “upon the
 enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have employed to
 reach the high perfection to which you have attained. what would you
 not have accomplished if you had been free?”
 
“possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would probably, in a
 state of freedom, have evaporated in thousand follies; misfortune is
 needed to bring to light the treasures of the human intellect.
 compression is needed to explode gunpowder. captivity has brought my
 mental faculties to focus; and you are well aware that from the
 collision of clouds electricity is produced—from electricity,
 lightning, from lightning, illumination.”
 
“no,” replied dantès. “i know nothing. some of your words are to me
 quite empty of meaning. you must be blessed indeed to possess the
 knowledge you have.”
 
the abbé smiled. “well,” said he, “but you had another subject for your
 thoughts; did you not say so just now?”
 
“i did!”
 
“you have told as yet but one of them—let hear the other.”
 
“it was this,—that while you had related to all the particulars of
 your past life, you were perfectly unacquainted with mine.”
 
“your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficient length to admit
 of your having passed through any very important events.”
 
“it has been long enough to inflict on great and undeserved
 misfortune. i would fain fix the source of it on man that i may no
 longer vent reproaches upon heaven.”
 
“then you profess ignorance of the crime with which you are charged?”
 
“i do, indeed; and this i swear by the two beings most dear to upon
 earth,—my father and mercédès.”
 
“come,” said the abbé, closing his hiding-place, and pushing the bed
 back to its original situation, “let hear your story.”
 
dantès obeyed, and commenced what called his history, but which
 consisted only of the account of voyage to india, and two or three
 voyages to the levant, until arrived at the recital of his last
 cruise, with the death of captain leclere, and the receipt of packet
 to be delivered by himself to the grand marshal; his interview with
 that personage, and his receiving, in place of the packet brought, a
 letter addressed to monsieur noirtier—his arrival at marseilles, and
 interview with his father—his affection for mercédès, and their nuptual
 feast—his arrest and subsequent examination, his temporary detention at
 the palais justice, and his final imprisonment in the château d’if.
 from this point everything was blank to dantès—he knew nothing more,
 not even the length of time had been imprisoned. his recital
 finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.
 
“there is,” said he, at the end of his meditations, “a clever maxim,
 which bears upon what i was saying to you some little while ago, and
 that is, that unless wicked ideas take root in naturally depraved
 mind, human nature, in right and wholesome state, revolts at crime.
 still, from an artificial civilization have originated wants, vices,
 and false tastes, which occasionally become so powerful as to stifle
 within us all good feelings, and ultimately to lead us into guilt and
 wickedness. from this view of things, then, comes the axiom that if you
 visit to discover the author of any bad action, seek first to discover
 the person to whom the perpetration of that bad action could be in any
 way advantageous. now, to apply it in your case,—to whom could your
 disappearance have been serviceable?”
 
“to one, by heaven! i was very insignificant person.”
 
“do not speak thus, for your reply evinces neither logic nor
 philosophy; everything is relative, my dear young friend, from the king
 who stands in the way of his successor, to the employee who keeps his
 rival out of place. now, in the event of the king’s death, his
 successor inherits crown,—when the employee dies, the supernumerary
 steps into his shoes, and receives his salary of twelve thousand
 livres. well, these twelve thousand livres are his civil list, and are
 as essential to him as the twelve millions of king. everyone, from
 the highest to the lowest degree, has his place on the social ladder,
 and is beset by stormy passions and conflicting interests, as in
 descartes’ theory of pressure and impulsion. but these forces increase
 as we go higher, so that we have spiral which in defiance of reason
 rests upon the apex and not on the base. now let us return to your
 particular world. you say you were on the point of being made captain
 of the _pharaon_?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and about to become the husband of young and lovely girl?”
 
“yes.”
 
“now, could anyone have had any interest in preventing the
 accomplishment of these two things? but let us first settle the
 question as to its being the interest of anyone to hinder you from
 being captain of the _pharaon_. what say you?”
 
“i cannot believe such was the case. i was generally liked on board,
 and had the sailors possessed the right of selecting captain
 themselves, i feel convinced their choice would have fallen on me.
 there was only one person among the crew who had any feeling of
 ill-will towards me. i had quarelled with him some time previously, and
 had even challenged him to fight me; but refused.”
 
“now we are getting on. and what was this man’s name?”
 
“danglars.”
 
“what rank did hold on board?”
 
“he was supercargo.”
 
“and had you been captain, should you have retained him in his
 employment?”
 
“not if the choice had remained with me, for i had frequently observed
 inaccuracies in his accounts.”
 
“good again! now then, tell me, was any person present during your last
 conversation with captain leclere?”
 
“no; we were quite alone.”
 
“could your conversation have been overheard by anyone?”
 
“it might, for the cabin door was open—and—stay; now i
 recollect,—danglars himself passed by just as captain leclere was
 giving the packet for the grand marshal.”
 
“that’s better,” cried the abbé; “now we are on the right scent. did
 you take anybody with you when you put into the port of elba?”
 
“nobody.”
 
“somebody there received your packet, and gave you letter in place of
 it, i think?”
 
“yes; the grand marshal did.”
 
“and what did you do with that letter?”
 
“put it into my portfolio.”
 
“you had your portfolio with you, then? now, how could sailor find
 room in his pocket for portfolio large enough to contain an official
 letter?”
 
“you are right; it was left on board.”
 
“then it was not till your return to the ship that you put the letter
 in the portfolio?”
 
“no.”
 
“and what did you do with this same letter while returning from
 porto-ferrajo to the vessel?”
 
“i carried it in my hand.”
 
“so that when you went on board the _pharaon_, everybody could see that
 you held letter in your hand?”
 
“yes.”
 
“danglars, as well as the rest?”
 
“danglars, as well as others.”
 
“now, listen to me, and try to recall every circumstance attending your
 arrest. do you recollect the words in which the information against you
 was formulated?”
 
“oh yes, i read it over three times, and the words sank deeply into my
 memory.”
 
“repeat it to me.”
 
dantès paused moment, then said, “this is it, word for word: ‘the
 king’s attorney is informed by friend to the throne and religion,
 that one edmond dantès, mate on board the _pharaon_, this day arrived
 from smyrna, after having touched at naples and porto-ferrajo, has been
 intrusted by murat with packet for the usurper; again, by the
 usurper, with letter for the bonapartist club in paris. this proof of
 his guilt may be procured by his immediate arrest, as the letter will
 be found either about his person, at his father’s residence, or in his
 cabin on board the _pharaon_.’”
 
the abbé shrugged his shoulders. “the thing is clear as day,” said he;
 “and you must have had very confiding nature, as well as good
 heart, not to have suspected the origin of the whole affair.”
 
“do you really think so? ah, that would indeed be infamous.”
 
“how did danglars usually write?”
 
“in handsome, running hand.”
 
“and how was the anonymous letter written?”
 
“backhanded.”
 
again the abbé smiled. “disguised.”
 
“it was very boldly written, if disguised.”
 
“stop bit,” said the abbé, taking up what called his pen, and,
 after dipping it into the ink, wrote on piece of prepared linen,
 with his left hand, the first two or three words of the accusation.
 dantès drew back, and gazed on the abbé with sensation almost
 amounting to terror.
 
“how very astonishing!” cried at length. “why your writing exactly
 resembles that of the accusation.”
 
“simply because that accusation had been written with the left hand;
 and i have noticed that——”
 
“what?”
 
“that while the writing of different persons done with the right hand
 varies, that performed with the left hand is invariably uniform.”
 
“you have evidently seen and observed everything.”
 
“let us proceed.”
 
“oh, yes, yes!”
 
“now as regards the second question.”
 
“i am listening.”
 
“was there any person whose interest it was to prevent your marriage
 with mercédès?”
 
“yes; young man who loved her.”
 
“and his name was——”
 
“fernand.”
 
“that is spanish name, i think?”
 
“he was catalan.”
 
“you imagine him capable of writing the letter?”
 
“oh, no; would more likely have got rid of by sticking knife
 into me.”
 
“that is in strict accordance with the spanish character; an
 assassination they will unhesitatingly commit, but an act of cowardice,
 never.”
 
“besides,” said dantès, “the various circumstances mentioned in the
 letter were wholly unknown to him.”
 
“you had never spoken of them yourself to anyone?”
 
“to one.”
 
“not even to your mistress?”
 
“no, not even to my betrothed.”
 
“then it is danglars.”
 
“i feel quite sure of it now.”
 
“wait little. pray, was danglars acquainted with fernand?”
 
“no—yes, was. now i recollect——”
 
“what?”
 
“to have seen them both sitting at table together under an arbor at
 père pamphile’s the evening before the day fixed for my wedding. they
 were in earnest conversation. danglars was joking in friendly way,
 but fernand looked pale and agitated.”
 
“were they alone?”
 
“there was third person with them whom i knew perfectly well, and who
 had, in all probability made their acquaintance; was tailor named
 caderousse, but was very drunk. stay!—stay!—how strange that it
 should not have occurred to before! now i remember quite well, that
 on the table round which they were sitting were pens, ink, and paper.
 oh, the heartless, treacherous scoundrels!” exclaimed dantès, pressing
 his hand to his throbbing brows.
 
“is there anything else i can assist you in discovering, besides the
 villany of your friends?” inquired the abbé with laugh.
 
“yes, yes,” replied dantès eagerly; “i would beg of you, who see so
 completely to the depths of things, and to whom the greatest mystery
 seems but an easy riddle, to explain to how it was that i underwent
 second examination, was never brought to trial, and, above all, was
 condemned without ever having had sentence passed on me?”
 
“that is altogether different and more serious matter,” responded the
 abbé. “the ways of justice are frequently too dark and mysterious to be
 easily penetrated. all we have hitherto done in the matter has been
 child’s play. if you wish to enter upon the more difficult part of
 the business, you must assist by the most minute information on
 every point.”
 
“pray ask whatever questions you please; for, in good truth, you see
 more clearly into my life than i do myself.”
 
“in the first place, then, who examined you,—the king’s attorney, his
 deputy, or magistrate?”
 
“the deputy.”
 
“was young or old?”
 
“about six or seven-and-twenty years of age, i should say.”
 
“so,” answered the abbé. “old enough to be ambitious, but too young to
 be corrupt. and how did treat you?”
 
“with more of mildness than severity.”
 
“did you tell him your whole story?”
 
“i did.”
 
“and did his conduct change at all in the course of your examination?”
 
“he did appear much disturbed when read the letter that had brought
 into this scrape. seemed quite overcome by my misfortune.”
 
“by your misfortune?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then you feel quite sure that it was your misfortune deplored?”
 
“he gave one great proof of his sympathy, at any rate.”
 
“and that?”
 
“he burnt the sole evidence that could at all have criminated me.”
 
“what? the accusation?”
 
“no; the letter.”
 
“are you sure?”
 
“i saw it done.”
 
“that alters the case. this man might, after all, be greater
 scoundrel than you have thought possible.”
 
“upon my word,” said dantès, “you make shudder. is the world filled
 with tigers and crocodiles?”
 
“yes; and remember that two-legged tigers and crocodiles are more
 dangerous than the others.”
 
“never mind; let us go on.”
 
“with all my heart! you tell burned the letter?”
 
“he did; saying at the same time, ‘you see i thus destroy the only
 proof existing against you.’”
 
“this action is somewhat too sublime to be natural.”
 
“you think so?”
 
“i am sure of it. to whom was this letter addressed?”
 
“to m. noirtier, rue coq-héron, no. 13, paris.”
 
“now can you conceive of any interest that your heroic deputy could
 possibly have had in the destruction of that letter?”
 
“why, it is not altogether impossible might have had, for made me
 promise several times never to speak of that letter to anyone, assuring
 so advised for my own interest; and, more than this, he
 insisted on my taking solemn oath never to utter the name mentioned
 in the address.”
 
“noirtier!” repeated the abbé; “noirtier!—i knew person of that name
 at the court of the queen of etruria,—a noirtier, who had been a
 girondin during the revolution! what was your deputy called?”
 
“de villefort!” the abbé burst into fit of laughter, while dantès
 gazed on him in utter astonishment.
 
“what ails you?” said at length.
 
“do you see that ray of sunlight?”
 
“i do.”
 
“well, the whole thing is more clear to than that sunbeam is to you.
 poor fellow! poor young man! and you tell this magistrate expressed
 great sympathy and commiseration for you?”
 
“he did.”
 
“and the worthy man destroyed your compromising letter?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and then made you swear never to utter the name of noirtier?”
 
“yes.”
 
“why, you poor short-sighted simpleton, can you not guess who this
 noirtier was, whose very name was so careful to keep concealed? this
 noirtier was his father!”
 
had thunderbolt fallen at the feet of dantès, or hell opened its
 yawning gulf before him, could not have been more completely
 transfixed with horror than was at the sound of these unexpected
 words. starting up, clasped his hands around his head as though to
 prevent his very brain from bursting, and exclaimed, “his father! his
 father!”
 
“yes, his father,” replied the abbé; “his right name was noirtier de
 villefort.”
 
at this instant bright light shot through the mind of dantès, and
 cleared up all that had been dark and obscure before. the change that
 had come over villefort during the examination, the destruction of the
 letter, the exacted promise, the almost supplicating tones of the
 magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy than to pronounce
 punishment,—all returned with stunning force to his memory. cried
 out, and staggered against the wall like drunken man, then hurried
 to the opening that led from the abbé’s cell to his own, and said, “i
 must be alone, to think over all this.”
 
when regained his dungeon, threw himself on his bed, where the
 turnkey found him in the evening visit, sitting with fixed gaze and
 contracted features, dumb and motionless as statue. during these
 hours of profound meditation, which to him had seemed only minutes, he
 had formed fearful resolution, and bound himself to its fulfilment by
 solemn oath.
 
dantès was at length roused from his reverie by the voice of faria,
 who, having also been visited by his jailer, had come to invite his
 fellow-sufferer to share his supper. the reputation of being out of his
 mind, though harmlessly and even amusingly so, had procured for the
 abbé unusual privileges. was supplied with bread of finer, whiter
 quality than the usual prison fare, and even regaled each sunday with a
 small quantity of wine. now this was sunday, and the abbé had come to
 ask his young companion to share the luxuries with him.
 
dantès followed him; his features were longer contracted, and now
 wore their usual expression, but there was that in his whole appearance
 that bespoke one who had come to fixed and desperate resolve. faria
 bent on him his penetrating eye.
 
“i regret now,” said he, “having helped you in your late inquiries, or
 having given you the information i did.”
 
“why so?” inquired dantès.
 
“because it has instilled new passion in your heart—that of
 vengeance.”
 
dantès smiled. “let us talk of something else,” said he.
 
again the abbé looked at him, then mournfully shook his head; but in
 accordance with dantès’ request, began to speak of other matters.
 the elder prisoner was one of those persons whose conversation, like
 that of all who have experienced many trials, contained many useful and
 important hints as well as sound information; but it was never
 egotistical, for the unfortunate man never alluded to his own sorrows.
 dantès listened with admiring attention to all said; some of his
 remarks corresponded with what already knew, or applied to the sort
 of knowledge his nautical life had enabled him to acquire. part of
 the good abbé’s words, however, were wholly incomprehensible to him;
 but, like the aurora which guides the navigator in northern latitudes,
 opened new vistas to the inquiring mind of the listener, and gave
 fantastic glimpses of new horizons, enabling him justly to estimate the
 delight an intellectual mind would have in following one so richly
 gifted as faria along the heights of truth, where was so much at
 home.
 
“you must teach small part of what you know,” said dantès, “if
 only to prevent your growing weary of me. i can well believe that so
 learned person as yourself would prefer absolute solitude to being
 tormented with the company of one as ignorant and uninformed as myself.
 if you will only agree to my request, i promise you never to mention
 another word about escaping.”
 
the abbé smiled.
 
“alas, my boy,” said he, “human knowledge is confined within very
 narrow limits; and when i have taught you mathematics, physics,
 history, and the three or four modern languages with which i am
 acquainted, you will know as much as i do myself. now, it will scarcely
 require two years for to communicate to you the stock of learning i
 possess.”
 
“two years!” exclaimed dantès; “do you really believe i can acquire all
 these things in so short time?”
 
“not their application, certainly, but their principles you may; to
 learn is not to know; there are the learners and the learned. memory
 makes the one, philosophy the other.”
 
“but cannot one learn philosophy?”
 
“philosophy cannot be taught; it is the application of the sciences to
 truth; it is like the golden cloud in which the messiah went up into
 heaven.”
 
“well, then,” said dantès, “what shall you teach first? i am in a
 hurry to begin. i want to learn.”
 
“everything,” said the abbé. and that very evening the prisoners
 sketched plan of education, to be entered upon the following day.
 dantès possessed prodigious memory, combined with an astonishing
 quickness and readiness of conception; the mathematical turn of his
 mind rendered him apt at all kinds of calculation, while his naturally
 poetical feelings threw light and pleasing veil over the dry reality
 of arithmetical computation, or the rigid severity of geometry. he
 already knew italian, and had also picked up little of the romaic
 dialect during voyages to the east; and by the aid of these two
 languages easily comprehended the construction of all the others, so
 that at the end of six months began to speak spanish, english, and
 german.
 
in strict accordance with the promise made to the abbé, dantès spoke no
 more of escape. perhaps the delight his studies afforded him left no
 room for such thoughts; perhaps the recollection that had pledged
 his word (on which his sense of honor was keen) kept him from referring
 in any way to the possibilities of flight. days, even months, passed by
 unheeded in one rapid and instructive course. at the end of year
 dantès was new man. dantès observed, however, that faria, in spite of
 the relief his society afforded, daily grew sadder; one thought seemed
 incessantly to harass and distract his mind. sometimes would fall
 into long reveries, sigh heavily and involuntarily, then suddenly rise,
 and, with folded arms, begin pacing the confined space of his dungeon.
 one day stopped all at once, and exclaimed:
 
“ah, if there were sentinel!”
 
“there shall not be one minute longer than you please,” said dantès,
 who had followed the working of his thoughts as accurately as though
 his brain were enclosed in crystal so clear as to display its minutest
 operations.
 
“i have already told you,” answered the abbé, “that i loathe the idea
 of shedding blood.”
 
“and yet the murder, if you choose to call it so, would be simply a
 measure of self-preservation.”
 
“no matter! i could never agree to it.”
 
“still, you have thought of it?”
 
“incessantly, alas!” cried the abbé.
 
“and you have discovered means of regaining our freedom, have you
 not?” asked dantès eagerly.
 
“i have; if it were only possible to place deaf and blind sentinel in
 the gallery beyond us.”
 
“he shall be both blind and deaf,” replied the young man, with an air
 of determination that made his companion shudder.
 
“no, no,” cried the abbé; “impossible!”
 
dantès endeavored to renew the subject; the abbé shook his head in
 token of disapproval, and refused to make any further response. three
 months passed away.
 
“are you strong?” the abbé asked one day of dantès. the young man, in
 reply, took up the chisel, bent it into the form of horseshoe, and
 then as readily straightened it.
 
“and will you engage not to do any harm to the sentry, except as last
 resort?”
 
“i promise on my honor.”
 
“then,” said the abbé, “we may hope to put our design into execution.”
 
“and how long shall we be in accomplishing the necessary work?”
 
“at least year.”
 
“and shall we begin at once?”
 
“at once.”
 
“we have lost year to purpose!” cried dantès.
 
“do you consider the last twelve months to have been wasted?” asked the
 abbé.
 
“forgive me!” cried edmond, blushing deeply.
 
“tut, tut!” answered the abbé, “man is but man after all, and you are
 about the best specimen of the genus i have ever known. come, let me
 show you my plan.”
 
the abbé then showed dantès the sketch had made for their escape. it
 consisted of plan of his own cell and that of dantès, with the
 passage which united them. in this passage proposed to drive level
 as they do in mines; this level would bring the two prisoners
 immediately beneath the gallery where the sentry kept watch; once
 there, large excavation would be made, and one of the flag-stones
 with which the gallery was paved be so completely loosened that at the
 desired moment it would give way beneath the feet of the soldier, who,
 stunned by his fall, would be immediately bound and gagged by dantès
 before had power to offer any resistance. the prisoners were then to
 make their way through one of the gallery windows, and to let
 themselves down from the outer walls by means of the abbé’s ladder of
 cords.
 
dantès’ eyes sparkled with joy, and rubbed his hands with delight at
 the idea of plan so simple, yet apparently so certain to succeed.
 that very day the miners began their labors, with vigor and alacrity
 proportionate to their long rest from fatigue and their hopes of
 ultimate success. nothing interrupted the progress of the work except
 the necessity that each was under of returning to his cell in
 anticipation of the turnkey’s visits. they had learned to distinguish
 the almost imperceptible sound of his footsteps as descended towards
 their dungeons, and happily, never failed of being prepared for his
 coming. the fresh earth excavated during their present work, and which
 would have entirely blocked up the old passage, was thrown, by degrees
 and with the utmost precaution, out of the window in either faria’s or
 dantès’ cell, the rubbish being first pulverized so finely that the
 night wind carried it far away without permitting the smallest trace to
 remain.
 
more than year had been consumed in this undertaking, the only tools
 for which had been chisel, knife, and wooden lever; faria still
 continuing to instruct dantès by conversing with him, sometimes in one
 language, sometimes in another; at others, relating to him the history
 of nations and great men who from time to time have risen to fame and
 trodden the path of glory. the abbé was man of the world, and had,
 moreover, mixed in the first society of the day; wore an air of
 melancholy dignity which dantès, thanks to the imitative powers
 bestowed on him by nature, easily acquired, as well as that outward
 polish and politeness had before been wanting in, and which is
 seldom possessed except by those who have been placed in constant
 intercourse with persons of high birth and breeding.
 
at the end of fifteen months the level was finished, and the excavation
 completed beneath the gallery, and the two workmen could distinctly
 hear the measured tread of the sentinel as paced to and fro over
 their heads. compelled, as they were, to await night sufficiently
 dark to favor their flight, they were obliged to defer their final
 attempt till that auspicious moment should arrive; their greatest dread
 now was lest the stone through which the sentry was doomed to fall
 should give way before its right time, and this they had in some
 measure provided against by propping it up with small beam which they
 had discovered in the walls through which they had worked their way.
 dantès was occupied in arranging this piece of wood when heard
 faria, who had remained in edmond’s cell for the purpose of cutting a
 peg to secure their rope-ladder, call to him in tone indicative of
 great suffering. dantès hastened to his dungeon, where found him
 standing in the middle of the room, pale as death, his forehead
 streaming with perspiration, and his hands clenched tightly together.
 
“gracious heavens!” exclaimed dantès, “what is the matter? what has
 happened?”
 
“quick! quick!” returned the abbé, “listen to what i have to say.”
 
dantès looked in fear and wonder at the livid countenance of faria,
 whose eyes, already dull and sunken, were surrounded by purple circles,
 while his lips were white as those of corpse, and his very hair
 seemed to stand on end.
 
“tell me, i beseech you, what ails you?” cried dantès, letting his
 chisel fall to the floor.
 
“alas,” faltered out the abbé, “all is over with me. i am seized with a
 terrible, perhaps mortal illness; i can feel that the paroxysm is fast
 approaching. i had similar attack the year previous to my
 imprisonment. this malady admits but of one remedy; i will tell you
 what that is. go into my cell as quickly as you can; draw out one of
 the feet that support the bed; you will find it has been hollowed out
 for the purpose of containing small phial you will see there
 half-filled with red-looking fluid. bring it to me—or rather—no,
 no!—i may be found here, therefore help back to my room while i have
 the strength to drag myself along. who knows what may happen, or how
 long the attack may last?”
 
in spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thus suddenly
 frustrated his hopes, dantès did not lose his presence of mind, but
 descended into the passage, dragging his unfortunate companion with
 him; then, half-carrying, half-supporting him, managed to reach the
 abbé’s chamber, when immediately laid the sufferer on his bed.
 
“thanks,” said the poor abbé, shivering as though his veins were filled
 with ice. “i am about to be seized with fit of catalepsy; when it
 comes to its height i shall probably lie still and motionless as though
 dead, uttering neither sigh nor groan. on the other hand, the symptoms
 may be much more violent, and cause to fall into fearful
 convulsions, foam at the mouth, and cry out loudly. take care my cries
 are not heard, for if they are it is more than probable i should be
 removed to another part of the prison, and we be separated forever.
 when i become quite motionless, cold, and rigid as corpse, then, and
 not before,—be careful about this,—force open my teeth with the knife,
 pour from eight to ten drops of the liquor contained in the phial down
 my throat, and i may perhaps revive.”
 
“perhaps!” exclaimed dantès in grief-stricken tones.
 
“help! help!” cried the abbé, “i—i—die—i——”
 
0229m
 


so sudden and violent was the fit that the unfortunate prisoner was
 unable to complete the sentence; violent convulsion shook his whole
 frame, his eyes started from their sockets, his mouth was drawn on one
 side, his cheeks became purple, struggled, foamed, dashed himself
 about, and uttered the most dreadful cries, which, however, dantès
 prevented from being heard by covering his head with the blanket. the
 fit lasted two hours; then, more helpless than an infant, and colder
 and paler than marble, more crushed and broken than reed trampled
 under foot, fell back, doubled up in one last convulsion, and became
 as rigid as corpse.
 
edmond waited till life seemed extinct in the body of his friend, then,
 taking up the knife, with difficulty forced open the closely fixed
 jaws, carefully administered the appointed number of drops, and
 anxiously awaited the result. an hour passed away and the old man gave
 sign of returning animation. dantès began to fear had delayed too
 long ere administered the remedy, and, thrusting his hands into his
 hair, continued gazing on the lifeless features of his friend. at
 length slight color tinged the livid cheeks, consciousness returned
 to the dull, open eyeballs, faint sigh issued from the lips, and the
 sufferer made feeble effort to move.
 
“he is saved! is saved!” cried dantès in paroxysm of delight.
 
the sick man was not yet able to speak, but pointed with evident
 anxiety towards the door. dantès listened, and plainly distinguished
 the approaching steps of the jailer. it was therefore near seven
 o’clock; but edmond’s anxiety had put all thoughts of time out of his
 head.
 
the young man sprang to the entrance, darted through it, carefully
 drawing the stone over the opening, and hurried to his cell. had
 scarcely done so before the door opened, and the jailer saw the
 prisoner seated as usual on the side of his bed. almost before the key
 had turned in the lock, and before the departing steps of the jailer
 had died away in the long corridor had to traverse, dantès, whose
 restless anxiety concerning his friend left him desire to touch the
 food brought him, hurried back to the abbé’s chamber, and raising the
 stone by pressing his head against it, was soon beside the sick man’s
 couch. faria had now fully regained his consciousness, but still lay
 helpless and exhausted on his miserable bed.
 
“i did not expect to see you again,” said feebly, to dantès.
 
“and why not?” asked the young man. “did you fancy yourself dying?”
 
“no, i had such idea; but, knowing that all was ready for flight, i
 thought you might have made your escape.”
 
the deep glow of indignation suffused the cheeks of dantès.
 
“without you? did you really think capable of that?”
 
“at least,” said the abbé, “i now see how wrong such an opinion would
 have been. alas, alas! i am fearfully exhausted and debilitated by this
 attack.”
 
“be of good cheer,” replied dantès; “your strength will return.” and as
 spoke seated himself near the bed beside faria, and took his
 hands. the abbé shook his head.
 
“the last attack i had,” said he, “lasted but half an hour, and after
 it i was hungry, and got up without help; now i can move neither my
 right arm nor leg, and my head seems uncomfortable, which shows that
 there has been suffusion of blood on the brain. the third attack will
 either carry off, or leave paralyzed for life.”
 
“no, no,” cried dantès; “you are mistaken—you will not die! and your
 third attack (if, indeed, you should have another) will find you at
 liberty. we shall save you another time, as we have done this, only
 with better chance of success, because we shall be able to command
 every requisite assistance.”
 
“my good edmond,” answered the abbé, “be not deceived. the attack which
 has just passed away, condemns forever to the walls of prison.
 none can fly from dungeon who cannot walk.”
 
“well, we will wait,—a week, month, two months, if need be,—and
 meanwhile your strength will return. everything is in readiness for our
 flight, and we can select any time we choose. as soon as you feel able
 to swim we will go.”
 
“i shall never swim again,” replied faria. “this arm is paralyzed; not
 for time, but forever. lift it, and judge if i am mistaken.”
 
the young man raised the arm, which fell back by its own weight,
 perfectly inanimate and helpless. sigh escaped him.
 
“you are convinced now, edmond, are you not?” asked the abbé. “depend
 upon it, i know what i say. since the first attack i experienced of
 this malady, i have continually reflected on it. indeed, i expected it,
 for it is family inheritance; both my father and grandfather died of
 it in third attack. the physician who prepared for the remedy i
 have twice successfully taken, was other than the celebrated
 cabanis, and predicted similar end for me.”
 
0233m
 


“the physician may be mistaken!” exclaimed dantès. “and as for your
 poor arm, what difference will that make? i can take you on my
 shoulders, and swim for both of us.”
 
“my son,” said the abbé, “you, who are sailor and swimmer, must
 know as well as i do that man so loaded would sink before had done
 fifty strokes. cease, then, to allow yourself to be duped by vain
 hopes, that even your own excellent heart refuses to believe in. here i
 shall remain till the hour of my deliverance arrives, and that, in all
 human probability, will be the hour of my death. as for you, who are
 young and active, delay not on my account, but fly—go—i give you back
 your promise.”
 
“it is well,” said dantès. “then i shall also remain.” then, rising and
 extending his hand with an air of solemnity over the old man’s head, he
 slowly added, “by the blood of christ i swear never to leave you while
 you live.”
 
faria gazed fondly on his noble-minded, single-hearted, high-principled
 young friend, and read in his countenance ample confirmation of the
 sincerity of his devotion and the loyalty of his purpose.
 
“thanks,” murmured the invalid, extending one hand. “i accept. you may
 one of these days reap the reward of your disinterested devotion. but
 as i cannot, and you will not, quit this place, it becomes necessary to
 fill up the excavation beneath the soldier’s gallery; might, by
 chance, hear the hollow sound of his footsteps, and call the attention
 of his officer to the circumstance. that would bring about discovery
 which would inevitably lead to our being separated. go, then, and set
 about this work, in which, unhappily, i can offer you assistance;
 keep at it all night, if necessary, and do not return here tomorrow
 till after the jailer has visited me. i shall have something of the
 greatest importance to communicate to you.”
 
dantès took the hand of the abbé in his, and affectionately pressed it.
 faria smiled encouragingly on him, and the young man retired to his
 task, in the spirit of obedience and respect which had sworn to show
 towards his aged friend.
 


chapter 18. the treasure
 
when dantès returned next morning to the chamber of his companion in
 captivity, found faria seated and looking composed. in the ray of
 light which entered by the narrow window of his cell, held open in
 his left hand, of which alone, it will be recollected, retained the
 use, sheet of paper, which, from being constantly rolled into small
 compass, had the form of cylinder, and was not easily kept open. he
 did not speak, but showed the paper to dantès.
 
“what is that?” inquired.
 
“look at it,” said the abbé with smile.
 
“i have looked at it with all possible attention,” said dantès, “and i
 only see half-burnt paper, on which are traces of gothic characters
 inscribed with peculiar kind of ink.”
 
“this paper, my friend,” said faria, “i may now avow to you, since i
 have the proof of your fidelity—this paper is my treasure, of which,
 from this day forth, one-half belongs to you.”
 
the sweat started forth on dantès’ brow. until this day and for how
 long time!—he had refrained from talking of the treasure, which had
 brought upon the abbé the accusation of madness. with his instinctive
 delicacy edmond had preferred avoiding any touch on this painful chord,
 and faria had been equally silent. had taken the silence of the old
 man for return to reason; and now these few words uttered by faria,
 after so painful crisis, seemed to indicate serious relapse into
 mental alienation.
 
“your treasure?” stammered dantès. faria smiled.
 
“yes,” said he. “you have, indeed, noble nature, edmond, and i see by
 your paleness and agitation what is passing in your heart at this
 moment. no, be assured, i am not mad. this treasure exists, dantès, and
 if i have not been allowed to possess it, you will. yes—you. one
 would listen or believe me, because everyone thought mad; but you,
 who must know that i am not, listen to me, and believe so afterwards
 if you will.”
 
“alas,” murmured edmond to himself, “this is terrible relapse! there
 was only this blow wanting.” then said aloud, “my dear friend, your
 attack has, perhaps, fatigued you; had you not better repose awhile?
 tomorrow, if you will, i will hear your narrative; but today i wish to
 nurse you carefully. besides,” said, “a treasure is not thing we
 need hurry about.”
 
“on the contrary, it is matter of the utmost importance, edmond!”
 replied the old man. “who knows if tomorrow, or the next day after, the
 third attack may not come on? and then must not all be over? yes,
 indeed, i have often thought with bitter joy that these riches, which
 would make the wealth of dozen families, will be forever lost to
 those men who persecute me. this idea was one of vengeance to me, and i
 tasted it slowly in the night of my dungeon and the despair of my
 captivity. but now i have forgiven the world for the love of you; now
 that i see you, young and with promising future,—now that i think of
 all that may result to you in the good fortune of such disclosure, i
 shudder at any delay, and tremble lest i should not assure to one as
 worthy as yourself the possession of so vast an amount of hidden
 wealth.”
 
edmond turned away his head with sigh.
 
“you persist in your incredulity, edmond,” continued faria. “my words
 have not convinced you. i see you require proofs. well, then, read this
 paper, which i have never shown to anyone.”
 
“tomorrow, my dear friend,” said edmond, desirous of not yielding to
 the old man’s madness. “i thought it was understood that we should not
 talk of that until tomorrow.”
 
“then we will not talk of it until tomorrow; but read this paper
 today.”
 
“i will not irritate him,” thought edmond, and taking the paper, of
 which half was wanting,—having been burnt, doubt, by some
 accident,—he read:
 
“this treasure, which may amount to two...
 
of roman crowns in the most distant a...
 
of the second opening wh...
 
declare to belong to him alo...
 
heir.
 
“25th april, 149’”
 

“well!” said faria, when the young man had finished reading it.
 
“why,” replied dantès, “i see nothing but broken lines and unconnected
 words, which are rendered illegible by fire.”
 
“yes, to you, my friend, who read them for the first time; but not for
 me, who have grown pale over them by many nights’ study, and have
 reconstructed every phrase, completed every thought.”
 
“and do you believe you have discovered the hidden meaning?”
 
“i am sure i have, and you shall judge for yourself; but first listen
 to the history of this paper.”
 
“silence!” exclaimed dantès. “steps approach—i go—adieu!”
 
and dantès, happy to escape the history and explanation which would be
 sure to confirm his belief in his friend’s mental instability, glided
 like snake along the narrow passage; while faria, restored by his
 alarm to certain amount of activity, pushed the stone into place with
 his foot, and covered it with mat in order the more effectually to
 avoid discovery.
 
it was the governor, who, hearing of faria’s illness from the jailer,
 had come in person to see him.
 
faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in order that he
 might conceal from the governor the paralysis that had already half
 stricken him with death. his fear was lest the governor, touched with
 pity, might order him to be removed to better quarters, and thus
 separate him from his young companion. but fortunately this was not the
 case, and the governor left him, convinced that the poor madman, for
 whom in his heart felt kind of affection, was only troubled with a
 slight indisposition.
 
during this time, edmond, seated on his bed with his head in his hands,
 tried to collect his scattered thoughts. faria, since their first
 acquaintance, had been on all points so rational and logical, so
 wonderfully sagacious, in fact, that could not understand how so
 much wisdom on all points could be allied with madness. was faria
 deceived as to his treasure, or was all the world deceived as to faria?
 
dantès remained in his cell all day, not daring to return to his
 friend, thinking thus to defer the moment when should be convinced,
 once for all, that the abbé was mad—such conviction would be so
 terrible!
 
but, towards the evening after the hour for the customary visit had
 gone by, faria, not seeing the young man appear, tried to move and get
 over the distance which separated them. edmond shuddered when heard
 the painful efforts which the old man made to drag himself along; his
 leg was inert, and could longer make use of one arm. edmond was
 obliged to assist him, for otherwise would not have been able to
 enter by the small aperture which led to dantès’ chamber.
 
“here i am, pursuing you remorselessly,” said with benignant
 smile. “you thought to escape my munificence, but it is in vain. listen
 to me.”
 
edmond saw there was escape, and placing the old man on his bed, he
 seated himself on the stool beside him.
 
“you know,” said the abbé, “that i was the secretary and intimate
 friend of cardinal spada, the last of the princes of that name. i owe
 to this worthy lord all the happiness i ever knew. was not rich,
 although the wealth of his family had passed into proverb, and i
 heard the phrase very often, ‘as rich as spada.’ but he, like public
 rumor, lived on this reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise.
 i was tutor to his nephews, who are dead; and when was alone in the
 world, i tried by absolute devotion to his will, to make up to him all
 had done for during ten years of unremitting kindness. the
 cardinal’s house had secrets for me. i had often seen my noble
 patron annotating ancient volumes, and eagerly searching amongst dusty
 family manuscripts. one day when i was reproaching him for his
 unavailing searches, and deploring the prostration of mind that
 followed them, looked at me, and, smiling bitterly, opened volume
 relating to the history of the city of rome. there, in the twentieth
 chapter of the life of pope alexander vi., were the following lines,
 which i can never forget:—
 
“‘the great wars of romagna had ended; cæsar borgia, who had completed
 his conquest, had need of money to purchase all italy. the pope had
 also need of money to bring matters to an end with louis xii. king of
 france, who was formidable still in spite of his recent reverses; and
 it was necessary, therefore, to have recourse to some profitable
 scheme, which was matter of great difficulty in the impoverished
 condition of exhausted italy. his holiness had an idea. determined
 to make two cardinals.’
 
“by choosing two of the greatest personages of rome, especially rich
 men—_this_ was the return the holy father looked for. in the first
 place, could sell the great appointments and splendid offices which
 the cardinals already held; and then had the two hats to sell
 besides. there was third point in view, which will appear hereafter.
 
“the pope and cæsar borgia first found the two future cardinals; they
 were giovanni rospigliosi, who held four of the highest dignities of
 the holy see, and cæsar spada, one of the noblest and richest of the
 roman nobility; both felt the high honor of such favor from the pope.
 they were ambitious, and cæsar borgia soon found purchasers for their
 appointments. the result was, that rospigliosi and spada paid for being
 cardinals, and eight other persons paid for the offices the cardinals
 held before their elevation, and thus eight hundred thousand crowns
 entered into the coffers of the speculators.
 
0239m
 


“it is time now to proceed to the last part of the speculation. the
 pope heaped attentions upon rospigliosi and spada, conferred upon them
 the insignia of the cardinalate, and induced them to arrange their
 affairs and take up their residence at rome. then the pope and cæsar
 borgia invited the two cardinals to dinner. this was matter of
 dispute between the holy father and his son. cæsar thought they could
 make use of one of the means which always had ready for his friends,
 that is to say, in the first place, the famous key which was given to
 certain persons with the request that they go and open designated
 cupboard. this key was furnished with small iron point,—a negligence
 on the part of the locksmith. when this was pressed to effect the
 opening of the cupboard, of which the lock was difficult, the person
 was pricked by this small point, and died next day. then there was the
 ring with the lion’s head, which cæsar wore when wanted to greet his
 friends with clasp of the hand. the lion bit the hand thus favored,
 and at the end of twenty-four hours, the bite was mortal.
 
“cæsar proposed to his father, that they should either ask the
 cardinals to open the cupboard, or shake hands with them; but alexander
 vi. replied: ‘now as to the worthy cardinals, spada and rospigliosi,
 let us ask both of them to dinner, something tells that we shall get
 that money back. besides, you forget, cæsar, an indigestion declares
 itself immediately, while prick or bite occasions delay of day
 or two.’ cæsar gave way before such cogent reasoning, and the cardinals
 were consequently invited to dinner.
 
“the table was laid in vineyard belonging to the pope, near san
 pierdarena, charming retreat which the cardinals knew very well by
 report. rospigliosi, quite set up with his new dignities, went with a
 good appetite and his most ingratiating manner. spada, prudent man,
 and greatly attached to his only nephew, young captain of the highest
 promise, took paper and pen, and made his will. then sent word to
 his nephew to wait for him near the vineyard; but it appeared the
 servant did not find him.
 
“spada knew what these invitations meant; since christianity, so
 eminently civilizing, had made progress in rome, it was longer a
 centurion who came from the tyrant with message, ‘cæsar wills that
 you die.’ but it was legate _à latere_, who came with smile on his
 lips to say from the pope, ‘his holiness requests you to dine with
 him.’
 
“spada set out about two o’clock to san pierdarena. the pope awaited
 him. the first sight that attracted the eyes of spada was that of his
 nephew, in full costume, and cæsar borgia paying him most marked
 attentions. spada turned pale, as cæsar looked at him with an ironical
 air, which proved that had anticipated all, and that the snare was
 well spread.
 
“they began dinner and spada was only able to inquire of his nephew if
 had received his message. the nephew replied no; perfectly
 comprehending the meaning of the question. it was too late, for had
 already drunk glass of excellent wine, placed for him expressly by
 the pope’s butler. spada at the same moment saw another bottle approach
 him, which was pressed to taste. an hour afterwards physician
 declared they were both poisoned through eating mushrooms. spada died
 on the threshold of the vineyard; the nephew expired at his own door,
 making signs which his wife could not comprehend.
 
“then cæsar and the pope hastened to lay hands on the heritage, under
 pretense of seeking for the papers of the dead man. but the inheritance
 consisted in this only, scrap of paper on which spada had written:—‘i
 bequeath to my beloved nephew my coffers, my books, and, amongst
 others, my breviary with the gold corners, which i beg will preserve
 in remembrance of his affectionate uncle.’
 
“the heirs sought everywhere, admired the breviary, laid hands on the
 furniture, and were greatly astonished that spada, the rich man, was
 really the most miserable of uncles—no treasures—unless they were those
 of science, contained in the library and laboratories. that was all.
 cæsar and his father searched, examined, scrutinized, but found
 nothing, or at least very little; not exceeding few thousand crowns
 in plate, and about the same in ready money; but the nephew had time to
 say to his wife before expired: ‘look well among my uncle’s papers;
 there is will.’
 
“they sought even more thoroughly than the august heirs had done, but
 it was fruitless. there were two palaces and vineyard behind the
 palatine hill; but in these days landed property had not much value,
 and the two palaces and the vineyard remained to the family since they
 were beneath the rapacity of the pope and his son. months and years
 rolled on. alexander vi. died, poisoned,—you know by what mistake.
 cæsar, poisoned at the same time, escaped by shedding his skin like a
 snake; but the new skin was spotted by the poison till it looked like a
 tiger’s. then, compelled to quit rome, went and got himself
 obscurely killed in night skirmish, scarcely noticed in history.
 
“after the pope’s death and his son’s exile, it was supposed that the
 spada family would resume the splendid position they had held before
 the cardinal’s time; but this was not the case. the spadas remained in
 doubtful ease, mystery hung over this dark affair, and the public
 rumor was, that cæsar, better politician than his father, had carried
 off from the pope the fortune of the two cardinals. i say the two,
 because cardinal rospigliosi, who had not taken any precaution, was
 completely despoiled.
 
“up to this point,” said faria, interrupting the thread of his
 narrative, “this seems to you very meaningless, doubt, eh?”
 
“oh, my friend,” cried dantès, “on the contrary, it seems as if i were
 reading most interesting narrative; go on, i beg of you.”
 
“i will. the family began to get accustomed to their obscurity. years
 rolled on, and amongst the descendants some were soldiers, others
 diplomatists; some churchmen, some bankers; some grew rich, and some
 were ruined. i come now to the last of the family, whose secretary i
 was—the count of spada. i had often heard him complain of the
 disproportion of his rank with his fortune; and i advised him to invest
 all had in an annuity. did so, and thus doubled his income. the
 celebrated breviary remained in the family, and was in the count’s
 possession. it had been handed down from father to son; for the
 singular clause of the only will that had been found, had caused it to
 be regarded as genuine relic, preserved in the family with
 superstitious veneration. it was an illuminated book, with beautiful
 gothic characters, and so weighty with gold, that servant always
 carried it before the cardinal on days of great solemnity.
 
“at the sight of papers of all sorts,—titles, contracts, parchments,
 which were kept in the archives of the family, all descending from the
 poisoned cardinal, i in my turn examined the immense bundles of
 documents, like twenty servitors, stewards, secretaries before me; but
 in spite of the most exhaustive researches, i found—nothing. yet i had
 read, i had even written precise history of the borgia family, for
 the sole purpose of assuring myself whether any increase of fortune had
 occurred to them on the death of the cardinal cæsar spada; but could
 only trace the acquisition of the property of the cardinal rospigliosi,
 his companion in misfortune.
 
“i was then almost assured that the inheritance had neither profited
 the borgias nor the family, but had remained unpossessed like the
 treasures of the arabian nights, which slept in the bosom of the earth
 under the eyes of the genie. i searched, ransacked, counted, calculated
 thousand and thousand times the income and expenditure of the
 family for three hundred years. it was useless. i remained in my
 ignorance, and the count of spada in his poverty.
 
“my patron died. had reserved from his annuity his family papers,
 his library, composed of five thousand volumes, and his famous
 breviary. all these bequeathed to me, with thousand roman crowns,
 which had in ready money, on condition that i would have anniversary
 masses said for the repose of his soul, and that i would draw up a
 genealogical tree and history of his house. all this i did
 scrupulously. be easy, my dear edmond, we are near the conclusion.
 
“in 1807, month before i was arrested, and fortnight after the
 death of the count of spada, on the 25th of december (you will see
 presently how the date became fixed in my memory), i was reading, for
 the thousandth time, the papers i was arranging, for the palace was
 sold to stranger, and i was going to leave rome and settle at
 florence, intending to take with twelve thousand francs i possessed,
 my library, and the famous breviary, when, tired with my constant labor
 at the same thing, and overcome by heavy dinner i had eaten, my head
 dropped on my hands, and i fell asleep about three o’clock in the
 afternoon.
 
0243m
 


“i awoke as the clock was striking six. i raised my head; i was in
 utter darkness. i rang for light, but, as one came, i determined
 to find one for myself. it was indeed but anticipating the simple
 manners which i should soon be under the necessity of adopting. i took
 wax-candle in one hand, and with the other groped about for piece
 of paper (my match-box being empty), with which i proposed to get a
 light from the small flame still playing on the embers. fearing,
 however, to make use of any valuable piece of paper, i hesitated for a
 moment, then recollected that i had seen in the famous breviary, which
 was on the table beside me, an old paper quite yellow with age, and
 which had served as marker for centuries, kept there by the request
 of the heirs. i felt for it, found it, twisted it up together, and
 putting it into the expiring flame, set light to it.
 
“but beneath my fingers, as if by magic, in proportion as the fire
 ascended, i saw yellowish characters appear on the paper. i grasped it
 in my hand, put out the flame as quickly as i could, lighted my taper
 in the fire itself, and opened the crumpled paper with inexpressible
 emotion, recognizing, when i had done so, that these characters had
 been traced in mysterious and sympathetic ink, only appearing when
 exposed to the fire; nearly one-third of the paper had been consumed by
 the flame. it was that paper you read this morning; read it again,
 dantès, and then i will complete for you the incomplete words and
 unconnected sense.”
 
faria, with an air of triumph, offered the paper to dantès, who this
 time read the following words, traced with an ink of reddish color
 resembling rust:
 
“this 25th day of april, 1498, be...
 
alexander vi., and fearing that not...
 
may desire to become my heir, and re...
 
and bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...
 
my sole heir, that i have bu...
 
and has visited with me, that is, in...
 
island of monte cristo, all i poss...
 
jewels, diamonds, gems; that i alone...
 
may amount to nearly two mil...
 
will find on raising the twentieth ro...
 
creek to the east in right line. two open...
 
in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...
 
which treasure i bequeath and leave en...
 
as my sole heir.
 
“25th april, 1498.
 
“cæs...
 

“and now,” said the abbé, “read this other paper;” and presented to
 dantès second leaf with fragments of lines written on it, which
 edmond read as follows:
 
“...ing invited to dine by his holiness
 
...content with making pay for my hat,
 
...serves for the fate of cardinals caprara
 
...i declare to my nephew, guido spada
 
...ried in place knows
 
...the caves of the small
 
...essed of ingots, gold, money,
 
...know of the existence of this treasure, which
 
...lions of roman crowns, and which he
 
...ck from the small
 
...ings have been made
 
...ngle in the second;
 
...tire to him
 
...ar † spada.”
 

faria followed him with an excited look.
 
“and now,” said, when saw that dantès had read the last line,
 “put the two fragments together, and judge for yourself.” dantès
 obeyed, and the conjointed pieces gave the following:
 
0245m
 


“this 25th day of april, 1498, be...ing invited to dine by his holiness
 alexander vi., and fearing that not...content with making pay for my
 hat, may desire to become my heir, and re...serves for the fate
 of cardinals caprara and bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...i declare to
 my nephew, guido spada, my sole heir, that i have bu...ried in place
 knows and has visited with me, that is, in...the caves of the small
 island of monte cristo, all i poss...essed of ingots, gold, money,
 jewels, diamonds, gems; that i alone...know of the existence of this
 treasure, which may amount to nearly two mil...lions of roman crowns,
 and which will find on raising the twentieth ro...ck from the small
 creek to the east in right line. two open...ings have been made in
 these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...ngle in the second;
 which treasure i bequeath and leave en...tire to him as my sole heir.
 “25th april, 1498. “cæs...ar † spada.”
 
“well, do you comprehend now?” inquired faria.
 
“it is the declaration of cardinal spada, and the will so long sought
 for,” replied edmond, still incredulous.
 
“yes; thousand times, yes!”
 
“and who completed it as it now is?”
 
“i did. aided by the remaining fragment, i guessed the rest; measuring
 the length of the lines by those of the paper, and divining the hidden
 meaning by means of what was in part revealed, as we are guided in a
 cavern by the small ray of light above us.”
 
“and what did you do when you arrived at this conclusion?”
 
“i resolved to set out, and did set out at that very instant, carrying
 with the beginning of my great work, the unity of the italian
 kingdom; but for some time the imperial police (who at this period,
 quite contrary to what napoleon desired so soon as had born to
 him, wished for partition of provinces) had their eyes on me; and my
 hasty departure, the cause of which they were unable to guess, having
 aroused their suspicions, i was arrested at the very moment i was
 leaving piombino.
 
“now,” continued faria, addressing dantès with an almost paternal
 expression, “now, my dear fellow, you know as much as i do myself. if
 we ever escape together, half this treasure is yours; if i die here,
 and you escape alone, the whole belongs to you.”
 
“but,” inquired dantès hesitating, “has this treasure more
 legitimate possessor in the world than ourselves?”
 
“no, no, be easy on that score; the family is extinct. the last count
 of spada, moreover, made his heir, bequeathing to this symbolic
 breviary, bequeathed to all it contained; no, no, make your mind
 satisfied on that point. if we lay hands on this fortune, we may enjoy
 it without remorse.”
 
“and you say this treasure amounts to——”
 
“two millions of roman crowns; nearly thirteen millions of our money.”2
 
“impossible!” said dantès, staggered at the enormous amount.
 
“impossible? and why?” asked the old man. “the spada family was one of
 the oldest and most powerful families of the fifteenth century; and in
 those times, when other opportunities for investment were wanting, such
 accumulations of gold and jewels were by means rare; there are at
 this day roman families perishing of hunger, though possessed of nearly
 million in diamonds and jewels, handed down by entail, and which they
 cannot touch.”
 
edmond thought was in dream—he wavered between incredulity and
 joy.
 
“i have only kept this secret so long from you,” continued faria, “that
 i might test your character, and then surprise you. had we escaped
 before my attack of catalepsy, i should have conducted you to monte
 cristo; now,” added, with sigh, “it is you who will conduct me
 thither. well, dantès, you do not thank me?”
 
“this treasure belongs to you, my dear friend,” replied dantès, “and to
 you only. i have right to it. i am relation of yours.”
 
“you are my son, dantès,” exclaimed the old man. “you are the child of
 my captivity. my profession condemns to celibacy. god has sent you
 to to console, at one and the same time, the man who could not be a
 father, and the prisoner who could not get free.”
 
and faria extended the arm of which alone the use remained to him to
 the young man, who threw himself upon his neck and wept.
 


chapter 19. the third attack
 
now that this treasure, which had so long been the object of the abbé’s
 meditations, could insure the future happiness of him whom faria really
 loved as son, it had doubled its value in his eyes, and every day he
 expatiated on the amount, explaining to dantès all the good which, with
 thirteen or fourteen millions of francs, man could do in these days
 to his friends; and then dantès’ countenance became gloomy, for the
 oath of vengeance had taken recurred to his memory, and reflected
 how much ill, in these times, man with thirteen or fourteen millions
 could do to his enemies.
 
the abbé did not know the island of monte cristo; but dantès knew it,
 and had often passed it, situated twenty-five miles from pianosa,
 between corsica and the island of elba, and had once touched there.
 this island was, always had been, and still is, completely deserted. it
 is rock of almost conical form, which looks as though it had been
 thrust up by volcanic force from the depth to the surface of the ocean.
 dantès drew plan of the island for faria, and faria gave dantès
 advice as to the means should employ to recover the treasure. but
 dantès was far from being as enthusiastic and confident as the old man.
 it was past question now that faria was not lunatic, and the way in
 which had achieved the discovery, which had given rise to the
 suspicion of his madness, increased edmond’s admiration of him; but at
 the same time dantès could not believe that the deposit, supposing it
 had ever existed, still existed; and though considered the treasure
 as by means chimerical, yet believed it was longer there.
 
however, as if fate resolved on depriving the prisoners of their last
 chance, and making them understand that they were condemned to
 perpetual imprisonment, new misfortune befell them; the gallery on
 the side, which had long been in ruins, was rebuilt. they had
 repaired it completely, and stopped up with vast masses of stone the
 hole dantès had partly filled in. but for this precaution, which, it
 will be remembered, the abbé had made to edmond, the misfortune would
 have been still greater, for their attempt to escape would have been
 detected, and they would undoubtedly have been separated. thus new, a
 stronger, and more inexorable barrier was interposed to cut off the
 realization of their hopes.
 
“you see,” said the young man, with an air of sorrowful resignation, to
 faria, “that god deems it right to take from any claim to merit for
 what you call my devotion to you. i have promised to remain forever
 with you, and now i could not break my promise if i would. the treasure
 will be more mine than yours, and neither of us will quit this
 prison. but my real treasure is not that, my dear friend, which awaits
 beneath the sombre rocks of monte cristo, it is your presence, our
 living together five or six hours day, in spite of our jailers; it is
 the rays of intelligence you have elicited from my brain, the languages
 you have implanted in my memory, and which have taken root there with
 all their philological ramifications. these different sciences that you
 have made so easy to by the depth of the knowledge you possess of
 them, and the clearness of the principles to which you have reduced
 them—this is my treasure, my beloved friend, and with this you have
 made rich and happy. believe me, and take comfort, this is better
 for than tons of gold and cases of diamonds, even were they not as
 problematical as the clouds we see in the morning floating over the
 sea, which we take for _terra firma_, and which evaporate and vanish as
 we draw near to them. to have you as long as possible near me, to hear
 your eloquent speech,—which embellishes my mind, strengthens my soul,
 and makes my whole frame capable of great and terrible things, if i
 should ever be free,—so fills my whole existence, that the despair to
 which i was just on the point of yielding when i knew you, has no
 longer any hold over me; and this—this is my fortune—not chimerical,
 but actual. i owe you my real good, my present happiness; and all the
 sovereigns of the earth, even cæsar borgia himself, could not deprive
 of this.”
 
thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these two unfortunates passed
 together went quickly. faria, who for so long time had kept silence
 as to the treasure, now perpetually talked of it. as had prophesied
 would be the case, remained paralyzed in the right arm and the left
 leg, and had given up all hope of ever enjoying it himself. but was
 continually thinking over some means of escape for his young companion,
 and anticipating the pleasure would enjoy. for fear the letter might
 be some day lost or stolen, compelled dantès to learn it by heart;
 and dantès knew it from the first to the last word. then destroyed
 the second portion, assured that if the first were seized, one would
 be able to discover its real meaning. whole hours sometimes passed
 while faria was giving instructions to dantès,—instructions which were
 to serve him when was at liberty. then, once free, from the day and
 hour and moment when was so, could have but one only thought,
 which was, to gain monte cristo by some means, and remain there alone
 under some pretext which would arouse suspicions; and once there, to
 endeavor to find the wonderful caverns, and search in the appointed
 spot,—the appointed spot, be it remembered, being the farthest angle in
 the second opening.
 
in the meanwhile the hours passed, if not rapidly, at least tolerably.
 faria, as we have said, without having recovered the use of his hand
 and foot, had regained all the clearness of his understanding, and had
 gradually, besides the moral instructions we have detailed, taught his
 youthful companion the patient and sublime duty of prisoner, who
 learns to make something from nothing. they were thus perpetually
 employed,—faria, that might not see himself grow old; dantès, for
 fear of recalling the almost extinct past which now only floated in his
 memory like distant light wandering in the night. so life went on for
 them as it does for those who are not victims of misfortune and whose
 activities glide along mechanically and tranquilly beneath the eye of
 providence.
 
but beneath this superficial calm there were in the heart of the young
 man, and perhaps in that of the old man, many repressed desires, many
 stifled sighs, which found vent when faria was left alone, and when
 edmond returned to his cell.
 
one night edmond awoke suddenly, believing that heard someone
 calling him. opened his eyes upon utter darkness. his name, or
 rather plaintive voice which essayed to pronounce his name, reached
 him. sat up in bed and cold sweat broke out upon his brow.
 undoubtedly the call came from faria’s dungeon.
 
“alas,” murmured edmond; “can it be?”
 
moved his bed, drew up the stone, rushed into the passage, and
 reached the opposite extremity; the secret entrance was open. by the
 light of the wretched and wavering lamp, of which we have spoken,
 dantès saw the old man, pale, but yet erect, clinging to the bedstead.
 his features were writhing with those horrible symptoms which he
 already knew, and which had so seriously alarmed him when saw them
 for the first time.
 
“alas, my dear friend,” said faria in resigned tone, “you understand,
 do you not, and i need not attempt to explain to you?”
 
edmond uttered cry of agony, and, quite out of his senses, rushed
 towards the door, exclaiming, “help, help!”
 
faria had just sufficient strength to restrain him.
 
“silence,” said, “or you are lost. we must now only think of you, my
 dear friend, and so act as to render your captivity supportable or your
 flight possible. it would require years to do again what i have done
 here, and the results would be instantly destroyed if our jailers knew
 we had communicated with each other. besides, be assured, my dear
 edmond, the dungeon i am about to leave will not long remain empty;
 some other unfortunate being will soon take my place, and to him you
 will appear like an angel of salvation. perhaps will be young,
 strong, and enduring, like yourself, and will aid you in your escape,
 while i have been but hindrance. you will longer have half dead
 body tied to you as drag to all your movements. at length providence
 has done something for you; restores to you more than takes away,
 and it was time i should die.”
 
edmond could only clasp his hands and exclaim, “oh, my friend, my
 friend, speak not thus!” and then resuming all his presence of mind,
 which had for moment staggered under this blow, and his strength,
 which had failed at the words of the old man, said, “oh, i have
 saved you once, and i will save you second time!” and raising the
 foot of the bed, drew out the phial, still third filled with the
 red liquor.
 
“see,” exclaimed, “there remains still some of the magic draught.
 quick, quick! tell what i must do this time; are there any fresh
 instructions? speak, my friend; i listen.”
 
“there is not hope,” replied faria, shaking his head, “but matter;
 god wills it that man whom has created, and in whose heart has so
 profoundly rooted the love of life, should do all in his power to
 preserve that existence, which, however painful it may be, is yet
 always so dear.”
 
“oh, yes, yes!” exclaimed dantès; “and i tell you that i will save you
 yet.”
 
“well, then, try. the cold gains upon me. i feel the blood flowing
 towards my brain. these horrible chills, which make my teeth chatter
 and seem to dislocate my bones, begin to pervade my whole frame; in
 five minutes the malady will reach its height, and in quarter of an
 hour there will be nothing left of but corpse.”
 
“oh!” exclaimed dantès, his heart wrung with anguish.
 
“do as you did before, only do not wait so long, all the springs of
 life are now exhausted in me, and death,” continued, looking at his
 paralyzed arm and leg, “has but half its work to do. if, after having
 made swallow twelve drops instead of ten, you see that i do not
 recover, then pour the rest down my throat. now lift on my bed, for
 i can longer support myself.”
 
edmond took the old man in his arms, and laid him on the bed.
 
“and now, my dear friend,” said faria, “sole consolation of my wretched
 existence,—you whom heaven gave somewhat late, but still gave me, a
 priceless gift, and for which i am most grateful,—at the moment of
 separating from you forever, i wish you all the happiness and all the
 prosperity you so well deserve. my son, i bless thee!”
 
the young man cast himself on his knees, leaning his head against the
 old man’s bed.
 
“listen, now, to what i say in this my dying moment. the treasure of
 the spadas exists. god grants the boon of vision unrestricted by
 time or space. i see it in the depths of the inner cavern. my eyes
 pierce the inmost recesses of the earth, and are dazzled at the sight
 of so much riches. if you do escape, remember that the poor abbé, whom
 all the world called mad, was not so. hasten to monte cristo—avail
 yourself of the fortune—for you have indeed suffered long enough.”
 
violent convulsion attacked the old man. dantès raised his head and
 saw faria’s eyes injected with blood. it seemed as if flow of blood
 had ascended from the chest to the head.
 
“adieu, adieu!” murmured the old man, clasping edmond’s hand
 convulsively—“adieu!”
 
“oh, no,—no, not yet,” cried; “do not forsake me! oh, succor him!
 help—help—help!”
 
“hush! hush!” murmured the dying man, “that they may not separate us if
 you save me!”
 
“you are right. oh, yes, yes; be assured i shall save you! besides,
 although you suffer much, you do not seem to be in such agony as you
 were before.”
 
“do not mistake! i suffer less because there is in less strength to
 endure. at your age we have faith in life; it is the privilege of youth
 to believe and hope, but old men see death more clearly. oh, ’tis
 here—’tis here—’tis over—my sight is gone—my senses fail! your hand,
 dantès! adieu! adieu!”
 
and raising himself by final effort, in which summoned all his
 faculties, said,—“monte cristo, forget not monte cristo!” and he
 fell back on the bed.
 
the crisis was terrible, and rigid form with twisted limbs, swollen
 eyelids, and lips flecked with bloody foam, lay on the bed of torture,
 in place of the intellectual being who so lately rested there.
 
dantès took the lamp, placed it on projecting stone above the bed,
 whence its tremulous light fell with strange and fantastic ray on the
 distorted countenance and motionless, stiffened body. with steady gaze
 awaited confidently the moment for administering the restorative.
 
when believed that the right moment had arrived, took the knife,
 pried open the teeth, which offered less resistance than before,
 counted one after the other twelve drops, and watched; the phial
 contained, perhaps, twice as much more. waited ten minutes, a
 quarter of an hour, half an hour,—no change took place. trembling, his
 hair erect, his brow bathed with perspiration, counted the seconds
 by the beating of his heart. then thought it was time to make the
 last trial, and put the phial to the purple lips of faria, and
 without having occasion to force open his jaws, which had remained
 extended, poured the whole of the liquid down his throat.
 
0255m
 


the draught produced galvanic effect, violent trembling pervaded
 the old man’s limbs, his eyes opened until it was fearful to gaze upon
 them, heaved sigh which resembled shriek, and then his convulsed
 body returned gradually to its former immobility, the eyes remaining
 open.
 
half an hour, an hour, an hour and half elapsed, and during this
 period of anguish, edmond leaned over his friend, his hand applied to
 his heart, and felt the body gradually grow cold, and the heart’s
 pulsation become more and more deep and dull, until at length it
 stopped; the last movement of the heart ceased, the face became livid,
 the eyes remained open, but the eyeballs were glazed.
 
it was six o’clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and its
 feeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectual light of
 the lamp. strange shadows passed over the countenance of the dead man,
 and at times gave it the appearance of life. while the struggle between
 day and night lasted, dantès still doubted; but as soon as the daylight
 gained the pre-eminence, saw that was alone with corpse. then
 an invincible and extreme terror seized upon him, and dared not
 again press the hand that hung out of bed, dared longer to gaze
 on those fixed and vacant eyes, which tried many times to close, but
 in vain—they opened again as soon as shut. extinguished the lamp,
 carefully concealed it, and then went away, closing as well as could
 the entrance to the secret passage by the large stone as descended.
 
it was time, for the jailer was coming. on this occasion began his
 rounds at dantès’ cell, and on leaving him went on to faria’s
 dungeon, taking thither breakfast and some linen. nothing betokened
 that the man knew anything of what had occurred. went on his way.
 
dantès was then seized with an indescribable desire to know what was
 going on in the dungeon of his unfortunate friend. therefore
 returned by the subterraneous gallery, and arrived in time to hear the
 exclamations of the turnkey, who called out for help. other turnkeys
 came, and then was heard the regular tramp of soldiers. last of all
 came the governor.
 
edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved the corpse, heard
 the voice of the governor, who asked them to throw water on the dead
 man’s face; and seeing that, in spite of this application, the prisoner
 did not recover, they sent for the doctor. the governor then went out,
 and words of pity fell on dantès’ listening ears, mingled with brutal
 laughter.
 
“well, well,” said one, “the madman has gone to look after his
 treasure. good journey to him!”
 
“with all his millions, will not have enough to pay for his shroud!”
 said another.
 
“oh,” added third voice, “the shrouds of the château d’if are not
 dear!”
 
0257m
 


“perhaps,” said one of the previous speakers, “as was churchman,
 they may go to some expense in his behalf.”
 
“they may give him the honors of the sack.”
 
edmond did not lose word, but comprehended very little of what was
 said. the voices soon ceased, and it seemed to him as if everyone had
 left the cell. still dared not to enter, as they might have left
 some turnkey to watch the dead. remained, therefore, mute and
 motionless, hardly venturing to breathe. at the end of an hour, he
 heard faint noise, which increased. it was the governor who returned,
 followed by the doctor and other attendants. there was moment’s
 silence,—it was evident that the doctor was examining the dead body.
 the inquiries soon commenced.
 
the doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which the prisoner
 had succumbed, and declared that was dead. questions and answers
 followed in nonchalant manner that made dantès indignant, for felt
 that all the world should have for the poor abbé love and respect
 equal to his own.
 
“i am very sorry for what you tell me,” said the governor, replying to
 the assurance of the doctor, “that the old man is really dead; for he
 was quiet, inoffensive prisoner, happy in his folly, and required no
 watching.”
 
“ah,” added the turnkey, “there was occasion for watching him; he
 would have stayed here fifty years, i’ll answer for it, without any
 attempt to escape.”
 
“still,” said the governor, “i believe it will be requisite,
 notwithstanding your certainty, and not that i doubt your science, but
 in discharge of my official duty, that we should be perfectly assured
 that the prisoner is dead.”
 
there was moment of complete silence, during which dantès, still
 listening, knew that the doctor was examining the corpse second time.
 
“you may make your mind easy,” said the doctor; “he is dead. i will
 answer for that.”
 
“you know, sir,” said the governor, persisting, “that we are not
 content in such cases as this with such simple examination. in spite
 of all appearances, be so kind, therefore, as to finish your duty by
 fulfilling the formalities described by law.”
 
“let the irons be heated,” said the doctor; “but really it is useless
 precaution.”
 
this order to heat the irons made dantès shudder. heard hasty steps,
 the creaking of door, people going and coming, and some minutes
 afterwards turnkey entered, saying:
 
“here is the brazier, lighted.”
 
there was moment’s silence, and then was heard the crackling of
 burning flesh, of which the peculiar and nauseous smell penetrated even
 behind the wall where dantès was listening in horror. the perspiration
 poured forth upon the young man’s brow, and felt as if should
 faint.
 
“you see, sir, is really dead,” said the doctor; “this burn in the
 heel is decisive. the poor fool is cured of his folly, and delivered
 from his captivity.”
 
“wasn’t his name faria?” inquired one of the officers who accompanied
 the governor.
 
0259m
 


“yes, sir; and, as said, it was an ancient name. was, too, very
 learned, and rational enough on all points which did not relate to his
 treasure; but on that, indeed, was intractable.”
 
“it is the sort of malady which we call monomania,” said the doctor.
 
“you had never anything to complain of?” said the governor to the
 jailer who had charge of the abbé.
 
“never, sir,” replied the jailer, “never; on the contrary, sometimes
 amused very much by telling stories. one day, too, when my wife
 was ill, gave prescription which cured her.”
 
“ah, ah!” said the doctor, “i did not know that i had rival; but i
 hope, governor, that you will show him all proper respect in
 consequence.”
 
“yes, yes, make your mind easy, shall be decently interred in the
 newest sack we can find. will that satisfy you?”
 
“must this last formality take place in your presence, sir?” inquired a
 turnkey.
 
“certainly. but make haste—i cannot stay here all day.” other
 footsteps, going and coming, were now heard, and moment afterwards
 the noise of rustling canvas reached dantès’ ears, the bed creaked, and
 the heavy footfall of man who lifts weight sounded on the floor;
 then the bed again creaked under the weight deposited upon it.
 
“this evening,” said the governor.
 
“will there be any mass?” asked one of the attendants.
 
“that is impossible,” replied the governor. “the chaplain of the
 château came to yesterday to beg for leave of absence, in order to
 take trip to hyères for week. i told him i would attend to the
 prisoners in his absence. if the poor abbé had not been in such a
 hurry, might have had his requiem.”
 
“pooh, pooh;” said the doctor, with the impiety usual in persons of his
 profession; “he is churchman. god will respect his profession, and
 not give the devil the wicked delight of sending him priest.” shout
 of laughter followed this brutal jest. meanwhile the operation of
 putting the body in the sack was going on.
 
“this evening,” said the governor, when the task was ended.
 
“at what hour?” inquired turnkey.
 
“why, about ten or eleven o’clock.”
 
“shall we watch by the corpse?”
 
“of what use would it be? shut the dungeon as if were alive—that is
 all.”
 
then the steps retreated, and the voices died away in the distance; the
 noise of the door, with its creaking hinges and bolts ceased, and a
 silence more sombre than that of solitude ensued,—the silence of death,
 which was all-pervasive, and struck its icy chill to the very soul of
 dantès.
 
then raised the flag-stone cautiously with his head, and looked
 carefully around the chamber. it was empty, and dantès emerged from the
 tunnel.
 


chapter 20. the cemetery of the château d’if
 
on the bed, at full length, and faintly illuminated by the pale light
 that came from the window, lay sack of canvas, and under its rude
 folds was stretched long and stiffened form; it was faria’s last
 winding-sheet,—a winding-sheet which, as the turnkey said, cost so
 little. everything was in readiness. barrier had been placed between
 dantès and his old friend. longer could edmond look into those
 wide-open eyes which had seemed to be penetrating the mysteries of
 death; longer could clasp the hand which had done so much to make
 his existence blessed. faria, the beneficent and cheerful companion,
 with whom was accustomed to live so intimately, longer breathed.
 seated himself on the edge of that terrible bed, and fell into
 melancholy and gloomy reverie.
 
alone! was alone again! again condemned to silence—again face to
 face with nothingness! alone!—never again to see the face, never again
 to hear the voice of the only human being who united him to earth! was
 not faria’s fate the better, after all—to solve the problem of life at
 its source, even at the risk of horrible suffering?
 
the idea of suicide, which his friend had driven away and kept away by
 his cheerful presence, now hovered like phantom over the abbé’s dead
 body.
 
“if i could die,” said, “i should go where goes, and should
 assuredly find him again. but how to die? it is very easy,” went on
 with smile; “i will remain here, rush on the first person that opens
 the door, strangle him, and then they will guillotine me.”
 
but excessive grief is like storm at sea, where the frail bark is
 tossed from the depths to the top of the wave. dantès recoiled from the
 idea of so infamous death, and passed suddenly from despair to an
 ardent desire for life and liberty.
 
“die? oh, no,” exclaimed—“not die now, after having lived and
 suffered so long and so much! die? yes, had i died years ago; but now
 to die would be, indeed, to give way to the sarcasm of destiny. no, i
 want to live; i shall struggle to the very last; i will yet win back
 the happiness of which i have been deprived. before i die i must not
 forget that i have my executioners to punish, and perhaps, too, who
 knows, some friends to reward. yet they will forget here, and i
 shall die in my dungeon like faria.”
 
as said this, became silent and gazed straight before him like
 one overwhelmed with strange and amazing thought. suddenly arose,
 lifted his hand to his brow as if his brain were giddy, paced twice or
 thrice round the dungeon, and then paused abruptly by the bed.
 
“just god!” muttered, “whence comes this thought? is it from thee?
 since none but the dead pass freely from this dungeon, let take the
 place of the dead!”
 
without giving himself time to reconsider his decision, and, indeed,
 that might not allow his thoughts to be distracted from his
 desperate resolution, bent over the appalling shroud, opened it with
 the knife which faria had made, drew the corpse from the sack, and bore
 it along the tunnel to his own chamber, laid it on his couch, tied
 around its head the rag wore at night around his own, covered it
 with his counterpane, once again kissed the ice-cold brow, and tried
 vainly to close the resisting eyes, which glared horribly, turned the
 head towards the wall, so that the jailer might, when brought the
 evening meal, believe that was asleep, as was his frequent custom;
 entered the tunnel again, drew the bed against the wall, returned to
 the other cell, took from the hiding-place the needle and thread, flung
 off his rags, that they might feel only naked flesh beneath the coarse
 canvas, and getting inside the sack, placed himself in the posture in
 which the dead body had been laid, and sewed up the mouth of the sack
 from the inside.
 
would have been discovered by the beating of his heart, if by any
 mischance the jailers had entered at that moment. dantès might have
 waited until the evening visit was over, but was afraid that the
 governor would change his mind, and order the dead body to be removed
 earlier. in that case his last hope would have been destroyed.
 
now his plans were fully made, and this is what intended to do. if
 while was being carried out the grave-diggers should discover that
 they were bearing live instead of dead body, dantès did not intend
 to give them time to recognize him, but with sudden cut of the knife,
 meant to open the sack from top to bottom, and, profiting by their
 alarm, escape; if they tried to catch him, would use his knife to
 better purpose.
 
0263m
 


if they took him to the cemetery and laid him in grave, would
 allow himself to be covered with earth, and then, as it was night, the
 grave-diggers could scarcely have turned their backs before would
 have worked his way through the yielding soil and escaped. hoped
 that the weight of earth would not be so great that could not
 overcome it. if was detected in this and the earth proved too heavy,
 would be stifled, and then—so much the better, all would be over.
 
dantès had not eaten since the preceding evening, but had not
 thought of hunger, nor did think of it now. his situation was too
 precarious to allow him even time to reflect on any thought but one.
 
the first risk that dantès ran was, that the jailer, when brought
 him his supper at seven o’clock, might perceive the change that had
 been made; fortunately, twenty times at least, from misanthropy or
 fatigue, dantès had received his jailer in bed, and then the man placed
 his bread and soup on the table, and went away without saying word.
 this time the jailer might not be as silent as usual, but speak to
 dantès, and seeing that received reply, go to the bed, and thus
 discover all.
 
when seven o’clock came, dantès’ agony really began. his hand placed
 upon his heart was unable to redress its throbbings, while, with the
 other wiped the perspiration from his temples. from time to time
 chills ran through his whole body, and clutched his heart in grasp of
 ice. then thought was going to die. yet the hours passed on
 without any unusual disturbance, and dantès knew that had escaped
 the first peril. it was good augury.
 
at length, about the hour the governor had appointed, footsteps were
 heard on the stairs. edmond felt that the moment had arrived, summoned
 up all his courage, held his breath, and would have been happy if at
 the same time could have repressed the throbbing of his veins. the
 footsteps—they were double—paused at the door—and dantès guessed that
 the two grave-diggers had come to seek him—this idea was soon converted
 into certainty, when heard the noise they made in putting down the
 hand-bier.
 
the door opened, and dim light reached dantès’ eyes through the
 coarse sack that covered him; saw two shadows approach his bed, a
 third remaining at the door with torch in its hand. the two men,
 approaching the ends of the bed, took the sack by its extremities.
 
“he’s heavy, though, for an old and thin man,” said one, as raised
 the head.
 
“they say every year adds half pound to the weight of the bones,”
 said another, lifting the feet.
 
“have you tied the knot?” inquired the first speaker.
 
“what would be the use of carrying so much more weight?” was the reply,
 “i can do that when we get there.”
 
“yes, you’re right,” replied the companion.
 
“what’s the knot for?” thought dantès.
 
they deposited the supposed corpse on the bier. edmond stiffened
 himself in order to play the part of dead man, and then the party,
 lighted by the man with the torch, who went first, ascended the stairs.
 suddenly felt the fresh and sharp night air, and dantès knew that
 the mistral was blowing. it was sensation in which pleasure and pain
 were strangely mingled.
 
the bearers went on for twenty paces, then stopped, putting the bier
 down on the ground. one of them went away, and dantès heard his shoes
 striking on the pavement.
 
“where am i?” asked himself.
 
“really, is by means light load!” said the other bearer,
 sitting on the edge of the hand-barrow.
 
dantès’ first impulse was to escape, but fortunately did not attempt
 it.
 
“give us light,” said the other bearer, “or i shall never find what i
 am looking for.”
 
the man with the torch complied, although not asked in the most polite
 terms.
 
“what can be looking for?” thought edmond. “the spade, perhaps.”
 
an exclamation of satisfaction indicated that the grave-digger had
 found the object of his search. “here it is at last,” said, “not
 without some trouble, though.”
 
“yes,” was the answer, “but it has lost nothing by waiting.”
 
as said this, the man came towards edmond, who heard heavy
 metallic substance laid down beside him, and at the same moment cord
 was fastened round his feet with sudden and painful violence.
 
“well, have you tied the knot?” inquired the grave-digger, who was
 looking on.
 
“yes, and pretty tight too, i can tell you,” was the answer.
 
“move on, then.” and the bier was lifted once more, and they proceeded.
 
they advanced fifty paces farther, and then stopped to open door,
 then went forward again. the noise of the waves dashing against the
 rocks on which the château is built, reached dantès’ ear distinctly as
 they went forward.
 
“bad weather!” observed one of the bearers; “not pleasant night for a
 dip in the sea.”
 
“why, yes, the abbé runs chance of being wet,” said the other; and
 then there was burst of brutal laughter.
 
dantès did not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood erect on his
 head.
 
“well, here we are at last,” said one of them.
 
“a little farther—a little farther,” said the other. “you know very
 well that the last was stopped on his way, dashed on the rocks, and the
 governor told us next day that we were careless fellows.”
 
they ascended five or six more steps, and then dantès felt that they
 took him, one by the head and the other by the heels, and swung him to
 and fro.
 
“one!” said the grave-diggers, “two! three!”
 
and at the same instant dantès felt himself flung into the air like a
 wounded bird, falling, falling, with rapidity that made his blood
 curdle. although drawn downwards by the heavy weight which hastened his
 rapid descent, it seemed to him as if the fall lasted for century. at
 last, with horrible splash, darted like an arrow into the ice-cold
 water, and as did so uttered shrill cry, stifled in moment by
 his immersion beneath the waves.
 
dantès had been flung into the sea, and was dragged into its depths by
 thirty-six-pound shot tied to his feet.
 
the is the cemetery of the château d’if.
 
0267m
 



chapter 21. the island of tiboulen
 
dantès, although stunned and almost suffocated, had sufficient presence
 of mind to hold his breath, and as his right hand (prepared as was
 for every chance) held his knife open, rapidly ripped up the sack,
 extricated his arm, and then his body; but in spite of all his efforts
 to free himself from the shot, felt it dragging him down still
 lower. then bent his body, and by desperate effort severed the
 cord that bound his legs, at the moment when it seemed as if were
 actually strangled. with mighty leap rose to the surface of the
 sea, while the shot dragged down to the depths the sack that had so
 nearly become his shroud.
 
dantès waited only to get breath, and then dived, in order to avoid
 being seen. when arose second time, was fifty paces from where
 had first sunk. saw overhead black and tempestuous sky, across
 which the wind was driving clouds that occasionally suffered a
 twinkling star to appear; before him was the vast expanse of waters,
 sombre and terrible, whose waves foamed and roared as if before the
 approach of storm. behind him, blacker than the sea, blacker than the
 sky, rose phantom-like the vast stone structure, whose projecting crags
 seemed like arms extended to seize their prey, and on the highest rock
 was torch lighting two figures.
 
fancied that these two forms were looking at the sea; doubtless
 these strange grave-diggers had heard his cry. dantès dived again, and
 remained long time beneath the water. this was an easy feat to him,
 for usually attracted crowd of spectators in the bay before the
 lighthouse at marseilles when swam there, and was unanimously
 declared to be the best swimmer in the port. when came up again the
 light had disappeared.
 
must now get his bearings. ratonneau and pomègue are the nearest
 islands of all those that surround the château d’if, but ratonneau and
 pomègue are inhabited, as is also the islet of daume. tiboulen and
 lemaire were therefore the safest for dantès’ venture. the islands of
 tiboulen and lemaire are league from the château d’if; dantès,
 nevertheless, determined to make for them. but how could find his
 way in the darkness of the night?
 
at this moment saw the light of planier, gleaming in front of him
 like star. by leaving this light on the right, kept the island of
 tiboulen little on the left; by turning to the left, therefore, he
 would find it. but, as we have said, it was at least league from the
 château d’if to this island. often in prison faria had said to him,
 when saw him idle and inactive:
 
“dantès, you must not give way to this listlessness; you will be
 drowned if you seek to escape, and your strength has not been properly
 exercised and prepared for exertion.”
 
these words rang in dantès’ ears, even beneath the waves; hastened
 to cleave his way through them to see if had not lost his strength.
 found with pleasure that his captivity had taken away nothing of his
 power, and that was still master of that element on whose bosom he
 had so often sported as boy.
 
fear, that relentless pursuer, clogged dantès’ efforts. listened for
 any sound that might be audible, and every time that rose to the top
 of wave scanned the horizon, and strove to penetrate the darkness.
 fancied that every wave behind him was pursuing boat, and he
 redoubled his exertions, increasing rapidly his distance from the
 château, but exhausting his strength. swam on still, and already the
 terrible château had disappeared in the darkness. could not see it,
 but _felt_ its presence.
 
an hour passed, during which dantès, excited by the feeling of freedom,
 continued to cleave the waves.
 
“let us see,” said he, “i have swum above an hour, but as the wind is
 against me, that has retarded my speed; however, if i am not mistaken,
 i must be close to tiboulen. but what if i were mistaken?”
 
shudder passed over him. sought to tread water, in order to rest
 himself; but the was too violent, and felt that could not
 make use of this means of recuperation.
 
“well,” said he, “i will swim on until i am worn out, or the cramp
 seizes me, and then i shall sink;” and struck out with the energy of
 despair.
 
suddenly the sky seemed to him to become still darker and more dense,
 and heavy clouds seemed to sweep down towards him; at the same time he
 felt sharp pain in his knee. fancied for moment that had been
 shot, and listened for the report; but heard nothing. then put
 out his hand, and encountered an obstacle and with another stroke knew
 that had gained the shore.
 
before him rose grotesque mass of rocks, that resembled nothing so
 much as vast fire petrified at the moment of its most fervent
 combustion. it was the island of tiboulen. dantès rose, advanced few
 steps, and, with fervent prayer of gratitude, stretched himself on
 the granite, which seemed to him softer than down. then, in spite of
 the wind and rain, fell into the deep, sweet sleep of utter
 exhaustion. at the expiration of an hour edmond was awakened by the
 roar of thunder. the tempest was let loose and beating the atmosphere
 with its mighty wings; from time to time flash of lightning stretched
 across the heavens like fiery serpent, lighting up the clouds that
 rolled on in vast chaotic waves.
 
dantès had not been deceived—he had reached the first of the two
 islands, which was, in fact, tiboulen. knew that it was barren and
 without shelter; but when the became more calm, resolved to
 plunge into its waves again, and swim to lemaire, equally arid, but
 larger, and consequently better adapted for concealment.
 
an overhanging rock offered him temporary shelter, and scarcely had
 availed himself of it when the tempest burst forth in all its fury.
 edmond felt the trembling of the rock beneath which lay; the waves,
 dashing themselves against it, wetted him with their spray. was
 safely sheltered, and yet felt dizzy in the midst of the warring of
 the elements and the dazzling brightness of the lightning. it seemed to
 him that the island trembled to its base, and that it would, like a
 vessel at anchor, break moorings, and bear him off into the centre of
 the storm.
 
then recollected that had not eaten or drunk for four-and-twenty
 hours. extended his hands, and drank greedily of the rainwater that
 had lodged in hollow of the rock.
 
as rose, flash of lightning, that seemed to rive the remotest
 heights of heaven, illumined the darkness. by its light, between the
 island of lemaire and cape croiselle, quarter of league distant,
 dantès saw fishing-boat driven rapidly like spectre before the
 power of winds and waves. second after, saw it again, approaching
 with frightful rapidity. dantès cried at the top of his voice to warn
 them of their danger, but they saw it themselves. another flash showed
 him four men clinging to the shattered mast and the rigging, while a
 fifth clung to the broken rudder. the men beheld saw him
 undoubtedly, for their cries were carried to his ears by the wind.
 above the splintered mast sail rent to tatters was waving; suddenly
 the ropes that still held it gave way, and it disappeared in the
 darkness of the night like vast sea-bird.
 
at the same moment violent crash was heard, and cries of distress.
 dantès from his rocky perch saw the shattered vessel, and among the
 fragments the floating forms of the hapless sailors. then all was dark
 again.
 
dantès ran down the rocks at the risk of being himself dashed to
 pieces; listened, groped about, but heard and saw nothing—the
 cries had ceased, and the tempest continued to rage. by degrees the
 wind abated, vast gray clouds rolled towards the west, and the blue
 firmament appeared studded with bright stars. soon red streak became
 visible in the horizon, the waves whitened, light played over them,
 and gilded their foaming crests with gold. it was day.
 
dantès stood mute and motionless before this majestic spectacle, as if
 now beheld it for the first time; and indeed since his captivity in
 the château d’if had forgotten that such scenes were ever to be
 witnessed. turned towards the fortress, and looked at both and
 land. the gloomy building rose from the bosom of the ocean with
 imposing majesty and seemed to dominate the scene. it was about five
 o’clock. the continued to get calmer.
 
“in two or three hours,” thought dantès, “the turnkey will enter my
 chamber, find the body of my poor friend, recognize it, seek for in
 vain, and give the alarm. then the tunnel will be discovered; the men
 who cast into the and who must have heard the cry i uttered,
 will be questioned. then boats filled with armed soldiers will pursue
 the wretched fugitive. the cannon will warn everyone to refuse shelter
 to man wandering about naked and famished. the police of marseilles
 will be on the alert by land, whilst the governor pursues by sea. i
 am cold, i am hungry. i have lost even the knife that saved me. oh, my
 god, i have suffered enough surely! have pity on me, and do for what
 i am unable to do for myself.”
 
as dantès (his eyes turned in the direction of the château d’if)
 uttered this prayer, saw off the farther point of the island of
 pomègue small vessel with lateen sail skimming the like gull in
 search of prey; and with his sailor’s eye knew it to be genoese
 tartan. she was coming out of marseilles harbor, and was standing out
 to rapidly, her sharp prow cleaving through the waves.
 
“oh,” cried edmond, “to think that in half an hour i could join her,
 did i not fear being questioned, detected, and conveyed back to
 marseilles! what can i do? what story can i invent? under pretext of
 trading along the coast, these men, who are in reality smugglers, will
 prefer selling to doing good action. i must wait. but i cannot—i
 am starving. in few hours my strength will be utterly exhausted;
 besides, perhaps i have not been missed at the fortress. i can pass as
 one of the sailors wrecked last night. my story will be accepted, for
 there is one left to contradict me.”
 
as spoke, dantès looked toward the spot where the fishing-vessel had
 been wrecked, and started. the red cap of one of the sailors hung to a
 point of the rock and some timbers that had formed part of the vessel’s
 keel, floated at the foot of the crag. in an instant dantès’ plan was
 formed. swam to the cap, placed it on his head, seized one of the
 timbers, and struck out so as to cut across the course the vessel was
 taking.
 
“i am saved!” murmured he. and this conviction restored his strength.
 
soon saw that the vessel, with the wind dead ahead, was tacking
 between the château d’if and the tower of planier. for an instant he
 feared lest, instead of keeping in shore, she should stand out to sea;
 but soon saw that she would pass, like most vessels bound for italy,
 between the islands of jaros and calaseraigne.
 
however, the vessel and the swimmer insensibly neared one another, and
 in one of its tacks the tartan bore down within quarter of mile of
 him. rose on the waves, making signs of distress; but one on
 board saw him, and the vessel stood on another tack. dantès would have
 shouted, but knew that the wind would drown his voice.
 
it was then rejoiced at his precaution in taking the timber, for
 without it would have been unable, perhaps, to reach the
 vessel—certainly to return to shore, should be unsuccessful in
 attracting attention.
 
dantès, though almost sure as to what course the vessel would take, had
 yet watched it anxiously until it tacked and stood towards him. then he
 advanced; but before they could meet, the vessel again changed her
 course. by violent effort rose half out of the water, waving his
 cap, and uttering loud shout peculiar to sailors. this time was
 both seen and heard, and the tartan instantly steered towards him. at
 the same time, saw they were about to lower the boat.
 
an instant after, the boat, rowed by two men, advanced rapidly towards
 him. dantès let go of the timber, which now thought to be useless,
 and swam vigorously to meet them. but had reckoned too much upon his
 strength, and then realized how serviceable the timber had been to
 him. his arms became stiff, his legs lost their flexibility, and was
 almost breathless.
 
shouted again. the two sailors redoubled their efforts, and one of
 them cried in italian, “courage!”
 
the word reached his ear as wave which longer had the strength
 to surmount passed over his head. rose again to the surface,
 struggled with the last desperate effort of drowning man, uttered a
 third cry, and felt himself sinking, as if the fatal cannon shot were
 again tied to his feet. the water passed over his head, and the sky
 turned gray. convulsive movement again brought him to the surface. he
 felt himself seized by the hair, then saw and heard nothing. had
 fainted.
 
when opened his eyes dantès found himself on the deck of the tartan.
 his first care was to see what course they were taking. they were
 rapidly leaving the château d’if behind. dantès was so exhausted that
 the exclamation of joy uttered was mistaken for sigh.
 
as we have said, was lying on the deck. sailor was rubbing his
 limbs with woollen cloth; another, whom recognized as the one who
 had cried out “courage!” held gourd full of rum to his mouth; while
 the third, an old sailor, at once the pilot and captain, looked on with
 that egotistical pity men feel for misfortune that they have escaped
 yesterday, and which may overtake them tomorrow.
 
few drops of the rum restored suspended animation, while the friction
 of his limbs restored their elasticity.
 
“who are you?” said the pilot in bad french.
 
“i am,” replied dantès, in bad italian, “a maltese sailor. we were
 coming from syracuse laden with grain. the storm of last night overtook
 us at cape morgiou, and we were wrecked on these rocks.”
 
“where do you come from?”
 
“from these rocks that i had the good luck to cling to while our
 captain and the rest of the crew were all lost. i saw your vessel, and
 fearful of being left to perish on the desolate island, i swam off on a
 piece of wreckage to try and intercept your course. you have saved my
 life, and i thank you,” continued dantès. “i was lost when one of your
 sailors caught hold of my hair.”
 
“it was i,” said sailor of frank and manly appearance; “and it was
 time, for you were sinking.”
 
“yes,” returned dantès, holding out his hand, “i thank you again.”
 
“i almost hesitated, though,” replied the sailor; “you looked more like
 brigand than an honest man, with your beard six inches, and your hair
 foot long.”
 
dantès recollected that his hair and beard had not been cut all the
 time was at the château d’if.
 
“yes,” said he, “i made vow, to our lady of the grotto not to cut my
 hair or beard for ten years if i were saved in moment of danger; but
 today the vow expires.”
 
“now what are we to do with you?” said the captain.
 
“alas, anything you please. my captain is dead; i have barely escaped;
 but i am good sailor. leave at the first port you make; i shall be
 sure to find employment.”
 
“do you know the mediterranean?”
 
“i have sailed over it since my childhood.”
 
“you know the best harbors?”
 
“there are few ports that i could not enter or leave with bandage
 over my eyes.”
 
“i say, captain,” said the sailor who had cried “courage!” to dantès,
 “if what says is true, what hinders his staying with us?”
 
“if says true,” said the captain doubtingly. “but in his present
 condition will promise anything, and take his chance of keeping it
 afterwards.”
 
“i will do more than i promise,” said dantès.
 
“we shall see,” returned the other, smiling.
 
“where are you going?” asked dantès.
 
“to leghorn.”
 
“then why, instead of tacking so frequently, do you not sail nearer the
 wind?”
 
“because we should run straight on to the island of rion.”
 
“you shall pass it by twenty fathoms.”
 
“take the helm, and let us see what you know.”
 
the young man took the helm, felt to see if the vessel answered the
 rudder promptly and seeing that, without being first-rate sailor, she
 yet was tolerably obedient.
 
“to the sheets,” said he. the four seamen, who composed the crew,
 obeyed, while the pilot looked on. “haul taut.”
 
they obeyed.
 
“belay.” this order was also executed; and the vessel passed, as dantès
 had predicted, twenty fathoms to windward.
 
“bravo!” said the captain.
 
“bravo!” repeated the sailors. and they all looked with astonishment at
 this man whose eye now disclosed an intelligence and his body vigor
 they had not thought him capable of showing.
 
“you see,” said dantès, quitting the helm, “i shall be of some use to
 you, at least during the voyage. if you do not want at leghorn, you
 can leave there, and i will pay you out of the first wages i get,
 for my food and the clothes you lend me.”
 
“ah,” said the captain, “we can agree very well, if you are
 reasonable.”
 
“give what you give the others, and it will be all right,” returned
 dantès.
 
“that’s not fair,” said the seaman who had saved dantès; “for you know
 more than we do.”
 
“what is that to you, jacopo?” returned the captain. “everyone is free
 to ask what pleases.”
 
“that’s true,” replied jacopo; “i only make remark.”
 
“well, you would do much better to find him jacket and pair of
 trousers, if you have them.”
 
“no,” said jacopo; “but i have shirt and pair of trousers.”
 
“that is all i want,” interrupted dantès. jacopo dived into the hold
 and soon returned with what edmond wanted.
 
“now, then, do you wish for anything else?” said the patron.
 
“a piece of bread and another glass of the capital rum i tasted, for i
 have not eaten or drunk for long time.” had not tasted food for
 forty hours. piece of bread was brought, and jacopo offered him the
 gourd.
 
“larboard your helm,” cried the captain to the steersman. dantès
 glanced that way as lifted the gourd to his mouth; then paused with
 hand in mid-air.
 
“hollo! what’s the matter at the château d’if?” said the captain.
 
small white cloud, which had attracted dantès’ attention, crowned the
 summit of the bastion of the château d’if. at the same moment the faint
 report of gun was heard. the sailors looked at one another.
 
“what is this?” asked the captain.
 
“a prisoner has escaped from the château d’if, and they are firing the
 alarm gun,” replied dantès. the captain glanced at him, but had
 lifted the rum to his lips and was drinking it with so much composure,
 that suspicions, if the captain had any, died away.
 
0277m
 


“pretty strong rum!” said dantès, wiping his brow with his sleeve.
 
“at any rate,” murmured he, “if it be, so much the better, for i have
 made rare acquisition.”
 
0279m
 


under pretence of being fatigued, dantès asked to take the helm; the
 steersman, glad to be relieved, looked at the captain, and the latter
 by sign indicated that might abandon it to his new comrade. dantès
 could thus keep his eyes on marseilles.
 
“what is the day of the month?” asked of jacopo, who sat down beside
 him.
 
“the 28th of february.”
 
“in what year?”
 
“in what year—you ask in what year?”
 
“yes,” replied the young man, “i ask you in what year!”
 
“you have forgotten then?”
 
“i got such fright last night,” replied dantès, smiling, “that i have
 almost lost my memory. i ask you what year is it?”
 
“the year 1829,” returned jacopo.
 
it was fourteen years, day for day, since dantès’ arrest. was
 nineteen when entered the château d’if; was thirty-three when he
 escaped. sorrowful smile passed over his face; asked himself what
 had become of mercédès, who must believe him dead. then his eyes
 lighted up with hatred as thought of the three men who had caused
 him so long and wretched captivity. renewed against danglars,
 fernand, and villefort the oath of implacable vengeance had made in
 his dungeon.
 
this oath was longer vain menace; for the fastest sailor in the
 mediterranean would have been unable to overtake the little tartan,
 that with every stitch of canvas set was flying before the wind to
 leghorn.
 


chapter 22. the smugglers
 
dantès had not been day on board before had very clear idea of
 the men with whom his lot had been cast. without having been in the
 school of the abbé faria, the worthy master of _la jeune amélie_ (the
 name of the genoese tartan) knew smattering of all the tongues spoken
 on the shores of that large lake called the mediterranean, from the
 arabic to the provençal, and this, while it spared him interpreters,
 persons always troublesome and frequently indiscreet, gave him great
 facilities of communication, either with the vessels met at sea,
 with the small boats sailing along the coast, or with the people
 without name, country, or occupation, who are always seen on the quays
 of seaports, and who live by hidden and mysterious means which we must
 suppose to be direct gift of providence, as they have visible
 means of support. it is fair to assume that dantès was on board a
 smuggler.
 
at first the captain had received dantès on board with certain degree
 of distrust. was very well known to the customs officers of the
 coast; and as there was between these worthies and himself perpetual
 battle of wits, had at first thought that dantès might be an
 emissary of these industrious guardians of rights and duties, who
 perhaps employed this ingenious means of learning some of the secrets
 of his trade. but the skilful manner in which dantès had handled the
 lugger had entirely reassured him; and then, when saw the light
 plume of smoke floating above the bastion of the château d’if, and
 heard the distant report, was instantly struck with the idea that he
 had on board his vessel one whose coming and going, like that of kings,
 was accompanied with salutes of artillery. this made him less uneasy,
 it must be owned, than if the new-comer had proved to be customs
 officer; but this supposition also disappeared like the first, when he
 beheld the perfect tranquillity of his recruit.
 
edmond thus had the advantage of knowing what the owner was, without
 the owner knowing who was; and however the old sailor and his crew
 tried to “pump” him, they extracted nothing more from him; gave
 accurate descriptions of naples and malta, which knew as well as
 marseilles, and held stoutly to his first story. thus the genoese,
 subtle as was, was duped by edmond, in whose favor his mild
 demeanor, his nautical skill, and his admirable dissimulation, pleaded.
 moreover, it is possible that the genoese was one of those shrewd
 persons who know nothing but what they should know, and believe nothing
 but what they should believe.
 
in this state of mutual understanding, they reached leghorn. here
 edmond was to undergo another trial; was to find out whether he
 could recognize himself, as had not seen his own face for fourteen
 years. had preserved tolerably good remembrance of what the youth
 had been, and was now to find out what the man had become. his comrades
 believed that his vow was fulfilled. as had twenty times touched at
 leghorn, remembered barber in st. ferdinand street; went there
 to have his beard and hair cut. the barber gazed in amazement at this
 man with the long, thick and black hair and beard, which gave his head
 the appearance of one of titian’s portraits. at this period it was not
 the fashion to wear so large beard and hair so long; now barber
 would only be surprised if man gifted with such advantages should
 consent voluntarily to deprive himself of them. the leghorn barber said
 nothing and went to work.
 
when the operation was concluded, and edmond felt that his chin was
 completely smooth, and his hair reduced to its usual length, asked
 for looking-glass. was now, as we have said, three-and-thirty
 years of age, and his fourteen years’ imprisonment had produced great
 transformation in his appearance.
 
dantès had entered the château d’if with the round, open, smiling face
 of young and happy man, with whom the early paths of life have been
 smooth, and who anticipates future corresponding with his past. this
 was now all changed. the oval face was lengthened, his smiling mouth
 had assumed the firm and marked lines which betoken resolution; his
 eyebrows were arched beneath brow furrowed with thought; his eyes
 were full of melancholy, and from their depths occasionally sparkled
 gloomy fires of misanthropy and hatred; his complexion, so long kept
 from the sun, had now that pale color which produces, when the features
 are encircled with black hair, the aristocratic beauty of the man of
 the north; the profound learning had acquired had besides diffused
 over his features refined intellectual expression; and had also
 acquired, being naturally of goodly stature, that vigor which frame
 possesses which has so long concentrated all its force within itself.
 
0283m
 


to the elegance of nervous and slight form had succeeded the solidity
 of rounded and muscular figure. as to his voice, prayers, sobs, and
 imprecations had changed it so that at times it was of singularly
 penetrating sweetness, and at others rough and almost hoarse.
 
moreover, from being so long in twilight or darkness, his eyes had
 acquired the faculty of distinguishing objects in the night, common to
 the hyena and the wolf. edmond smiled when beheld himself; it was
 impossible that his best friend—if, indeed, had any friend
 left—could recognize him; could not recognize himself.
 
the master of _la jeune amélie_, who was very desirous of retaining
 amongst his crew man of edmond’s value, had offered to advance him
 funds out of his future profits, which edmond had accepted. his next
 care on leaving the barber’s who had achieved his first metamorphosis
 was to enter shop and buy complete sailor’s suit—a garb, as we all
 know, very simple, and consisting of white trousers, striped shirt,
 and cap.
 
it was in this costume, and bringing back to jacopo the shirt and
 trousers had lent him, that edmond reappeared before the captain of
 the lugger, who had made him tell his story over and over again before
 could believe him, or recognize in the neat and trim sailor the man
 with thick and matted beard, hair tangled with seaweed, and body
 soaking in seabrine, whom had picked up naked and nearly drowned.
 attracted by his prepossessing appearance, renewed his offers of an
 engagement to dantès; but dantès, who had his own projects, would not
 agree for longer time than three months.
 
_la jeune amélie_ had very active crew, very obedient to their
 captain, who lost as little time as possible. had scarcely been a
 week at leghorn before the hold of his vessel was filled with printed
 muslins, contraband cottons, english powder, and tobacco on which the
 excise had forgotten to put its mark. the master was to get all this
 out of leghorn free of duties, and land it on the shores of corsica,
 where certain speculators undertook to forward the cargo to france.
 
they sailed; edmond was again cleaving the azure which had been the
 first horizon of his youth, and which had so often dreamed of in
 prison. left gorgone on his right and pianosa on his left, and
 went towards the country of paoli and napoleon.
 
the next morning going on deck, as always did at an early hour, the
 patron found dantès leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intense
 earnestness at pile of granite rocks, which the rising sun tinged
 with rosy light. it was the island of monte cristo.
 
_la jeune amélie_ left it three-quarters of league to the larboard
 and kept on for corsica. dantès thought, as they passed so closely to
 the island whose name was so interesting to him, that had only to
 leap into the and in half an hour be at the promised land. but then
 what could do without instruments to discover his treasure, without
 arms to defend himself? besides, what would the sailors say? what would
 the patron think? must wait.
 
fortunately, dantès had learned how to wait; had waited fourteen
 years for his liberty, and now was free could wait at least six
 months or year for wealth. would not have accepted liberty without
 riches if it had been offered to him? besides, were not those riches
 chimerical?—offspring of the brain of the poor abbé faria, had they not
 died with him? it is true, the letter of the cardinal spada was
 singularly circumstantial, and dantès repeated it to himself, from one
 end to the other, for had not forgotten word.
 
0285m
 


evening came, and edmond saw the island tinged with the shades of
 twilight, and then disappear in the darkness from all eyes but his own,
 for he, with vision accustomed to the gloom of prison, continued to
 behold it last of all, for remained alone upon deck. the next morn
 broke off the coast of aleria; all day they coasted, and in the evening
 saw fires lighted on land; the position of these was doubt signal
 for landing, for ship’s lantern was hung up at the mast-head instead
 of the streamer, and they came to within gunshot of the shore. dantès
 noticed that the captain of _la jeune amélie_ had, as neared the
 land, mounted two small culverins, which, without making much noise,
 can throw four ounce ball thousand paces or so.
 
but on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, and everything
 proceeded with the utmost smoothness and politeness. four shallops came
 off with very little noise alongside the lugger, which, doubt, in
 acknowledgement of the compliment, lowered her own shallop into the
 sea, and the five boats worked so well that by two o’clock in the
 morning all the cargo was out of _la jeune amélie_ and on _terra
 firma_. the same night, such man of regularity was the patron of _la
 jeune amélie_, the profits were divided, and each man had hundred
 tuscan livres, or about eighty francs.
 
but the voyage was not ended. they turned the bowsprit towards
 sardinia, where they intended to take in cargo, which was to replace
 what had been discharged. the second operation was as successful as the
 first, _la jeune amélie_ was in luck. this new cargo was destined for
 the coast of the duchy of lucca, and consisted almost entirely of
 havana cigars, sherry, and malaga wines.
 
there they had bit of skirmish in getting rid of the duties; the
 excise was, in truth, the everlasting enemy of the patron of _la jeune
 amélie_. customs officer was laid low, and two sailors wounded;
 dantès was one of the latter, ball having touched him in the left
 shoulder. dantès was almost glad of this affray, and almost pleased at
 being wounded, for they were rude lessons which taught him with what
 eye could view danger, and with what endurance could bear
 suffering. had contemplated danger with smile, and when wounded
 had exclaimed with the great philosopher, “pain, thou art not an evil.”
 
had, moreover, looked upon the customs officer wounded to death,
 and, whether from heat of blood produced by the encounter, or the chill
 of human sentiment, this sight had made but slight impression upon him.
 dantès was on the way desired to follow, and was moving towards the
 end wished to achieve; his heart was in fair way of petrifying in
 his bosom. jacopo, seeing him fall, had believed him killed, and
 rushing towards him raised him up, and then attended to him with all
 the kindness of devoted comrade.
 
this world was not then so good as doctor pangloss believed it, neither
 was it so wicked as dantès thought it, since this man, who had nothing
 to expect from his comrade but the inheritance of his share of the
 prize-money, manifested so much sorrow when saw him fall.
 fortunately, as we have said, edmond was only wounded, and with certain
 herbs gathered at certain seasons, and sold to the smugglers by the old
 sardinian women, the wound soon closed. edmond then resolved to try
 jacopo, and offered him in return for his attention share of his
 prize-money, but jacopo refused it indignantly.
 
as result of the sympathetic devotion which jacopo had from the first
 bestowed on edmond, the latter was moved to certain degree of
 affection. but this sufficed for jacopo, who instinctively felt that
 edmond had right to superiority of position—a superiority which
 edmond had concealed from all others. and from this time the kindness
 which edmond showed him was enough for the brave seaman.
 
then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel, gliding on with
 security over the azure sea, required care but the hand of the
 helmsman, thanks to the favorable winds that swelled her sails, edmond,
 with chart in his hand, became the instructor of jacopo, as the poor
 abbé faria had been his tutor. pointed out to him the bearings of
 the coast, explained to him the variations of the compass, and taught
 him to read in that vast book opened over our heads which they call
 heaven, and where god writes in azure with letters of diamonds.
 
and when jacopo inquired of him, “what is the use of teaching all these
 things to poor sailor like me?” edmond replied, “who knows? you may
 one day be the captain of vessel. your fellow-countryman, bonaparte,
 became emperor.” we had forgotten to say that jacopo was corsican.
 
two months and half elapsed in these trips, and edmond had become as
 skilful coaster as had been hardy seaman; had formed an
 acquaintance with all the smugglers on the coast, and learned all the
 masonic signs by which these half pirates recognize each other. had
 passed and re-passed his island of monte cristo twenty times, but not
 once had found an opportunity of landing there.
 
then formed resolution. as soon as his engagement with the patron
 of _la jeune amélie_ ended, would hire small vessel on his own
 account—for in his several voyages had amassed hundred
 piastres—and under some pretext land at the island of monte cristo.
 then would be free to make his researches, not perhaps entirely at
 liberty, for would be doubtless watched by those who accompanied
 him. but in this world we must risk something. prison had made edmond
 prudent, and was desirous of running risk whatever. but in vain
 did rack his imagination; fertile as it was, could not devise any
 plan for reaching the island without companionship.
 
dantès was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when the patron,
 who had great confidence in him, and was very desirous of retaining him
 in his service, took him by the arm one evening and led him to tavern
 on the via del’ oglio, where the leading smugglers of leghorn used to
 congregate and discuss affairs connected with their trade. already
 dantès had visited this maritime bourse two or three times, and seeing
 all these hardy free-traders, who supplied the whole coast for nearly
 two hundred leagues in extent, had asked himself what power might
 not that man attain who should give the impulse of his will to all
 these contrary and diverging minds. this time it was great matter
 that was under discussion, connected with vessel laden with turkey
 carpets, stuffs of the levant, and cashmeres. it was necessary to find
 some neutral ground on which an exchange could be made, and then to try
 and land these goods on the coast of france. if the venture was
 successful the profit would be enormous, there would be gain of fifty
 or sixty piastres each for the crew.
 
the patron of _la jeune amélie_ proposed as place of landing the
 island of monte cristo, which being completely deserted, and having
 neither soldiers nor revenue officers, seemed to have been placed in
 the midst of the ocean since the time of the heathen olympus by
 mercury, the god of merchants and robbers, classes of mankind which we
 in modern times have separated if not made distinct, but which
 antiquity appears to have included in the same category.
 
at the mention of monte cristo dantès started with joy; rose to
 conceal his emotion, and took turn around the smoky tavern, where all
 the languages of the known world were jumbled in _lingua franca_.
 
when again joined the two persons who had been discussing the
 matter, it had been decided that they should touch at monte cristo and
 set out on the following night. edmond, being consulted, was of opinion
 that the island afforded every possible security, and that great
 enterprises to be well done should be done quickly.
 
nothing then was altered in the plan, and orders were given to get
 under weigh next night, and, wind and weather permitting, to make the
 neutral island by the following day.
 
0289m
 



chapter 23. the island of monte cristo
 
thus, at length, by one of the unexpected strokes of fortune which
 sometimes befall those who have for long time been the victims of an
 evil destiny, dantès was about to secure the opportunity wished for,
 by simple and natural means, and land on the island without incurring
 any suspicion. one night more and would be on his way.
 
the night was one of feverish distraction, and in its progress visions,
 good and evil, passed through dantès’ mind. if closed his eyes, he
 saw cardinal spada’s letter written on the wall in characters of
 flame—if slept for moment the wildest dreams haunted his brain. he
 ascended into grottos paved with emeralds, with panels of rubies, and
 the roof glowing with diamond stalactites. pearls fell drop by drop, as
 subterranean waters filter in their caves. edmond, amazed,
 wonderstruck, filled his pockets with the radiant gems and then
 returned to daylight, when discovered that his prizes had all
 changed into common pebbles. then endeavored to re-enter the
 marvellous grottos, but they had suddenly receded, and now the path
 became labyrinth, and then the entrance vanished, and in vain did he
 tax his memory for the magic and mysterious word which opened the
 splendid caverns of ali baba to the arabian fisherman. all was useless,
 the treasure disappeared, and had again reverted to the genii from whom
 for moment had hoped to carry it off.
 
the day came at length, and was almost as feverish as the night had
 been, but it brought reason to the aid of imagination, and dantès was
 then enabled to arrange plan which had hitherto been vague and
 unsettled in his brain. night came, and with it the preparation for
 departure, and these preparations served to conceal dantès’ agitation.
 had by degrees assumed such authority over his companions that he
 was almost like commander on board; and as his orders were always
 clear, distinct, and easy of execution, his comrades obeyed him with
 celerity and pleasure.
 
the old patron did not interfere, for too had recognized the
 superiority of dantès over the crew and himself. saw in the young
 man his natural successor, and regretted that had not daughter,
 that might have bound edmond to him by more secure alliance. at
 seven o’clock in the evening all was ready, and at ten minutes past
 seven they doubled the lighthouse just as the beacon was kindled. the
 was calm, and, with fresh breeze from the south-east, they sailed
 beneath bright blue sky, in which god also lighted up in turn his
 beacon lights, each of which is world. dantès told them that all
 hands might turn in, and would take the helm. when the maltese (for
 so they called dantès) had said this, it was sufficient, and all went
 to their bunks contentedly.
 
this frequently happened. dantès, cast from solitude into the world,
 frequently experienced an imperious desire for solitude; and what
 solitude is more complete, or more poetical, than that of ship
 floating in isolation on the during the obscurity of the night, in
 the silence of immensity, and under the eye of heaven?
 
now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the night lighted up
 by his illusions, and the silence animated by his anticipations. when
 the patron awoke, the vessel was hurrying on with every sail set, and
 every sail full with the breeze. they were making nearly ten knots an
 hour. the island of monte cristo loomed large in the horizon. edmond
 resigned the lugger to the master’s care, and went and lay down in his
 hammock; but, in spite of sleepless night, could not close his
 eyes for moment.
 
two hours afterwards came on deck, as the boat was about to double
 the island of elba. they were just abreast of mareciana, and beyond the
 flat but verdant island of pianosa. the peak of monte cristo
 reddened by the burning sun, was seen against the azure sky. dantès
 ordered the helmsman to put down his helm, in order to leave pianosa
 to starboard, as knew that should shorten his course by two or
 three knots. about five o’clock in the evening the island was distinct,
 and everything on it was plainly perceptible, owing to that clearness
 of the atmosphere peculiar to the light which the rays of the sun cast
 at its setting.
 
edmond gazed very earnestly at the mass of rocks which gave out all the
 variety of twilight colors, from the brightest pink to the deepest
 blue; and from time to time his cheeks flushed, his brow darkened, and
 mist passed over his eyes. never did gamester, whose whole fortune
 is staked on one cast of the die, experience the anguish which edmond
 felt in his paroxysms of hope.
 
night came, and at ten o’clock they anchored. _la jeune amélie_ was
 first at the rendezvous. in spite of his usual command over himself,
 dantès could not restrain his impetuosity. was the first to jump on
 shore; and had dared, would, like lucius brutus, have “kissed his
 mother earth.” it was dark, but at eleven o’clock the moon rose in the
 midst of the ocean, whose every wave she silvered, and then, “ascending
 high,” played in floods of pale light on the rocky hills of this second
 pelion.
 
the island was familiar to the crew of _la jeune amélie_,—it was one of
 her regular haunts. as to dantès, had passed it on his voyage to and
 from the levant, but never touched at it. questioned jacopo.
 
“where shall we pass the night?” inquired.
 
“why, on board the tartan,” replied the sailor.
 
“should we not do better in the grottos?”
 
“what grottos?”
 
“why, the grottos—caves of the island.”
 
“i do not know of any grottos,” replied jacopo.
 
the cold sweat sprang forth on dantès’ brow.
 
“what, are there grottos at monte cristo?” asked.
 
“none.”
 
for moment dantès was speechless; then remembered that these caves
 might have been filled up by some accident, or even stopped up, for the
 sake of greater security, by cardinal spada. the point was, then, to
 discover the hidden entrance. it was useless to search at night, and
 dantès therefore delayed all investigation until the morning. besides,
 signal made half league out at sea, and to which _la jeune amélie_
 replied by similar signal, indicated that the moment for business had
 come.
 
the boat that now arrived, assured by the answering signal that all was
 well, soon came in sight, white and silent as phantom, and cast
 anchor within cable’s length of shore.
 
then the landing began. dantès reflected, as worked, on the shout of
 joy which, with single word, could evoke from all these men, if he
 gave utterance to the one unchanging thought that pervaded his heart;
 but, far from disclosing this precious secret, almost feared that he
 had already said too much, and by his restlessness and continual
 questions, his minute observations and evident preoccupation, aroused
 suspicions. fortunately, as regarded this circumstance at least, his
 painful past gave to his countenance an indelible sadness, and the
 glimmerings of gayety seen beneath this cloud were indeed but
 transitory.
 
one had the slightest suspicion; and when next day, taking a
 fowling-piece, powder, and shot, dantès declared his intention to go
 and kill some of the wild goats that were seen springing from rock to
 rock, his wish was construed into love of sport, or desire for
 solitude. however, jacopo insisted on following him, and dantès did not
 oppose this, fearing if did so that might incur distrust.
 scarcely, however, had they gone quarter of league when, having
 killed kid, begged jacopo to take it to his comrades, and request
 them to cook it, and when ready to let him know by firing gun. this
 and some dried fruits and flask of monte pulciano, was the bill of
 fare.
 
dantès went on, looking from time to time behind and around about him.
 having reached the summit of rock, saw, thousand feet beneath
 him, his companions, whom jacopo had rejoined, and who were all busy
 preparing the repast which edmond’s skill as marksman had augmented
 with capital dish.
 
edmond looked at them for moment with the sad and gentle smile of a
 man superior to his fellows.
 
“in two hours’ time,” said he, “these persons will depart richer by
 fifty piastres each, to go and risk their lives again by endeavoring to
 gain fifty more; then they will return with fortune of six hundred
 francs, and waste this treasure in some city with the pride of sultans
 and the insolence of nabobs. at this moment hope makes despise their
 riches, which seem to contemptible. yet perchance tomorrow deception
 will so act on me, that i shall, on compulsion, consider such a
 contemptible possession as the utmost happiness. oh, no!” exclaimed
 edmond, “that will not be. the wise, unerring faria could not be
 mistaken in this one thing. besides, it were better to die than to
 continue to lead this low and wretched life.”
 
thus dantès, who but three months before had desire but liberty had
 now not liberty enough, and panted for wealth. the cause was not in
 dantès, but in providence, who, while limiting the power of man, has
 filled him with boundless desires.
 
meanwhile, by cleft between two walls of rock, following path worn
 by torrent, and which, in all human probability, human foot had never
 before trod, dantès approached the spot where supposed the grottos
 must have existed. keeping along the shore, and examining the smallest
 object with serious attention, thought could trace, on certain
 rocks, marks made by the hand of man.
 
time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossy mantle, as
 it invests all things of the mind with forgetfulness, seemed to have
 respected these signs, which apparently had been made with some degree
 of regularity, and probably with definite purpose. occasionally the
 marks were hidden under tufts of myrtle, which spread into large bushes
 laden with blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen. so edmond had to
 separate the branches or brush away the moss to know where the
 guide-marks were. the sight of marks renewed edmond fondest hopes.
 might it not have been the cardinal himself who had first traced them,
 in order that they might serve as guide for his nephew in the event
 of catastrophe, which could not foresee would have been so
 complete. this solitary place was precisely suited to the requirements
 of man desirous of burying treasure. only, might not these betraying
 marks have attracted other eyes than those for whom they were made? and
 had the dark and wondrous island indeed faithfully guarded its precious
 secret?
 
0295m
 


it seemed, however, to edmond, who was hidden from his comrades by the
 inequalities of the ground, that at sixty paces from the harbor the
 marks ceased; nor did they terminate at any grotto. large round rock,
 placed solidly on its base, was the only spot to which they seemed to
 lead. edmond concluded that perhaps instead of having reached the end
 of the route had only explored its beginning, and therefore
 turned round and retraced his steps.
 
meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got some water from
 spring, spread out the fruit and bread, and cooked the kid. just at
 the moment when they were taking the dainty animal from the spit, they
 saw edmond springing with the boldness of chamois from rock to rock,
 and they fired the signal agreed upon. the sportsman instantly changed
 his direction, and ran quickly towards them. but even while they
 watched his daring progress, edmond’s foot slipped, and they saw him
 stagger on the edge of rock and disappear. they all rushed towards
 him, for all loved edmond in spite of his superiority; yet jacopo
 reached him first.
 
found edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost senseless. had
 rolled down declivity of twelve or fifteen feet. they poured little
 rum down his throat, and this remedy which had before been so
 beneficial to him, produced the same effect as formerly. edmond opened
 his eyes, complained of great pain in his knee, feeling of heaviness
 in his head, and severe pains in his loins. they wished to carry him to
 the shore; but when they touched him, although under jacopo’s
 directions, declared, with heavy groans, that could not bear to
 be moved.
 
it may be supposed that dantès did not now think of his dinner, but he
 insisted that his comrades, who had not his reasons for fasting, should
 have their meal. as for himself, declared that had only need of a
 little rest, and that when they returned should be easier. the
 sailors did not require much urging. they were hungry, and the smell of
 the roasted kid was very savory, and your tars are not very
 ceremonious. an hour afterwards they returned. all that edmond had been
 able to do was to drag himself about dozen paces forward to lean
 against moss-grown rock.
 
but, instead of growing easier, dantès’ pains appeared to increase in
 violence. the old patron, who was obliged to sail in the morning in
 order to land his cargo on the frontiers of piedmont and france,
 between nice and fréjus, urged dantès to try and rise. edmond made
 great exertions in order to comply; but at each effort fell back,
 moaning and turning pale.
 
“he has broken his ribs,” said the commander, in low voice. “no
 matter; is an excellent fellow, and we must not leave him. we will
 try and carry him on board the tartan.”
 
dantès declared, however, that would rather die where was than
 undergo the agony which the slightest movement cost him.
 
“well,” said the patron, “let what may happen, it shall never be said
 that we deserted good comrade like you. we will not go till evening.”
 
this very much astonished the sailors, although, not one opposed it.
 the patron was so strict that this was the first time they had ever
 seen him give up an enterprise, or even delay in its execution. dantès
 would not allow that any such infraction of regular and proper rules
 should be made in his favor.
 
“no, no,” said to the patron, “i was awkward, and it is just that i
 pay the penalty of my clumsiness. leave small supply of biscuit, a
 gun, powder, and balls, to kill the kids or defend myself at need, and
 pickaxe, that i may build shelter if you delay in coming back for
 me.”
 
“but you’ll die of hunger,” said the patron.
 
“i would rather do so,” was edmond’s reply, “than suffer the
 inexpressible agonies which the slightest movement causes me.”
 
the patron turned towards his vessel, which was rolling on the swell in
 the little harbor, and, with sails partly set, would be ready for sea
 when her toilet should be completed.
 
“what are we to do, maltese?” asked the captain. “we cannot leave you
 here so, and yet we cannot stay.”
 
“go, go!” exclaimed dantès.
 
“we shall be absent at least week,” said the patron, “and then we
 must run out of our course to come here and take you up again.”
 
“why,” said dantès, “if in two or three days you hail any fishing-boat,
 desire them to come here to me. i will pay twenty-five piastres for my
 passage back to leghorn. if you do not come across one, return for me.”
 the patron shook his head.
 
“listen, captain baldi; there’s one way of settling this,” said jacopo.
 “do you go, and i will stay and take care of the wounded man.”
 
“and give up your share of the venture,” said edmond, “to remain with
 me?”
 
“yes,” said jacopo, “and without any hesitation.”
 
“you are good fellow and kind-hearted messmate,” replied edmond,
 “and heaven will recompense you for your generous intentions; but i do
 not wish anyone to stay with me. day or two of rest will set up,
 and i hope i shall find among the rocks certain herbs most excellent
 for bruises.”
 
peculiar smile passed over dantès’ lips; squeezed jacopo’s hand
 warmly, but nothing could shake his determination to remain—and remain
 alone.
 
the smugglers left with edmond what had requested and set sail, but
 not without turning about several times, and each time making signs of
 cordial farewell, to which edmond replied with his hand only, as if
 could not move the rest of his body.
 
then, when they had disappeared, said with smile,—“’tis strange
 that it should be among such men that we find proofs of friendship and
 devotion.” then dragged himself cautiously to the top of rock,
 from which had full view of the sea, and thence saw the tartan
 complete her preparations for sailing, weigh anchor, and, balancing
 herself as gracefully as water-fowl ere it takes to the wing, set
 sail.
 
at the end of an hour she was completely out of sight; at least, it was
 impossible for the wounded man to see her any longer from the spot
 where was. then dantès rose more agile and light than the kid among
 the myrtles and shrubs of these wild rocks, took his gun in one hand,
 his pickaxe in the other, and hastened towards the rock on which the
 marks had noted terminated.
 
“and now,” exclaimed, remembering the tale of the arabian fisherman,
 which faria had related to him, “now, open sesame!”
 


chapter 24. the secret cave
 
the sun had nearly reached the meridian, and his scorching rays fell
 full on the rocks, which seemed themselves sensible of the heat.
 thousands of grasshoppers, hidden in the bushes, chirped with a
 monotonous and dull note; the leaves of the myrtle and olive trees
 waved and rustled in the wind. at every step that edmond took he
 disturbed the lizards glittering with the hues of the emerald; afar off
 saw the wild goats bounding from crag to crag. in word, the island
 was inhabited, yet edmond felt himself alone, guided by the hand of
 god.
 
felt an indescribable sensation somewhat akin to dread—that dread of
 the daylight which even in the desert makes us fear we are watched and
 observed. this feeling was so strong that at the moment when edmond was
 about to begin his labor, stopped, laid down his pickaxe, seized his
 gun, mounted to the summit of the highest rock, and from thence gazed
 round in every direction.
 
but it was not upon corsica, the very houses of which could
 distinguish; or on sardinia; or on the island of elba, with its
 historical associations; or upon the almost imperceptible line that to
 the experienced eye of sailor alone revealed the coast of genoa the
 proud, and leghorn the commercial, that gazed. it was at the
 brigantine that had left in the morning, and the tartan that had just
 set sail, that edmond fixed his eyes.
 
the first was just disappearing in the straits of bonifacio; the other,
 following an opposite direction, was about to round the island of
 corsica.
 
this sight reassured him. then looked at the objects near him. he
 saw that was on the highest point of the island,—a statue on this
 vast pedestal of granite, nothing human appearing in sight, while the
 blue ocean beat against the base of the island, and covered it with a
 fringe of foam. then descended with cautious and slow step, for he
 dreaded lest an accident similar to that had so adroitly feigned
 should happen in reality.
 
dantès, as we have said, had traced the marks along the rocks, and he
 had noticed that they led to small creek, which was hidden like the
 bath of some ancient nymph. this creek was sufficiently wide at its
 mouth, and deep in the centre, to admit of the entrance of small
 vessel of the lugger class, which would be perfectly concealed from
 observation.
 
then following the clew that, in the hands of the abbé faria, had been
 so skilfully used to guide him through the dædalian labyrinth of
 probabilities, thought that the cardinal spada, anxious not to be
 watched, had entered the creek, concealed his little barque, followed
 the line marked by the notches in the rock, and at the end of it had
 buried his treasure. it was this idea that had brought dantès back to
 the circular rock. one thing only perplexed edmond, and destroyed his
 theory. how could this rock, which weighed several tons, have been
 lifted to this spot, without the aid of many men?
 
suddenly an idea flashed across his mind. instead of raising it,
 thought he, they have lowered it. and sprang from the rock in order
 to inspect the base on which it had formerly stood.
 
soon perceived that slope had been formed, and the rock had slid
 along this until it stopped at the spot it now occupied. large stone
 had served as wedge; flints and pebbles had been inserted around it,
 so as to conceal the orifice; this species of masonry had been covered
 with earth, and grass and weeds had grown there, moss had clung to the
 stones, myrtle-bushes had taken root, and the old rock seemed fixed to
 the earth.
 
0301m
 


dantès dug away the earth carefully, and detected, or fancied he
 detected, the ingenious artifice. attacked this wall, cemented by
 the hand of time, with his pickaxe. after ten minutes’ labor the wall
 gave way, and hole large enough to insert the arm was opened.
 
dantès went and cut the strongest olive-tree could find, stripped
 off its branches, inserted it in the hole, and used it as lever. but
 the rock was too heavy, and too firmly wedged, to be moved by anyone
 man, were hercules himself. dantès saw that must attack the
 wedge. but how?
 
cast his eyes around, and saw the horn full of powder which his
 friend jacopo had left him. smiled; the infernal invention would
 serve him for this purpose.
 
with the aid of his pickaxe, dantès, after the manner of labor-saving
 pioneer, dug mine between the upper rock and the one that supported
 it, filled it with powder, then made match by rolling his
 handkerchief in saltpetre. lighted it and retired.
 
the explosion soon followed; the upper rock was lifted from its base by
 the terrific force of the powder; the lower one flew into pieces;
 thousands of insects escaped from the aperture dantès had previously
 formed, and huge snake, like the guardian demon of the treasure,
 rolled himself along in darkening coils, and disappeared.
 
dantès approached the upper rock, which now, without any support,
 leaned towards the sea. the intrepid treasure-seeker walked round it,
 and, selecting the spot from whence it appeared most susceptible to
 attack, placed his lever in one of the crevices, and strained every
 nerve to move the mass.
 
the rock, already shaken by the explosion, tottered on its base. dantès
 redoubled his efforts; seemed like one of the ancient titans, who
 uprooted the mountains to hurl against the father of the gods. the rock
 yielded, rolled over, bounded from point to point, and finally
 disappeared in the ocean.
 
on the spot it had occupied was circular space, exposing an iron ring
 let into square flag-stone.
 
dantès uttered cry of joy and surprise; never had first attempt
 been crowned with more perfect success. would fain have continued,
 but his knees trembled, and his heart beat so violently, and his sight
 became so dim, that was forced to pause.
 
this feeling lasted but for moment. edmond inserted his lever in the
 ring and exerted all his strength; the flag-stone yielded, and
 disclosed steps that descended until they were lost in the obscurity of
 subterraneous grotto.
 
anyone else would have rushed on with cry of joy. dantès turned pale,
 hesitated, and reflected.
 
“come,” said to himself, “be man. i am accustomed to adversity. i
 must not be cast down by the discovery that i have been deceived. what,
 then, would be the use of all i have suffered? the heart breaks when,
 after having been elated by flattering hopes, it sees all its illusions
 destroyed. faria has dreamed this; the cardinal spada buried no
 treasure here; perhaps never came here, or if did, cæsar borgia,
 the intrepid adventurer, the stealthy and indefatigable plunderer, has
 followed him, discovered his traces, pursued them as i have done,
 raised the stone, and descending before me, has left nothing.”
 
remained motionless and pensive, his eyes fixed on the gloomy
 aperture that was open at his feet.
 
“now that i expect nothing, now that i longer entertain the
 slightest hopes, the end of this adventure becomes simply matter of
 curiosity.” and remained again motionless and thoughtful.
 
“yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy place in the varied career of
 that royal bandit. this fabulous event formed but link in long
 chain of marvels. yes, borgia has been here, torch in one hand, a
 sword in the other, and within twenty paces, at the foot of this rock,
 perhaps two guards kept watch on land and sea, while their master
 descended, as i am about to descend, dispelling the darkness before his
 awe-inspiring progress.”
 
0303m
 


“but what was the fate of the guards who thus possessed his secret?”
 asked dantès of himself.
 
“the fate,” replied he, smiling, “of those who buried alaric, and were
 interred with the corpse.”
 
“yet, had come,” thought dantès, “he would have found the treasure,
 and borgia, who compared italy to an artichoke, which could
 devour leaf by leaf, knew too well the value of time to waste it in
 replacing this rock. i will go down.”
 
then descended, smile on his lips, and murmuring that last word of
 human philosophy, “perhaps!”
 
but instead of the darkness, and the thick and mephitic atmosphere he
 had expected to find, dantès saw dim and bluish light, which, as well
 as the air, entered, not merely by the aperture had just formed, but
 by the interstices and crevices of the rock which were visible from
 without, and through which could distinguish the blue sky and the
 waving branches of the evergreen oaks, and the tendrils of the creepers
 that grew from the rocks.
 
after having stood few minutes in the cavern, the atmosphere of which
 was rather warm than damp, dantès’ eye, habituated as it was to
 darkness, could pierce even to the remotest angles of the cavern, which
 was of granite that sparkled like diamonds.
 
“alas,” said edmond, smiling, “these are the treasures the cardinal has
 left; and the good abbé, seeing in dream these glittering walls, has
 indulged in fallacious hopes.”
 
but called to mind the words of the will, which knew by heart.
 “in the farthest angle of the second opening,” said the cardinal’s
 will. had only found the first grotto; had now to seek the
 second. dantès continued his search. reflected that this second
 grotto must penetrate deeper into the island; examined the stones,
 and sounded one part of the wall where fancied the opening existed,
 masked for precaution’s sake.
 
the pickaxe struck for moment with dull sound that drew out of
 dantès’ forehead large drops of perspiration. at last it seemed to him
 that one part of the wall gave forth more hollow and deeper echo; he
 eagerly advanced, and with the quickness of perception that one but
 prisoner possesses, saw that there, in all probability, the opening
 must be.
 
however, he, like cæsar borgia, knew the value of time; and, in order
 to avoid fruitless toil, sounded all the other walls with his
 pickaxe, struck the earth with the butt of his gun, and finding nothing
 that appeared suspicious, returned to that part of the wall whence
 issued the consoling sound had before heard.
 
again struck it, and with greater force. then singular thing
 occurred. as struck the wall, pieces of stucco similar to that used
 in the ground work of arabesques broke off, and fell to the ground in
 flakes, exposing large white stone. the aperture of the rock had been
 closed with stones, then this stucco had been applied, and painted to
 imitate granite. dantès struck with the sharp end of his pickaxe, which
 entered someway between the interstices.
 
it was there must dig.
 
but by some strange play of emotion, in proportion as the proofs that
 faria, had not been deceived became stronger, so did his heart give
 way, and feeling of discouragement stole over him. this last proof,
 instead of giving him fresh strength, deprived him of it; the pickaxe
 descended, or rather fell; placed it on the ground, passed his hand
 over his brow, and remounted the stairs, alleging to himself, as an
 excuse, desire to be assured that one was watching him, but in
 reality because felt that was about to faint.
 
the island was deserted, and the sun seemed to cover it with its fiery
 glance; afar off, few small fishing boats studded the bosom of the
 blue ocean.
 
dantès had tasted nothing, but thought not of hunger at such a
 moment; hastily swallowed few drops of rum, and again entered the
 cavern.
 
the pickaxe that had seemed so heavy, was now like feather in his
 grasp; seized it, and attacked the wall. after several blows he
 perceived that the stones were not cemented, but had been merely placed
 one upon the other, and covered with stucco; inserted the point of
 his pickaxe, and using the handle as lever, with joy soon saw the
 stone turn as if on hinges, and fall at his feet.
 
had nothing more to do now, but with the iron tooth of the pickaxe
 to draw the stones towards him one by one. the aperture was already
 sufficiently large for him to enter, but by waiting, could still
 cling to hope, and retard the certainty of deception. at last, after
 renewed hesitation, dantès entered the second grotto.
 
the second grotto was lower and more gloomy than the first; the air
 that could only enter by the newly formed opening had the mephitic
 smell dantès was surprised not to find in the outer cavern. waited
 in order to allow pure air to displace the foul atmosphere, and then
 went on.
 
at the left of the opening was dark and deep angle. but to dantès’
 eye there was darkness. glanced around this second grotto; it
 was, like the first, empty.
 
the treasure, if it existed, was buried in this corner. the time had at
 length arrived; two feet of earth removed, and dantès’ fate would be
 decided.
 
advanced towards the angle, and summoning all his resolution,
 attacked the ground with the pickaxe. at the fifth or sixth blow the
 pickaxe struck against an iron substance. never did funeral knell,
 never did alarm-bell, produce greater effect on the hearer. had
 dantès found nothing could not have become more ghastly pale.
 
again struck his pickaxe into the earth, and encountered the same
 resistance, but not the same sound.
 
“it is casket of wood bound with iron,” thought he.
 
at this moment shadow passed rapidly before the opening; dantès
 seized his gun, sprang through the opening, and mounted the stair. a
 wild goat had passed before the mouth of the cave, and was feeding at a
 little distance. this would have been favorable occasion to secure
 his dinner; but dantès feared lest the report of his gun should attract
 attention.
 
thought moment, cut branch of resinous tree, lighted it at the
 fire at which the smugglers had prepared their breakfast, and descended
 with this torch.
 
wished to see everything. approached the hole had dug, and
 now, with the aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had in reality
 struck against iron and wood. planted his torch in the ground and
 resumed his labor.
 
in an instant space three feet long by two feet broad was cleared,
 and dantès could see an oaken coffer, bound with cut steel; in the
 middle of the lid saw engraved on silver plate, which was still
 untarnished, the arms of the spada family—viz., sword, _en pale_, on
 an oval shield, like all the italian armorial bearings, and surmounted
 by cardinal’s hat.
 
dantès easily recognized them, faria had so often drawn them for him.
 there was longer any doubt: the treasure was there—no one would have
 been at such pains to conceal an empty casket. in an instant had
 cleared every obstacle away, and saw successively the lock, placed
 between two padlocks, and the two handles at each end, all carved as
 things were carved at that epoch, when art rendered the commonest
 metals precious.
 
dantès seized the handles, and strove to lift the coffer; it was
 impossible. sought to open it; lock and padlock were fastened; these
 faithful guardians seemed unwilling to surrender their trust. dantès
 inserted the sharp end of the pickaxe between the coffer and the lid,
 and pressing with all his force on the handle, burst open the
 fastenings. the hinges yielded in their turn and fell, still holding in
 their grasp fragments of the wood, and the chest was open.
 
0307m
 


edmond was seized with vertigo; cocked his gun and laid it beside
 him. then closed his eyes as children do in order that they may see
 in the resplendent night of their own imagination more stars than are
 visible in the firmament; then re-opened them, and stood motionless
 with amazement.
 
three compartments divided the coffer. in the first, blazed piles of
 golden coin; in the second, were ranged bars of unpolished gold, which
 possessed nothing attractive save their value; in the third, edmond
 grasped handfuls of diamonds, pearls, and rubies, which, as they fell
 on one another, sounded like hail against glass.
 
after having touched, felt, examined these treasures, edmond rushed
 through the caverns like man seized with frenzy; leaped on rock,
 from whence could behold the sea. was alone—alone with these
 countless, these unheard-of treasures! was awake, or was it but a
 dream? was it transient vision, or was face to face with reality?
 
would fain have gazed upon his gold, and yet had not strength
 enough; for an instant leaned his head in his hands as if to prevent
 his senses from leaving him, and then rushed madly about the rocks of
 monte cristo, terrifying the wild goats and scaring the sea-fowls with
 his wild cries and gestures; then returned, and, still unable to
 believe the evidence of his senses, rushed into the grotto, and found
 himself before this mine of gold and jewels.
 
this time fell on his knees, and, clasping his hands convulsively,
 uttered prayer intelligible to god alone. soon became calmer and
 more happy, for only now did begin to realize his felicity.
 
then set himself to work to count his fortune. there were thousand
 ingots of gold, each weighing from two to three pounds; then piled
 up twenty-five thousand crowns, each worth about eighty francs of our
 money, and bearing the effigies of alexander vi. and his predecessors;
 and saw that the complement was not half empty. and measured ten
 double handfuls of pearls, diamonds, and other gems, many of which,
 mounted by the most famous workmen, were valuable beyond their
 intrinsic worth.
 
dantès saw the light gradually disappear, and fearing to be surprised
 in the cavern, left it, his gun in his hand. piece of biscuit and a
 small quantity of rum formed his supper, and snatched few hours’
 sleep, lying over the mouth of the cave.
 
it was night of joy and terror, such as this man of stupendous
 emotions had already experienced twice or thrice in his lifetime.
 


chapter 25. the unknown
 
day, for which dantès had so eagerly and impatiently waited with open
 eyes, again dawned. with the first light dantès resumed his search.
 again climbed the rocky height had ascended the previous evening,
 and strained his view to catch every peculiarity of the landscape; but
 it wore the same wild, barren aspect when seen by the rays of the
 morning sun which it had done when surveyed by the fading glimmer of
 eve.
 
descending into the grotto, lifted the stone, filled his pockets
 with gems, put the box together as well and securely as could,
 sprinkled fresh sand over the spot from which it had been taken, and
 then carefully trod down the earth to give it everywhere uniform
 appearance; then, quitting the grotto, replaced the stone, heaping
 on it broken masses of rocks and rough fragments of crumbling granite,
 filling the interstices with earth, into which deftly inserted
 rapidly growing plants, such as the wild myrtle and flowering thorn,
 then carefully watering these new plantations, scrupulously effaced
 every trace of footsteps, leaving the approach to the cavern as
 savage-looking and untrodden as had found it. this done, he
 impatiently awaited the return of his companions. to wait at monte
 cristo for the purpose of watching like dragon over the almost
 incalculable riches that had thus fallen into his possession satisfied
 not the cravings of his heart, which yearned to return to dwell among
 mankind, and to assume the rank, power, and influence which are always
 accorded to wealth—that first and greatest of all the forces within the
 grasp of man.
 
on the sixth day, the smugglers returned. from distance dantès
 recognized the rig and handling of _la jeune amélie_, and dragging
 himself with affected difficulty towards the landing-place, met his
 companions with an assurance that, although considerably better than
 when they quitted him, still suffered acutely from his late
 accident. then inquired how they had fared in their trip. to this
 question the smugglers replied that, although successful in landing
 their cargo in safety, they had scarcely done so when they received
 intelligence that guard-ship had just quitted the port of toulon and
 was crowding all sail towards them. this obliged them to make all the
 speed they could to evade the enemy, when they could but lament the
 absence of dantès, whose superior skill in the management of vessel
 would have availed them so materially. in fact, the pursuing vessel had
 almost overtaken them when, fortunately, night came on, and enabled
 them to double the cape of corsica, and so elude all further pursuit.
 upon the whole, however, the trip had been sufficiently successful to
 satisfy all concerned; while the crew, and particularly jacopo,
 expressed great regrets that dantès had not been an equal sharer with
 themselves in the profits, which amounted to less sum than fifty
 piastres each.
 
0311m
 


edmond preserved the most admirable self-command, not suffering the
 faintest indication of smile to escape him at the enumeration of all
 the benefits would have reaped had been able to quit the island;
 but as _la jeune amélie_ had merely come to monte cristo to fetch him
 away, embarked that same evening, and proceeded with the captain to
 leghorn.
 
arrived at leghorn, repaired to the house of jew, dealer in
 precious stones, to whom disposed of four of his smallest diamonds
 for five thousand francs each. dantès half feared that such valuable
 jewels in the hands of poor sailor like himself might excite
 suspicion; but the cunning purchaser asked troublesome questions
 concerning bargain by which gained round profit of at least
 eighty per cent.
 
the following day dantès presented jacopo with an entirely new vessel,
 accompanying the gift by donation of one hundred piastres, that he
 might provide himself with suitable crew and other requisites for his
 outfit, upon condition that would go at once to marseilles for the
 purpose of inquiring after an old man named louis dantès, residing in
 the allées meilhan, and also young woman called mercédès, an
 inhabitant of the catalan village.
 
jacopo could scarcely believe his senses at receiving this magnificent
 present, which dantès hastened to account for by saying that had
 merely been sailor from whim and desire to spite his family, who
 did not allow him as much money as liked to spend; but that on his
 arrival at leghorn had come into possession of large fortune, left
 him by an uncle, whose sole heir was. the superior education of
 dantès gave an air of such extreme probability to this statement that
 it never once occurred to jacopo to doubt its accuracy.
 
the term for which edmond had engaged to serve on board _la jeune
 amélie_ having expired, dantès took leave of the captain, who at first
 tried all his powers of persuasion to induce him to remain as one of
 the crew, but having been told the history of the legacy, ceased to
 importune him further.
 
the following morning jacopo set sail for marseilles, with directions
 from dantès to join him at the island of monte cristo.
 
having seen jacopo fairly out of the harbor, dantès proceeded to make
 his final adieus on board _la jeune amélie_, distributing so liberal a
 gratuity among her crew as to secure for him the good wishes of all,
 and expressions of cordial interest in all that concerned him. to the
 captain promised to write when had made up his mind as to his
 future plans. then dantès departed for genoa.
 
at the moment of his arrival small yacht was under trial in the bay;
 this yacht had been built by order of an englishman, who, having heard
 that the genoese excelled all other builders along the shores of the
 mediterranean in the construction of fast-sailing vessels, was desirous
 of possessing specimen of their skill; the price agreed upon between
 the englishman and the genoese builder was forty thousand francs.
 dantès, struck with the beauty and capability of the little vessel,
 applied to its owner to transfer it to him, offering sixty thousand
 francs, upon condition that should be allowed to take immediate
 possession. the proposal was too advantageous to be refused, the more
 so as the person for whom the yacht was intended had gone upon tour
 through switzerland, and was not expected back in less than three weeks
 or month, by which time the builder reckoned upon being able to
 complete another. bargain was therefore struck. dantès led the owner
 of the yacht to the dwelling of jew; retired with the latter for a
 few minutes to small back parlor, and upon their return the jew
 counted out to the shipbuilder the sum of sixty thousand francs in
 bright gold pieces.
 
the delighted builder then offered his services in providing suitable
 crew for the little vessel, but this dantès declined with many thanks,
 saying was accustomed to cruise about quite alone, and his principal
 pleasure consisted in managing his yacht himself; the only thing the
 builder could oblige him in would be to contrive sort of secret
 closet in the cabin at his bed’s head, the closet to contain three
 divisions, so constructed as to be concealed from all but himself. the
 builder cheerfully undertook the commission, and promised to have these
 secret places completed by the next day, dantès furnishing the
 dimensions and plan in accordance with which they were to be
 constructed.
 
0313m
 


two hours afterward dantès sailed from the port of genoa, under the
 inspection of an immense crowd drawn together by curiosity to see the
 rich spanish nobleman who preferred managing his own yacht. but their
 wonder was soon changed to admiration at seeing the perfect skill with
 which dantès handled the helm. the boat, indeed, seemed to be animated
 with almost human intelligence, so promptly did it obey the slightest
 touch; and dantès required but short trial of his beautiful craft to
 acknowledge that the genoese had not without reason attained their high
 reputation in the art of shipbuilding.
 
the spectators followed the little vessel with their eyes as long as it
 remained visible; they then turned their conjectures upon her probable
 destination. some insisted she was making for corsica, others the
 island of elba; bets were offered to any amount that she was bound for
 spain; while africa was positively reported by many persons as her
 intended course; but one thought of monte cristo.
 
yet thither it was that dantès guided his vessel, and at monte cristo
 arrived at the close of the second day; his boat had proved herself
 first-class sailor, and had come the distance from genoa in
 thirty-five hours. dantès had carefully noted the general appearance of
 the shore, and, instead of landing at the usual place, dropped
 anchor in the little creek. the island was utterly deserted, and bore
 evidence of having been visited since went away; his treasure was
 just as had left it.
 
early on the following morning commenced the removal of his riches,
 and ere nightfall the whole of his immense wealth was safely deposited
 in the compartments of the secret locker.
 
week passed by. dantès employed it in manœuvring his yacht round the
 island, studying it as skilful horseman would the animal destined
 for some important service, till at the end of that time was
 perfectly conversant with its good and bad qualities. the former dantès
 proposed to augment, the latter to remedy.
 
upon the eighth day discerned small vessel under full sail
 approaching monte cristo. as it drew near, recognized it as the boat
 had given to jacopo. immediately signalled it. his signal was
 returned, and in two hours afterwards the new-comer lay at anchor
 beside the yacht.
 
mournful answer awaited each of edmond’s eager inquiries as to the
 information jacopo had obtained. old dantès was dead, and mercédès had
 disappeared.
 
dantès listened to these melancholy tidings with outward calmness; but,
 leaping lightly ashore, signified his desire to be quite alone. in a
 couple of hours returned. two of the men from jacopo’s boat came on
 board the yacht to assist in navigating it, and gave orders that she
 should be steered direct to marseilles. for his father’s death was
 in some manner prepared; but knew not how to account for the
 mysterious disappearance of mercédès.
 
without divulging his secret, dantès could not give sufficiently clear
 instructions to an agent. there were, besides, other particulars was
 desirous of ascertaining, and those were of nature alone could
 investigate in manner satisfactory to himself. his looking-glass had
 assured him, during his stay at leghorn, that ran risk of
 recognition; moreover, had now the means of adopting any disguise he
 thought proper. one fine morning, then, his yacht, followed by the
 little fishing-boat, boldly entered the port of marseilles, and
 anchored exactly opposite the spot from whence, on the
 never-to-be-forgotten night of his departure for the château d’if, he
 had been put on board the boat destined to convey him thither.
 
0315m
 


still dantès could not view without shudder the approach of a
 gendarme who accompanied the officers deputed to demand his bill of
 health ere the yacht was permitted to hold communication with the
 shore; but with that perfect self-possession had acquired during his
 acquaintance with faria, dantès coolly presented an english passport he
 had obtained from leghorn, and as this gave him standing which a
 french passport would not have afforded, was informed that there
 existed obstacle to his immediate debarkation.
 
the first person to attract the attention of dantès, as landed on
 the canebière, was one of the crew belonging to the _pharaon_. edmond
 welcomed the meeting with this fellow—who had been one of his own
 sailors—as sure means of testing the extent of the change which time
 had worked in his own appearance. going straight towards him, he
 propounded variety of questions on different subjects, carefully
 watching the man’s countenance as did so; but not word or look
 implied that had the slightest idea of ever having seen before the
 person with whom was then conversing.
 
giving the sailor piece of money in return for his civility, dantès
 proceeded onwards; but ere had gone many steps heard the man
 loudly calling him to stop.
 
dantès instantly turned to meet him.
 
“i beg your pardon, sir,” said the honest fellow, in almost breathless
 haste, “but i believe you made mistake; you intended to give a
 two-franc piece, and see, you gave double napoleon.”
 
“thank you, my good friend. i see that i have made trifling mistake,
 as you say; but by way of rewarding your honesty i give you another
 double napoleon, that you may drink to my health, and be able to ask
 your messmates to join you.”
 
so extreme was the surprise of the sailor, that was unable even to
 thank edmond, whose receding figure continued to gaze after in
 speechless astonishment. “some nabob from india,” was his comment.
 
dantès, meanwhile, went on his way. each step trod oppressed his
 heart with fresh emotion; his first and most indelible recollections
 were there; not tree, not street, that passed but seemed filled
 with dear and cherished memories. and thus proceeded onwards till he
 arrived at the end of the rue noailles, from whence full view of
 the allées meilhan was obtained. at this spot, so pregnant with fond
 and filial remembrances, his heart beat almost to bursting, his knees
 tottered under him, mist floated over his sight, and had not clung
 for support to one of the trees, would inevitably have fallen to the
 ground and been crushed beneath the many vehicles continually passing
 there. recovering himself, however, wiped the perspiration from his
 brows, and stopped not again till found himself at the door of the
 house in which his father had lived.
 
the nasturtiums and other plants, which his father had delighted to
 train before his window, had all disappeared from the upper part of the
 house.
 
leaning against the tree, gazed thoughtfully for time at the upper
 stories of the shabby little house. then advanced to the door, and
 asked whether there were any rooms to be let. though answered in the
 negative, begged so earnestly to be permitted to visit those on the
 fifth floor, that, in despite of the oft-repeated assurance of the
 _concierge_ that they were occupied, dantès succeeded in inducing the
 man to go up to the tenants, and ask permission for gentleman to be
 allowed to look at them.
 
the tenants of the humble lodging were young couple who had been
 scarcely married week; and seeing them, dantès sighed heavily.
 nothing in the two small chambers forming the apartments remained as it
 had been in the time of the elder dantès; the very paper was different,
 while the articles of antiquated furniture with which the rooms had
 been filled in edmond’s time had all disappeared; the four walls alone
 remained as had left them.
 
the bed belonging to the present occupants was placed as the former
 owner of the chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in spite of
 his efforts to prevent it, the eyes of edmond were suffused in tears as
 reflected that on that spot the old man had breathed his last,
 vainly calling for his son.
 
the young couple gazed with astonishment at the sight of their
 visitor’s emotion, and wondered to see the large tears silently chasing
 each other down his otherwise stern and immovable features; but they
 felt the sacredness of his grief, and kindly refrained from questioning
 him as to its cause, while, with instinctive delicacy, they left him to
 indulge his sorrow alone.
 
0317m
 


when withdrew from the scene of his painful recollections, they both
 accompanied him downstairs, reiterating their hope that would come
 again whenever pleased, and assuring him that their poor dwelling
 would ever be open to him.
 
as edmond passed the door on the fourth floor, paused to inquire
 whether caderousse the tailor still dwelt there; but received for
 reply, that the person in question had got into difficulties, and at
 the present time kept small inn on the route from bellegarde to
 beaucaire.
 
having obtained the address of the person to whom the house in the
 allées meilhan belonged, dantès next proceeded thither, and, under
 the name of lord wilmore (the name and title inscribed on his
 passport), purchased the small dwelling for the sum of twenty-five
 thousand francs, at least ten thousand more than it was worth; but had
 its owner asked half million, it would unhesitatingly have been
 given.
 
the very same day the occupants of the apartments on the fifth floor of
 the house, now become the property of dantès, were duly informed by the
 notary who had arranged the necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the
 new landlord gave them their choice of any of the rooms in the house,
 without the least augmentation of rent, upon condition of their giving
 instant possession of the two small chambers they at present inhabited.
 
this strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in the
 neighborhood of the allées meilhan, and multitude of theories were
 afloat, none of which was anywhere near the truth. but what raised
 public astonishment to climax, and set all conjecture at defiance,
 was the knowledge that the same stranger who had in the morning visited
 the allées meilhan had been seen in the evening walking in the
 little village of the catalans, and afterwards observed to enter poor
 fisherman’s hut, and to pass more than an hour in inquiring after
 persons who had either been dead or gone away for more than fifteen or
 sixteen years.
 
but on the following day the family from whom all these particulars had
 been asked received handsome present, consisting of an entirely new
 fishing-boat, with two seines and tender.
 
the delighted recipients of these munificent gifts would gladly have
 poured out their thanks to their generous benefactor, but they had seen
 him, upon quitting the hut, merely give some orders to sailor, and
 then springing lightly on horseback, leave marseilles by the porte
 d’aix.
 


chapter 26. the pont du gard inn
 
such of my readers as have made pedestrian excursion to the south of
 france may perchance have noticed, about midway between the town of
 beaucaire and the village of bellegarde,—a little nearer to the former
 than to the latter,—a small roadside inn, from the front of which hung,
 creaking and flapping in the wind, sheet of tin covered with a
 grotesque representation of the pont du gard. this modern place of
 entertainment stood on the left-hand side of the post road, and backed
 upon the rhône. it also boasted of what in languedoc is styled a
 garden, consisting of small plot of ground, on the side opposite to
 the main entrance reserved for the reception of guests. few dingy
 olives and stunted fig-trees struggled hard for existence, but their
 withered dusty foliage abundantly proved how unequal was the conflict.
 between these sickly shrubs grew scanty supply of garlic, tomatoes,
 and eschalots; while, lone and solitary, like forgotten sentinel, a
 tall pine raised its melancholy head in one of the corners of this
 unattractive spot, and displayed its flexible stem and fan-shaped
 summit dried and cracked by the fierce heat of the sub-tropical sun.
 
all these trees, great or small, were turned in the direction to which
 the mistral blows, one of the three curses of provence, the others
 being the durance and the parliament.
 
in the surrounding plain, which more resembled dusty lake than solid
 ground, were scattered few miserable stalks of wheat, the effect, no
 doubt, of curious desire on the part of the agriculturists of the
 country to see whether such thing as the raising of grain in those
 parched regions was practicable. each stalk served as perch for a
 grasshopper, which regaled the passers-by through this egyptian scene
 with its strident, monotonous note.
 
for about seven or eight years the little tavern had been kept by man
 and his wife, with two servants,—a chambermaid named trinette, and a
 hostler called pecaud. this small staff was quite equal to all the
 requirements, for canal between beaucaire and aiguemortes had
 revolutionized transportation by substituting boats for the cart and
 the stagecoach. and, as though to add to the daily misery which this
 prosperous canal inflicted on the unfortunate innkeeper, whose utter
 ruin it was fast accomplishing, it was situated between the rhône from
 which it had its source and the post-road it had depleted, not a
 hundred steps from the inn, of which we have given brief but faithful
 description.
 
the innkeeper himself was man of from forty to fifty-five years of
 age, tall, strong, and bony, perfect specimen of the natives of those
 southern latitudes; had dark, sparkling, and deep-set eyes, hooked
 nose, and teeth white as those of carnivorous animal; his hair, like
 his beard, which wore under his chin, was thick and curly, and in
 spite of his age but slightly interspersed with few silvery threads.
 his naturally dark complexion had assumed still further shade of
 brown from the habit the unfortunate man had acquired of stationing
 himself from morning till eve at the threshold of his door, on the
 lookout for guests who seldom came, yet there stood, day after day,
 exposed to the meridional rays of burning sun, with other
 protection for his head than red handkerchief twisted around it,
 after the manner of the spanish muleteers. this man was our old
 acquaintance, gaspard caderousse.
 
his wife, on the contrary, whose maiden name had been madeleine
 radelle, was pale, meagre, and sickly-looking. born in the neighborhood
 of arles, she had shared in the beauty for which its women are
 proverbial; but that beauty had gradually withered beneath the
 devastating influence of the slow fever so prevalent among dwellers by
 the ponds of aiguemortes and the marshes of camargue. she remained
 nearly always in her second-floor chamber, shivering in her chair, or
 stretched languid and feeble on her bed, while her husband kept his
 daily watch at the door—a duty performed with so much the greater
 willingness, as it saved him the necessity of listening to the endless
 plaints and murmurs of his helpmate, who never saw him without breaking
 out into bitter invectives against fate; to all of which her husband
 would calmly return an unvarying reply, in these philosophic words:
 
“hush, carconte. it is god’s pleasure that things should be so.”
 
the sobriquet of carconte had been bestowed on madeleine radelle
 from the fact that she had been born in village, so called, situated
 between salon and lambesc; and as custom existed among the
 inhabitants of that part of france where caderousse lived of styling
 every person by some particular and distinctive appellation, her
 husband had bestowed on her the name of carconte in place of her
 sweet and euphonious name of madeleine, which, in all probability, his
 rude gutteral language would not have enabled him to pronounce.
 
still, let it not be supposed that amid this affected resignation to
 the will of providence, the unfortunate innkeeper did not writhe under
 the double misery of seeing the hateful canal carry off his customers
 and his profits, and the daily infliction of his peevish partner’s
 murmurs and lamentations.
 
0323m
 


like other dwellers in the south, was man of sober habits and
 moderate desires, but fond of external show, vain, and addicted to
 display. during the days of his prosperity, not festivity took place
 without himself and wife being among the spectators. dressed in the
 picturesque costume worn upon grand occasions by the inhabitants of the
 south of france, bearing equal resemblance to the style adopted both by
 the catalans and andalusians; while carconte displayed the charming
 fashion prevalent among the women of arles, mode of attire borrowed
 equally from greece and arabia. but, by degrees, watch-chains,
 necklaces, parti-colored scarves, embroidered bodices, velvet vests,
 elegantly worked stockings, striped gaiters, and silver buckles for the
 shoes, all disappeared; and gaspard caderousse, unable to appear abroad
 in his pristine splendor, had given up any further participation in the
 pomps and vanities, both for himself and wife, although bitter
 feeling of envious discontent filled his mind as the sound of mirth and
 merry music from the joyous revellers reached even the miserable
 hostelry to which still clung, more for the shelter than the profit
 it afforded.
 
caderousse, then, was, as usual, at his place of observation before the
 door, his eyes glancing listlessly from piece of closely shaven
 grass—on which some fowls were industriously, though fruitlessly,
 endeavoring to turn up some grain or insect suited to their palate—to
 the deserted road, which led away to the north and south, when was
 aroused by the shrill voice of his wife, and grumbling to himself as he
 went, mounted to her chamber, first taking care, however, to set the
 entrance door wide open, as an invitation to any chance traveller who
 might be passing.
 
at the moment caderousse quitted his sentry-like watch before the door,
 the road on which so eagerly strained his sight was void and lonely
 as desert at midday. there it lay stretching out into one
 interminable line of dust and sand, with its sides bordered by tall,
 meagre trees, altogether presenting so uninviting an appearance, that
 one in his senses could have imagined that any traveller, at liberty
 to regulate his hours for journeying, would choose to expose himself in
 such formidable sahara.
 
nevertheless, had caderousse but retained his post few minutes
 longer, might have caught dim outline of something approaching
 from the direction of bellegarde; as the moving object drew nearer, he
 would easily have perceived that it consisted of man and horse,
 between whom the kindest and most amiable understanding appeared to
 exist. the horse was of hungarian breed, and ambled along at an easy
 pace. his rider was priest, dressed in black, and wearing a
 three-cornered hat; and, spite of the ardent rays of noonday sun, the
 pair came on with fair degree of rapidity.
 
having arrived before the pont du gard, the horse stopped, but whether
 for his own pleasure or that of his rider would have been difficult to
 say. however that might have been, the priest, dismounting, led his
 steed by the bridle in search of some place to which could secure
 him. availing himself of handle that projected from half-fallen
 door, tied the animal safely and having drawn red cotton
 handkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspiration that
 streamed from his brow, then, advancing to the door, struck thrice with
 the end of his iron-shod stick.
 
at this unusual sound, huge black dog came rushing to meet the daring
 assailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode, snarling and displaying his
 sharp white teeth with determined hostility that abundantly proved
 how little was accustomed to society. at that moment heavy
 footstep was heard descending the wooden staircase that led from the
 upper floor, and, with many bows and courteous smiles, the host of the
 pont du gard besought his guest to enter.
 
0319m
 


“you are welcome, sir, most welcome!” repeated the astonished
 caderousse. “now, then, margotin,” cried he, speaking to the dog, “will
 you be quiet? pray don’t heed him, sir!—he only barks, never bites.
 i make doubt glass of good wine would be acceptable this
 dreadfully hot day.” then perceiving for the first time the garb of the
 traveller had to entertain, caderousse hastily exclaimed: “a
 thousand pardons! i really did not observe whom i had the honor to
 receive under my poor roof. what would the abbé please to have? what
 refreshment can i offer? all i have is at his service.”
 
the priest gazed on the person addressing him with long and searching
 gaze—there even seemed disposition on his part to court similar
 scrutiny on the part of the innkeeper; then, observing in the
 countenance of the latter other expression than extreme surprise at
 his own want of attention to an inquiry so courteously worded, he
 deemed it as well to terminate this dumb show, and therefore said,
 speaking with strong italian accent, “you are, i presume, m.
 caderousse?”
 
“yes, sir,” answered the host, even more surprised at the question than
 had been by the silence which had preceded it; “i am gaspard
 caderousse, at your service.”
 
“gaspard caderousse,” rejoined the priest. “yes,—christian and surname
 are the same. you formerly lived, i believe in the allées meilhan,
 on the fourth floor?”
 
0325m
 


“i did.”
 
“and you followed the business of tailor?”
 
“true, i was tailor, till the trade fell off. it is so hot at
 marseilles, that really i believe that the respectable inhabitants will
 in time go without any clothing whatever. but talking of heat, is there
 nothing i can offer you by way of refreshment?”
 
“yes; let have bottle of your best wine, and then, with your
 permission, we will resume our conversation from where we left off.”
 
“as you please, sir,” said caderousse, who, anxious not to lose the
 present opportunity of finding customer for one of the few bottles of
 cahors still remaining in his possession, hastily raised trap-door in
 the floor of the apartment they were in, which served both as parlor
 and kitchen.
 
upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the expiration of
 five minutes, found the abbé seated upon wooden stool, leaning his
 elbow on table, while margotin, whose animosity seemed appeased by
 the unusual command of the traveller for refreshments, had crept up to
 him, and had established himself very comfortably between his knees,
 his long, skinny neck resting on his lap, while his dim eye was fixed
 earnestly on the traveller’s face.
 
“are you quite alone?” inquired the guest, as caderousse placed before
 him the bottle of wine and glass.
 
“quite, quite alone,” replied the man—“or, at least, practically so,
 for my poor wife, who is the only person in the house besides myself,
 is laid up with illness, and unable to render the least assistance,
 poor thing!”
 
“you are married, then?” said the priest, with show of interest,
 glancing round as spoke at the scanty furnishings of the apartment.
 
“ah, sir,” said caderousse with sigh, “it is easy to perceive i am
 not rich man; but in this world man does not thrive the better for
 being honest.” the abbé fixed on him searching, penetrating glance.
 
“yes, honest—i can certainly say that much for myself,” continued the
 innkeeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny of the abbé’s gaze; “i can
 boast with truth of being an honest man; and,” continued he
 significantly, with hand on his breast and shaking his head, “that is
 more than everyone can say nowadays.”
 
0327m
 


“so much the better for you, if what you assert be true,” said the
 abbé; “for i am firmly persuaded that, sooner or later, the good will
 be rewarded, and the wicked punished.”
 
“such words as those belong to your profession,” answered caderousse,
 “and you do well to repeat them; but,” added he, with bitter
 expression of countenance, “one is free to believe them or not, as one
 pleases.”
 
“you are wrong to speak thus,” said the abbé; “and perhaps i may, in my
 own person, be able to prove to you how completely you are in error.”
 
“what mean you?” inquired caderousse with look of surprise.
 
“in the first place, i must be satisfied that you are the person i am
 in search of.”
 
“what proofs do you require?”
 
“did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of young sailor
 named dantès?”
 
“dantès? did i know poor dear edmond? why, edmond dantès and myself
 were intimate friends!” exclaimed caderousse, whose countenance flushed
 darkly as caught the penetrating gaze of the abbé fixed on him,
 while the clear, calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with
 feverish scrutiny.
 
“you remind me,” said the priest, “that the young man concerning whom i
 asked you was said to bear the name of edmond.”
 
“said to bear the name!” repeated caderousse, becoming excited and
 eager. “why, was so called as truly as i myself bore the appellation
 of gaspard caderousse; but tell me, i pray, what has become of poor
 edmond? did you know him? is alive and at liberty? is prosperous
 and happy?”
 
“he died more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisoner than the
 felons who pay the penalty of their crimes at the galleys of toulon.”
 
deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance of caderousse,
 who turned away, and the priest saw him wiping the tears from his eyes
 with the corner of the red handkerchief twisted round his head.
 
“poor fellow, poor fellow!” murmured caderousse. “well, there, sir, is
 another proof that good people are never rewarded on this earth, and
 that none but the wicked prosper. ah,” continued caderousse, speaking
 in the highly colored language of the south, “the world grows worse and
 worse. why does not god, if really hates the wicked, as is said
 to do, send down brimstone and fire, and consume them altogether?”
 
“you speak as though you had loved this young dantès,” observed the
 abbé, without taking any notice of his companion’s vehemence.
 
“and so i did,” replied caderousse; “though once, i confess, i envied
 him his good fortune. but i swear to you, sir, i swear to you, by
 everything man holds dear, i have, since then, deeply and sincerely
 lamented his unhappy fate.”
 
there was brief silence, during which the fixed, searching eye of the
 abbé was employed in scrutinizing the agitated features of the
 innkeeper.
 
“you knew the poor lad, then?” continued caderousse.
 
“i was called to see him on his dying bed, that i might administer to
 him the consolations of religion.”
 
“and of what did die?” asked caderousse in choking voice.
 
“of what, think you, do young and strong men die in prison, when they
 have scarcely numbered their thirtieth year, unless it be of
 imprisonment?” caderousse wiped away the large beads of perspiration
 that gathered on his brow.
 
0329m
 


“but the strangest part of the story is,” resumed the abbé, “that
 dantès, even in his dying moments, swore by his crucified redeemer,
 that was utterly ignorant of the cause of his detention.”
 
“and so was,” murmured caderousse. “how should have been
 otherwise? ah, sir, the poor fellow told you the truth.”
 
“and for that reason, besought to try and clear up mystery he
 had never been able to penetrate, and to clear his memory should any
 foul spot or stain have fallen on it.”
 
and here the look of the abbé, becoming more and more fixed, seemed to
 rest with ill-concealed satisfaction on the gloomy depression which was
 rapidly spreading over the countenance of caderousse.
 
“a rich englishman,” continued the abbé, “who had been his companion in
 misfortune, but had been released from prison during the second
 restoration, was possessed of diamond of immense value; this jewel he
 bestowed on dantès upon himself quitting the prison, as mark of his
 gratitude for the kindness and brotherly care with which dantès had
 nursed him in severe illness underwent during his confinement.
 instead of employing this diamond in attempting to bribe his jailers,
 who might only have taken it and then betrayed him to the governor,
 dantès carefully preserved it, that in the event of his getting out of
 prison might have wherewithal to live, for the sale of such a
 diamond would have quite sufficed to make his fortune.”
 
“then, i suppose,” asked caderousse, with eager, glowing looks, “that
 it was stone of immense value?”
 
“why, everything is relative,” answered the abbé. “to one in edmond’s
 position the diamond certainly was of great value. it was estimated at
 fifty thousand francs.”
 
“bless me!” exclaimed caderousse, “fifty thousand francs! surely the
 diamond was as large as nut to be worth all that.”
 
“no,” replied the abbé, “it was not of such size as that; but you
 shall judge for yourself. i have it with me.”
 
the sharp gaze of caderousse was instantly directed towards the
 priest’s garments, as though hoping to discover the location of the
 treasure. calmly drawing forth from his pocket small box covered with
 black shagreen, the abbé opened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes
 of caderousse the sparkling jewel it contained, set in ring of
 admirable workmanship.
 
“and that diamond,” cried caderousse, almost breathless with eager
 admiration, “you say, is worth fifty thousand francs?”
 
“it is, without the setting, which is also valuable,” replied the abbé,
 as closed the box, and returned it to his pocket, while its
 brilliant hues seemed still to dance before the eyes of the fascinated
 innkeeper.
 
“but how comes the diamond in your possession, sir? did edmond make you
 his heir?”
 
“no, merely his testamentary executor. ‘i once possessed four dear and
 faithful friends, besides the maiden to whom i was betrothed’ said;
 ‘and i feel convinced they have all unfeignedly grieved over my loss.
 the name of one of the four friends is caderousse.’” the innkeeper
 shivered.
 
“‘another of the number,’” continued the abbé, without seeming to
 notice the emotion of caderousse, “‘is called danglars; and the third,
 in spite of being my rival, entertained very sincere affection for
 me.’”
 
fiendish smile played over the features of caderousse, who was about
 to break in upon the abbé’s speech, when the latter, waving his hand,
 said, “allow to finish first, and then if you have any observations
 to make, you can do so afterwards. ‘the third of my friends, although
 my rival, was much attached to me,—his name was fernand; that of my
 betrothed was’—stay, stay,” continued the abbé, “i have forgotten what
 called her.”
 
“mercédès,” said caderousse eagerly.
 
“true,” said the abbé, with stifled sigh, “mercédès it was.”
 
“go on,” urged caderousse.
 
“bring _carafe_ of water,” said the abbé.
 
caderousse quickly performed the stranger’s bidding; and after pouring
 some into glass, and slowly swallowing its contents, the abbé,
 resuming his usual placidity of manner, said, as placed his empty
 glass on the table:
 
“where did we leave off?”
 
“the name of edmond’s betrothed was mercédès.”
 
“to be sure. ‘you will go to marseilles,’ said dantès,—for you
 understand, i repeat his words just as uttered them. do you
 understand?”
 
“perfectly.”
 
“‘you will sell this diamond; you will divide the money into five equal
 parts, and give an equal portion to these good friends, the only
 persons who have loved upon earth.’”
 
“but why into five parts?” asked caderousse; “you only mentioned four
 persons.”
 
“because the fifth is dead, as i hear. the fifth sharer in edmond’s
 bequest, was his own father.”
 
“too true, too true!” ejaculated caderousse, almost suffocated by the
 contending passions which assailed him, “the poor old man did die.”
 
“i learned so much at marseilles,” replied the abbé, making strong
 effort to appear indifferent; “but from the length of time that has
 elapsed since the death of the elder dantès, i was unable to obtain any
 particulars of his end. can you enlighten on that point?”
 
“i do not know who could if i could not,” said caderousse. “why, i
 lived almost on the same floor with the poor old man. ah, yes, about a
 year after the disappearance of his the poor old man died.”
 
“of what did die?”
 
“why, the doctors called his complaint gastro-enteritis, i believe; his
 acquaintances say died of grief; but i, who saw him in his dying
 moments, i say died of——”
 
caderousse paused.
 
“of what?” asked the priest, anxiously and eagerly.
 
“why, of downright starvation.”
 
“starvation!” exclaimed the abbé, springing from his seat. “why, the
 vilest animals are not suffered to die by such death as that. the
 very dogs that wander houseless and homeless in the streets find some
 pitying hand to cast them mouthful of bread; and that man, a
 christian, should be allowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other
 men who call themselves christians, is too horrible for belief. oh, it
 is impossible!—utterly impossible!”
 
“what i have said, i have said,” answered caderousse.
 
“and you are fool for having said anything about it,” said voice
 from the top of the stairs. “why should you meddle with what does not
 concern you?”
 
the two men turned quickly, and saw the sickly countenance of la
 carconte peering between the baluster rails; attracted by the sound of
 voices, she had feebly dragged herself down the stairs, and, seated on
 the lower step, head on knees, she had listened to the foregoing
 conversation.
 
“mind your own business, wife,” replied caderousse sharply. “this
 gentleman asks for information, which common politeness will not
 permit to refuse.”
 
“politeness, you simpleton!” retorted carconte. “what have you to do
 with politeness, i should like to know? better study little common
 prudence. how do you know the motives that person may have for trying
 to extract all can from you?”
 
“i pledge you my word, madam,” said the abbé, “that my intentions are
 good; and that your husband can incur risk, provided answers me
 candidly.”
 
“ah, that’s all very fine,” retorted the woman. “nothing is easier than
 to begin with fair promises and assurances of nothing to fear; but when
 poor, silly folks, like my husband there, have been persuaded to tell
 all they know, the promises and assurances of safety are quickly
 forgotten; and at some moment when nobody is expecting it, behold
 trouble and misery, and all sorts of persecutions, are heaped on the
 unfortunate wretches, who cannot even see whence all their afflictions
 come.”
 
“nay, nay, my good woman, make yourself perfectly easy, i beg of you.
 whatever evils may befall you, they will not be occasioned by my
 instrumentality, that i solemnly promise you.”
 
carconte muttered few inarticulate words, then let her head again
 drop upon her knees, and went into fit of ague, leaving the two
 speakers to resume the conversation, but remaining so as to be able to
 hear every word they uttered. again the abbé had been obliged to
 swallow draught of water to calm the emotions that threatened to
 overpower him.
 
when had sufficiently recovered himself, said, “it appears, then,
 that the miserable old man you were telling of was forsaken by
 everyone. surely, had not such been the case, would not have
 perished by so dreadful death.”
 
“why, was not altogether forsaken,” continued caderousse, “for
 mercédès the catalan and monsieur morrel were very kind to him; but
 somehow the poor old man had contracted profound hatred for
 fernand—the very person,” added caderousse with bitter smile, “that
 you named just now as being one of dantès’ faithful and attached
 friends.”
 
“and was not so?” asked the abbé.
 
“gaspard, gaspard!” murmured the woman, from her seat on the stairs,
 “mind what you are saying!”
 
caderousse made reply to these words, though evidently irritated and
 annoyed by the interruption, but, addressing the abbé, said, “can man
 be faithful to another whose wife covets and desires for himself?
 but dantès was so honorable and true in his own nature, that he
 believed everybody’s professions of friendship. poor edmond, was
 cruelly deceived; but it was fortunate that never knew, or might
 have found it more difficult, when on his deathbed, to pardon his
 enemies. and, whatever people may say,” continued caderousse, in his
 native language, which was not altogether devoid of rude poetry, “i
 cannot help being more frightened at the idea of the malediction of the
 dead than the hatred of the living.”
 
“imbecile!” exclaimed carconte.
 
“do you, then, know in what manner fernand injured dantès?” inquired
 the abbé of caderousse.
 
“do i? one better.”
 
“speak out then, say what it was!”
 
“gaspard!” cried carconte, “do as you will; you are master—but if
 you take my advice you’ll hold your tongue.”
 
“well, wife,” replied caderousse, “i don’t know but what you’re right!”
 
“so you will say nothing?” asked the abbé.
 
“why, what good would it do?” asked caderousse. “if the poor lad were
 living, and came to and begged that i would candidly tell which were
 his true and which his false friends, why, perhaps, i should not
 hesitate. but you tell is more, and therefore can have nothing
 to do with hatred or revenge, so let all such feeling be buried with
 him.”
 
“you prefer, then,” said the abbé, “that i should bestow on men you say
 are false and treacherous, the reward intended for faithful
 friendship?”
 
“that is true enough,” returned caderousse. “you say truly, the gift of
 poor edmond was not meant for such traitors as fernand and danglars;
 besides, what would it be to them? more than drop of water in the
 ocean.”
 
“remember,” chimed in carconte, “those two could crush you at a
 single blow!”
 
“how so?” inquired the abbé. “are these persons, then, so rich and
 powerful?”
 
“do you not know their history?”
 
“i do not. pray relate it to me!”
 
caderousse seemed to reflect for few moments, then said, “no, truly,
 it would take up too much time.”
 
“well, my good friend,” returned the abbé, in tone that indicated
 utter indifference on his part, “you are at liberty, either to speak or
 be silent, just as you please; for my own part, i respect your scruples
 and admire your sentiments; so let the matter end. i shall do my duty
 as conscientiously as i can, and fulfil my promise to the dying man. my
 first business will be to dispose of this diamond.”
 
so saying, the abbé again drew the small box from his pocket, opened
 it, and contrived to hold it in such light, that bright flash of
 brilliant hues passed before the dazzled gaze of caderousse.
 
“wife, wife!” cried in hoarse voice, “come here!”
 
“diamond!” exclaimed carconte, rising and descending to the chamber
 with tolerably firm step; “what diamond are you talking about?”
 
“why, did you not hear all we said?” inquired caderousse. “it is a
 beautiful diamond left by poor edmond dantès, to be sold, and the money
 divided between his father, mercédès, his betrothed bride, fernand,
 danglars, and myself. the jewel is worth at least fifty thousand
 francs.”
 
“oh, what magnificent jewel!” cried the astonished woman.
 
“the fifth part of the profits from this stone belongs to us then, does
 it not?” asked caderousse.
 
“it does,” replied the abbé; “with the addition of an equal division of
 that part intended for the elder dantès, which i believe myself at
 liberty to divide equally with the four survivors.”
 
“and why among us four?” inquired caderousse.
 
“as being the friends edmond esteemed most faithful and devoted to
 him.”
 
“i don’t call those friends who betray and ruin you,” murmured the wife
 in her turn, in low, muttering voice.
 
“of course not!” rejoined caderousse quickly; “no more do i, and that
 was what i was observing to this gentleman just now. i said i looked
 upon it as sacrilegious profanation to reward treachery, perhaps
 crime.”
 
“remember,” answered the abbé calmly, as replaced the jewel and its
 case in the pocket of his cassock, “it is your fault, not mine, that i
 do so. you will have the goodness to furnish with the address of
 both fernand and danglars, in order that i may execute edmond’s last
 wishes.”
 
the agitation of caderousse became extreme, and large drops of
 perspiration rolled from his heated brow. as saw the abbé rise from
 his seat and go towards the door, as though to ascertain if his horse
 were sufficiently refreshed to continue his journey, caderousse and his
 wife exchanged looks of deep meaning.
 
0335m
 


“there, you see, wife,” said the former, “this splendid diamond might
 all be ours, if we chose!”
 
“do you believe it?”
 
“why, surely man of his holy profession would not deceive us!”
 
“well,” replied carconte, “do as you like. for my part, i wash my
 hands of the affair.”
 
so saying, she once more climbed the staircase leading to her chamber,
 her body convulsed with chills, and her teeth rattling in her head, in
 spite of the intense heat of the weather. arrived at the top stair, she
 turned round, and called out, in warning tone, to her husband,
 “gaspard, consider well what you are about to do!”
 
“i have both reflected and decided,” answered he.
 
carconte then entered her chamber, the flooring of which creaked
 beneath her heavy, uncertain tread, as she proceeded towards her
 armchair, into which she fell as though exhausted.
 
“well,” asked the abbé, as returned to the apartment below, “what
 have you made up your mind to do?”
 
“to tell you all i know,” was the reply.
 
“i certainly think you act wisely in so doing,” said the priest. “not
 because i have the least desire to learn anything you may please to
 conceal from me, but simply that if, through your assistance, i could
 distribute the legacy according to the wishes of the testator, why, so
 much the better, that is all.”
 
“i hope it may be so,” replied caderousse, his face flushed with
 cupidity.
 
“i am all attention,” said the abbé.
 
“stop minute,” answered caderousse; “we might be interrupted in the
 most interesting part of my story, which would be pity; and it is as
 well that your visit hither should be made known only to ourselves.”
 
with these words went stealthily to the door, which closed, and,
 by way of still greater precaution, bolted and barred it, as was
 accustomed to do at night.
 
during this time the abbé had chosen his place for listening at his
 ease. removed his seat into corner of the room, where himself
 would be in deep shadow, while the light would be fully thrown on the
 narrator; then, with head bent down and hands clasped, or rather
 clenched together, prepared to give his whole attention to
 caderousse, who seated himself on the little stool, exactly opposite to
 him.
 
“remember, this is affair of mine,” said the trembling voice of la
 carconte, as though through the flooring of her chamber she viewed the
 scene that was enacting below.
 
“enough, enough!” replied caderousse; “say more about it; i will
 take all the consequences upon myself.”
 
and began his story.
 


chapter 27. the story
 
first, sir,” said caderousse, “you must make promise.”
 
“what is that?” inquired the abbé.
 
“why, if you ever make use of the details i am about to give you, that
 you will never let anyone know that it was i who supplied them; for the
 persons of whom i am about to talk are rich and powerful, and if they
 only laid the tips of their fingers on me, i should break to pieces
 like glass.”
 
“make yourself easy, my friend,” replied the abbé. “i am priest, and
 confessions die in my breast. recollect, our only desire is to carry
 out, in fitting manner, the last wishes of our friend. speak, then,
 without reserve, as without hatred; tell the truth, the whole truth; i
 do not know, never may know, the persons of whom you are about to
 speak; besides, i am an italian, and not frenchman, and belong to
 god, and not to man, and i shall shortly retire to my convent, which i
 have only quitted to fulfil the last wishes of dying man.”
 
this positive assurance seemed to give caderousse little courage.
 
“well, then, under these circumstances,” said caderousse, “i will, i
 even believe i ought to undeceive you as to the friendship which poor
 edmond thought so sincere and unquestionable.”
 
“begin with his father, if you please.” said the abbé; “edmond talked
 to great deal about the old man for whom had the deepest love.”
 
“the history is sad one, sir,” said caderousse, shaking his head;
 “perhaps you know all the earlier part of it?”
 
“yes.” answered the abbé; “edmond related to everything until the
 moment when was arrested in small cabaret close to marseilles.”
 
“at réserve! oh, yes; i can see it all before this moment.”
 
“was it not his betrothal feast?”
 
“it was and the feast that began so gayly had very sorrowful ending;
 police commissary, followed by four soldiers, entered, and dantès was
 arrested.”
 
“yes, and up to this point i know all,” said the priest. “dantès
 himself only knew that which personally concerned him, for never
 beheld again the five persons i have named to you, or heard mention of
 anyone of them.”
 
“well, when dantès was arrested, monsieur morrel hastened to obtain the
 particulars, and they were very sad. the old man returned alone to his
 home, folded up his wedding suit with tears in his eyes, and paced up
 and down his chamber the whole day, and would not go to bed at all, for
 i was underneath him and heard him walking the whole night; and for
 myself, i assure you i could not sleep either, for the grief of the
 poor father gave great uneasiness, and every step took went to my
 heart as really as if his foot had pressed against my breast.
 
“the next day mercédès came to implore the protection of m. de
 villefort; she did not obtain it, however, and went to visit the old
 man; when she saw him so miserable and heart-broken, having passed a
 sleepless night, and not touched food since the previous day, she
 wished him to go with her that she might take care of him; but the old
 man would not consent. ‘no,’ was the old man’s reply, ‘i will not leave
 this house, for my poor dear boy loves better than anything in the
 world; and if gets out of prison will come and see the first
 thing, and what would think if i did not wait here for him?’ i heard
 all this from the window, for i was anxious that mercédès should
 persuade the old man to accompany her, for his footsteps over my head
 night and day did not leave moment’s repose.”
 
“but did you not go upstairs and try to console the poor old man?”
 asked the abbé.
 
“ah, sir,” replied caderousse, “we cannot console those who will not be
 consoled, and was one of these; besides, i know not why, but he
 seemed to dislike seeing me. one night, however, i heard his sobs, and
 i could not resist my desire to go up to him, but when i reached his
 door was longer weeping but praying. i cannot now repeat to you,
 sir, all the eloquent words and imploring language made use of; it
 was more than piety, it was more than grief, and i, who am canter,
 and hate the jesuits, said then to myself, ‘it is really well, and i am
 very glad that i have not any children; for if i were father and felt
 such excessive grief as the old man does, and did not find in my memory
 or heart all is now saying, i should throw myself into the at
 once, for i could not bear it.’”
 
“poor father!” murmured the priest.
 
“from day to day lived on alone, and more and more solitary. m.
 morrel and mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and,
 although i was certain was at home, would not make any answer.
 one day, when, contrary to his custom, had admitted mercédès, and
 the poor girl, in spite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to
 console him, said to her,—‘be assured, my dear daughter, is dead;
 and instead of expecting him, it is who is awaiting us; i am quite
 happy, for i am the oldest, and of course shall see him first.’
 
“however well disposed person may be, why, you see we leave off after
 time seeing persons who are in sorrow, they make one melancholy; and
 so at last old dantès was left all to himself, and i only saw from time
 to time strangers go up to him and come down again with some bundle
 they tried to hide; but i guessed what these bundles were, and that he
 sold by degrees what had to pay for his subsistence. at length the
 poor old fellow reached the end of all had; owed three quarters’
 rent, and they threatened to turn him out; begged for another week,
 which was granted to him. i know this, because the landlord came into
 my apartment when left his.
 
“for the first three days i heard him walking about as usual, but, on
 the fourth i heard nothing. i then resolved to go up to him at all
 risks. the door was closed, but i looked through the keyhole, and saw
 him so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, i went and told
 m. morrel and then ran on to mercédès. they both came immediately, m.
 morrel bringing doctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of
 the bowels, and ordered him limited diet. i was there, too, and i
 never shall forget the old man’s smile at this prescription.
 
“from that time received all who came; had an excuse for not
 eating any more; the doctor had put him on diet.”
 
the abbé uttered kind of groan.
 
“the story interests you, does it not, sir?” inquired caderousse.
 
“yes,” replied the abbé, “it is very affecting.”
 
“mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even
 more anxious than before to have him taken to her own home. this was m.
 morrel’s wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against
 his consent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were
 actually frightened. mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and
 m. morrel went away, making sign to the catalan that had left his
 purse on the chimney-piece; but, availing himself of the doctor’s
 order, the old man would not take any sustenance; at length (after nine
 days of despair and fasting), the old man died, cursing those who had
 caused his misery, and saying to mercédès, ‘if you ever see my edmond
 again, tell him i die blessing him.’”
 
the abbé rose from his chair, made two turns round the chamber, and
 pressed his trembling hand against his parched throat.
 
“and you believe died——”
 
“of hunger, sir, of hunger,” said caderousse. “i am as certain of it as
 that we two are christians.”
 
the abbé, with shaking hand, seized glass of water that was
 standing by him half-full, swallowed it at one gulp, and then resumed
 his seat, with red eyes and pale cheeks.
 
“this was, indeed, horrid event,” said in hoarse voice.
 
“the more so, sir, as it was men’s and not god’s doing.”
 
“tell of those men,” said the abbé, “and remember too,” added in
 an almost menacing tone, “you have promised to tell everything. tell
 me, therefore, who are these men who killed the with despair, and
 the father with famine?”
 
“two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the other from
 ambition,—fernand and danglars.”
 
“how was this jealousy manifested? speak on.”
 
“they denounced edmond as bonapartist agent.”
 
“which of the two denounced him? which was the real delinquent?”
 
“both, sir; one with letter, and the other put it in the post.”
 
“and where was this letter written?”
 
“at réserve, the day before the betrothal feast.”
 
“’twas so, then—’twas so, then,” murmured the abbé. “oh, faria, faria,
 how well did you judge men and things!”
 
“what did you please to say, sir?” asked caderousse.
 
“nothing, nothing,” replied the priest; “go on.”
 
“it was danglars who wrote the denunciation with his left hand, that
 his writing might not be recognized, and fernand who put it in the
 post.”
 
“but,” exclaimed the abbé suddenly, “you were there yourself.”
 
“i!” said caderousse, astonished; “who told you i was there?”
 
the abbé saw had overshot the mark, and added quickly,—“no one;
 but in order to have known everything so well, you must have been an
 eye-witness.”
 
“true, true!” said caderousse in choking voice, “i was there.”
 
“and did you not remonstrate against such infamy?” asked the abbé; “if
 not, you were an accomplice.”
 
“sir,” replied caderousse, “they had made drink to such an excess
 that i nearly lost all perception. i had only an indistinct
 understanding of what was passing around me. i said all that man in
 such state could say; but they both assured that it was jest
 they were carrying on, and perfectly harmless.”
 
“next day—next day, sir, you must have seen plain enough what they had
 been doing, yet you said nothing, though you were present when dantès
 was arrested.”
 
“yes, sir, i was there, and very anxious to speak; but danglars
 restrained me. ‘if should really be guilty,’ said he, ‘and did
 really put in to the island of elba; if is really charged with a
 letter for the bonapartist committee at paris, and if they find this
 letter upon him, those who have supported him will pass for his
 accomplices.’ i confess i had my fears, in the state in which politics
 then were, and i held my tongue. it was cowardly, i confess, but it was
 not criminal.”
 
0341m
 


“i understand—you allowed matters to take their course, that was all.”
 
“yes, sir,” answered caderousse; “and remorse preys on night and
 day. i often ask pardon of god, i swear to you, because this action,
 the only one with which i have seriously to reproach myself in all my
 life, is doubt the cause of my abject condition. i am expiating a
 moment of selfishness, and so i always say to carconte, when she
 complains, ‘hold your tongue, woman; it is the will of god.’” and
 caderousse bowed his head with every sign of real repentance.
 
“well, sir,” said the abbé, “you have spoken unreservedly; and thus to
 accuse yourself is to deserve pardon.”
 
“unfortunately, edmond is dead, and has not pardoned me.”
 
“he did not know,” said the abbé.
 
“but knows it all now,” interrupted caderousse; “they say the dead
 know everything.”
 
there was brief silence; the abbé rose and paced up and down
 pensively, and then resumed his seat.
 
“you have two or three times mentioned m. morrel,” said; “who was
 he?”
 
“the owner of the _pharaon_ and patron of dantès.”
 
“and what part did play in this sad drama?” inquired the abbé.
 
“the part of an honest man, full of courage and real regard. twenty
 times interceded for edmond. when the emperor returned, wrote,
 implored, threatened, and so energetically, that on the second
 restoration was persecuted as bonapartist. ten times, as i told
 you, came to see dantès’ father, and offered to receive him in his
 own house; and the night or two before his death, as i have already
 said, left his purse on the mantelpiece, with which they paid the
 old man’s debts, and buried him decently; and so edmond’s father died,
 as had lived, without doing harm to anyone. i have the purse still
 by me—a large one, made of red silk.”
 
“and,” asked the abbé, “is m. morrel still alive?”
 
“yes,” replied caderousse.
 
“in that case,” replied the abbé, “he should be man blessed of god,
 rich, happy.”
 
caderousse smiled bitterly. “yes, happy as myself,” said he.
 
“what! m. morrel unhappy?” exclaimed the abbé.
 
“he is reduced almost to the last extremity—nay, is almost at the
 point of dishonor.”
 
“how?”
 
“yes,” continued caderousse, “so it is; after five-and-twenty years of
 labor, after having acquired most honorable name in the trade of
 marseilles, m. morrel is utterly ruined; has lost five ships in two
 years, has suffered by the bankruptcy of three large houses, and his
 only hope now is in that very _pharaon_ which poor dantès commanded,
 and which is expected from the indies with cargo of cochineal and
 indigo. if this ship founders, like the others, is ruined man.”
 
“and has the unfortunate man wife or children?” inquired the abbé.
 
“yes, has wife, who through everything has behaved like an angel;
 has daughter, who was about to marry the man she loved, but whose
 family now will not allow him to wed the daughter of ruined man; he
 has, besides, son, lieutenant in the army; and, as you may suppose,
 all this, instead of lessening, only augments his sorrows. if were
 alone in the world would blow out his brains, and there would be an
 end.”
 
“horrible!” ejaculated the priest.
 
“and it is thus heaven recompenses virtue, sir,” added caderousse. “you
 see, i, who never did bad action but that i have told you of—am in
 destitution, with my poor wife dying of fever before my very eyes, and
 i unable to do anything in the world for her; i shall die of hunger, as
 old dantès did, while fernand and danglars are rolling in wealth.”
 
“how is that?”
 
“because their deeds have brought them good fortune, while honest men
 have been reduced to misery.”
 
“what has become of danglars, the instigator, and therefore the most
 guilty?”
 
“what has become of him? why, left marseilles, and was taken, on the
 recommendation of m. morrel, who did not know his crime, as cashier
 into spanish bank. during the war with spain was employed in the
 commissariat of the french army, and made fortune; then with that
 money speculated in the funds, and trebled or quadrupled his
 capital; and, having first married his banker’s daughter, who left him
 widower, has married second time, widow, madame nargonne,
 daughter of m. servieux, the king’s chamberlain, who is in high
 favor at court. is millionaire, and they have made him baron,
 and now is the baron danglars, with fine residence in the rue du
 mont-blanc, with ten horses in his stables, six footmen in his
 antechamber, and i know not how many millions in his strongbox.”
 
“ah!” said the abbé, in peculiar tone, “he is happy.”
 
“happy? who can answer for that? happiness or unhappiness is the secret
 known but to one’s self and the walls—walls have ears but tongue;
 but if large fortune produces happiness, danglars is happy.”
 
“and fernand?”
 
“fernand? why, much the same story.”
 
“but how could poor catalan fisher-boy, without education or
 resources, make fortune? i confess this staggers me.”
 
“and it has staggered everybody. there must have been in his life some
 strange secret that one knows.”
 
“but, then, by what visible steps has attained this high fortune or
 high position?”
 
“both, sir—he has both fortune and position—both.”
 
“this must be impossible!”
 
“it would seem so; but listen, and you will understand. some days
 before the return of the emperor, fernand was drafted. the bourbons
 left him quietly enough at the catalans, but napoleon returned, a
 special levy was made, and fernand was compelled to join. i went too;
 but as i was older than fernand, and had just married my poor wife, i
 was only sent to the coast. fernand was enrolled in the active army,
 went to the frontier with his regiment, and was at the battle of ligny.
 the night after that battle was sentry at the door of general who
 carried on secret correspondence with the enemy. that same night the
 general was to go over to the english. proposed to fernand to
 accompany him; fernand agreed to do so, deserted his post, and followed
 the general.
 
“fernand would have been court-martialed if napoleon had remained on
 the throne, but his action was rewarded by the bourbons. returned to
 france with the epaulet of sub-lieutenant, and as the protection of the
 general, who is in the highest favor, was accorded to him, was a
 captain in 1823, during the spanish war—that is to say, at the time
 when danglars made his early speculations. fernand was spaniard, and
 being sent to spain to ascertain the feeling of his fellow-countrymen,
 found danglars there, got on very intimate terms with him, won over the
 support of the royalists at the capital and in the provinces, received
 promises and made pledges on his own part, guided his regiment by paths
 known to himself alone through the mountain gorges which were held by
 the royalists, and, in fact, rendered such services in this brief
 campaign that, after the taking of trocadero, was made colonel, and
 received the title of count and the cross of an officer of the legion
 of honor.”
 
“destiny! destiny!” murmured the abbé.
 
“yes, but listen: this was not all. the war with spain being ended,
 fernand’s career was checked by the long peace which seemed likely to
 endure throughout europe. greece only had risen against turkey, and had
 begun her war of independence; all eyes were turned towards athens—it
 was the fashion to pity and support the greeks. the french government,
 without protecting them openly, as you know, gave countenance to
 volunteer assistance. fernand sought and obtained leave to go and serve
 in greece, still having his name kept on the army roll.
 
0345m
 


some time after, it was stated that the comte morcerf (this was the
 name bore) had entered the service of ali pasha with the rank of
 instructor-general. ali pasha was killed, as you know, but before he
 died recompensed the services of fernand by leaving him a
 considerable sum, with which returned to france, when was
 gazetted lieutenant-general.”
 
“so that now——?” inquired the abbé.
 
“so that now,” continued caderousse, “he owns magnificent house—no.
 27, rue du helder, paris.”
 
the abbé opened his mouth, hesitated for moment, then, making an
 effort at self-control, said, “and mercédès—they tell that she
 has disappeared?”
 
“disappeared,” said caderousse, “yes, as the sun disappears, to rise
 the next day with still more splendor.”
 
“has she made fortune also?” inquired the abbé, with an ironical
 smile.
 
“mercédès is at this moment one of the greatest ladies in paris,”
 replied caderousse.
 
“go on,” said the abbé; “it seems as if i were listening to the story
 of dream. but i have seen things so extraordinary, that what you tell
 seems less astonishing than it otherwise might.”
 
“mercédès was at first in the deepest despair at the blow which
 deprived her of edmond. i have told you of her attempts to propitiate
 m. villefort, her devotion to the elder dantès. in the midst of her
 despair, new affliction overtook her. this was the departure of
 fernand—of fernand, whose crime she did not know, and whom she regarded
 as her brother. fernand went, and mercédès remained alone.
 
“three months passed and still she wept—no news of edmond, news of
 fernand, companionship save that of an old man who was dying with
 despair. one evening, after day of accustomed vigil at the angle of
 two roads leading to marseilles from the catalans, she returned to her
 home more depressed than ever. suddenly she heard step she knew,
 turned anxiously around, the door opened, and fernand, dressed in the
 uniform of sub-lieutenant, stood before her.
 
“it was not the one she wished for most, but it seemed as if part of
 her past life had returned to her.
 
“mercédès seized fernand’s hands with transport which took for
 love, but which was only joy at being longer alone in the world, and
 seeing at last friend, after long hours of solitary sorrow. and then,
 it must be confessed, fernand had never been hated—he was only not
 precisely loved. another possessed all mercédès’ heart; that other was
 absent, had disappeared, perhaps was dead. at this last thought
 mercédès burst into flood of tears, and wrung her hands in agony; but
 the thought, which she had always repelled before when it was suggested
 to her by another, came now in full force upon her mind; and then, too,
 old dantès incessantly said to her, ‘our edmond is dead; if were
 not, would return to us.’
 
“the old man died, as i have told you; had lived, mercédès,
 perchance, had not become the wife of another, for would have been
 there to reproach her infidelity. fernand saw this, and when learned
 of the old man’s death returned. was now lieutenant. at his
 first coming had not said word of love to mercédès; at the second
 reminded her that loved her.
 
“mercédès begged for six months more in which to await and mourn for
 edmond.”
 
“so that,” said the abbé, with bitter smile, “that makes eighteen
 months in all. what more could the most devoted lover desire?” then he
 murmured the words of the english poet, “‘frailty, thy name is woman.’”
 
“six months afterwards,” continued caderousse, “the marriage took place
 in the church of accoules.”
 
“the very church in which she was to have married edmond,” murmured the
 priest; “there was only change of bridegrooms.”
 
“well, mercédès was married,” proceeded caderousse; “but although in
 the eyes of the world she appeared calm, she nearly fainted as she
 passed réserve, where, eighteen months before, the betrothal had
 been celebrated with him whom she might have known she still loved, had
 she looked to the bottom of her heart. fernand, more happy, but not
 more at his ease—for i saw at this time was in constant dread of
 edmond’s return—fernand was very anxious to get his wife away, and to
 depart himself. there were too many unpleasant possibilities associated
 with the catalans, and eight days after the wedding they left
 marseilles.”
 
“did you ever see mercédès again?” inquired the priest.
 
“yes, during the spanish war, at perpignan, where fernand had left her;
 she was attending to the education of her son.”
 
the abbé started. “her son?” said he.
 
“yes,” replied caderousse, “little albert.”
 
“but, then, to be able to instruct her child,” continued the abbé, “she
 must have received an education herself. i understood from edmond that
 she was the daughter of simple fisherman, beautiful but uneducated.”
 
“oh,” replied caderousse, “did know so little of his lovely
 betrothed? mercédès might have been queen, sir, if the crown were to
 be placed on the heads of the loveliest and most intelligent. fernand’s
 fortune was already waxing great, and she developed with his growing
 fortune. she learned drawing, music—everything. besides, i believe,
 between ourselves, she did this in order to distract her mind, that she
 might forget; and she only filled her head in order to alleviate the
 weight on her heart. but now her position in life is assured,”
 continued caderousse; “no doubt fortune and honors have comforted her;
 she is rich, countess, and yet——”
 
caderousse paused.
 
“and yet what?” asked the abbé.
 
“yet, i am sure, she is not happy,” said caderousse.
 
“what makes you believe this?”
 
“why, when i found myself utterly destitute, i thought my old friends
 would, perhaps, assist me. so i went to danglars, who would not even
 receive me. i called on fernand, who sent hundred francs by his
 valet-de-chambre.”
 
“then you did not see either of them?”
 
“no, but madame morcerf saw me.”
 
“how was that?”
 
“as i went away purse fell at my feet—it contained five-and-twenty
 louis; i raised my head quickly, and saw mercédès, who at once shut the
 blind.”
 
“and m. villefort?” asked the abbé.
 
“oh, never was friend of mine, i did not know him, and i had
 nothing to ask of him.”
 
“do you not know what became of him, and the share had in edmond’s
 misfortunes?”
 
“no; i only know that some time after edmond’s arrest, married
 mademoiselle saint-méran, and soon after left marseilles; doubt
 has been as lucky as the rest; doubt is as rich as danglars,
 as high in station as fernand. i only, as you see, have remained poor,
 wretched, and forgotten.”
 
“you are mistaken, my friend,” replied the abbé; “god may seem
 sometimes to forget for time, while his justice reposes, but there
 always comes moment when remembers—and behold—a proof!”
 
as spoke, the abbé took the diamond from his pocket, and giving it
 to caderousse, said, “here, my friend, take this diamond, it is yours.”
 
“what, for only?” cried caderousse, “ah, sir, do not jest with me!”
 
“this diamond was to have been shared among his friends. edmond had one
 friend only, and thus it cannot be divided. take the diamond, then, and
 sell it; it is worth fifty thousand francs, and i repeat my wish that
 this sum may suffice to release you from your wretchedness.”
 
0351m
 


“oh, sir,” said caderousse, putting out one hand timidly, and with the
 other wiping away the perspiration which bedewed his brow,—“oh, sir, do
 not make jest of the happiness or despair of man.”
 
“i know what happiness and what despair are, and i never make jest of
 such feelings. take it, then, but in exchange——”
 
caderousse, who touched the diamond, withdrew his hand.
 
the abbé smiled.
 
“in exchange,” continued, “give the red silk purse that m. morrel
 left on old dantès’ chimney-piece, and which you tell is still in
 your hands.”
 
caderousse, more and more astonished, went toward large oaken
 cupboard, opened it, and gave the abbé long purse of faded red silk,
 round which were two copper runners that had once been gilt. the abbé
 took it, and in return gave caderousse the diamond.
 
“oh, you are man of god, sir,” cried caderousse; “for one knew
 that edmond had given you this diamond, and you might have kept it.”
 
“which,” said the abbé to himself, “you would have done.” the abbé
 rose, took his hat and gloves. “well,” said, “all you have told me
 is perfectly true, then, and i may believe it in every particular.”
 
“see, sir,” replied caderousse, “in this corner is crucifix in holy
 wood—here on this shelf is my wife’s testament; open this book, and i
 will swear upon it with my hand on the crucifix. i will swear to you by
 my soul’s salvation, my faith as christian, i have told everything to
 you as it occurred, and as the recording angel will tell it to the ear
 of god at the day of the last judgment!”
 
“’tis well,” said the abbé, convinced by his manner and tone that
 caderousse spoke the truth. “’tis well, and may this money profit you!
 adieu; i go far from men who thus so bitterly injure each other.”
 
the abbé with difficulty got away from the enthusiastic thanks of
 caderousse, opened the door himself, got out and mounted his horse,
 once more saluted the innkeeper, who kept uttering his loud farewells,
 and then returned by the road had travelled in coming.
 
when caderousse turned around, saw behind him carconte, paler and
 trembling more than ever.
 
“is, then, all that i have heard really true?” she inquired.
 
“what? that has given the diamond to us only?” inquired caderousse,
 half bewildered with joy; “yes, nothing more true! see, here it is.”
 
the woman gazed at it moment, and then said, in gloomy voice,
 “suppose it’s false?”
 
caderousse started and turned pale.
 
“false!” muttered. “false! why should that man give false
 diamond?”
 
0349m
 


“to get your secret without paying for it, you blockhead!”
 
caderousse remained for moment aghast under the weight of such an
 idea.
 
“oh!” said, taking up his hat, which placed on the red
 handkerchief tied round his head, “we will soon find out.”
 
“in what way?”
 
“why, the fair is on at beaucaire, there are always jewellers from
 paris there, and i will show it to them. look after the house, wife,
 and i shall be back in two hours,” and caderousse left the house in
 haste, and ran rapidly in the direction opposite to that which the
 priest had taken.
 
“fifty thousand francs!” muttered carconte when left alone; “it is a
 large sum of money, but it is not fortune.”
 

volume two
 
20009m
 


20011m
 


20019m
 



chapter 28. the prison register
 
the day after that in which the scene we have just described had taken
 place on the road between bellegarde and beaucaire, man of about
 thirty or two-and-thirty, dressed in bright blue frock coat, nankeen
 trousers, and white waistcoat, having the appearance and accent of an
 englishman, presented himself before the mayor of marseilles.
 
“sir,” said he, “i am chief clerk of the house of thomson & french, of
 rome. we are, and have been these ten years, connected with the house
 of morrel & son, of marseilles. we have hundred thousand francs or
 thereabouts loaned on their securities, and we are little uneasy at
 reports that have reached us that the firm is on the brink of ruin. i
 have come, therefore, express from rome, to ask you for information.”
 
“sir,” replied the mayor. “i know very well that during the last four
 or five years misfortune has seemed to pursue m. morrel. has lost
 four or five vessels, and suffered by three or four bankruptcies; but
 it is not for me, although i am creditor myself to the amount of ten
 thousand francs, to give any information as to the state of his
 finances. ask of me, as mayor, what is my opinion of m. morrel, and i
 shall say that is man honorable to the last degree, and who has up
 to this time fulfilled every engagement with scrupulous punctuality.
 this is all i can say, sir; if you wish to learn more, address yourself
 to m. boville, the inspector of prisons, no. 15, rue nouailles;
 has, i believe, two hundred thousand francs in morrel’s hands, and
 if there be any grounds for apprehension, as this is greater amount
 than mine, you will most probably find him better informed than
 myself.”
 
the englishman seemed to appreciate this extreme delicacy, made his bow
 and went away, proceeding with characteristic british stride towards
 the street mentioned.
 
m. boville was in his private room, and the englishman, on
 perceiving him, made gesture of surprise, which seemed to indicate
 that it was not the first time had been in his presence. as to m. de
 boville, was in such state of despair, that it was evident all the
 faculties of his mind, absorbed in the thought which occupied him at
 the moment, did not allow either his memory or his imagination to stray
 to the past.
 
the englishman, with the coolness of his nation, addressed him in terms
 nearly similar to those with which had accosted the mayor of
 marseilles.
 
“oh, sir,” exclaimed m. boville, “your fears are unfortunately but
 too well founded, and you see before you man in despair. i had two
 hundred thousand francs placed in the hands of morrel & son; these two
 hundred thousand francs were the dowry of my daughter, who was to be
 married in fortnight, and these two hundred thousand francs were
 payable, half on the 15th of this month, and the other half on the 15th
 of next month. i had informed m. morrel of my desire to have these
 payments punctually, and has been here within the last half-hour to
 tell that if his ship, the _pharaon_, did not come into port on the
 15th, would be wholly unable to make this payment.”
 
“but,” said the englishman, “this looks very much like suspension of
 payment.”
 
“it looks more like bankruptcy!” exclaimed m. boville despairingly.
 
the englishman appeared to reflect moment, and then said, “from which
 it would appear, sir, that this credit inspires you with considerable
 apprehension?”
 
“to tell you the truth, i consider it lost.”
 
“well, then, i will buy it of you!”
 
“you?”
 
“yes, i!”
 
“but at tremendous discount, of course?”
 
“no, for two hundred thousand francs. our house,” added the englishman
 with laugh, “does not do things in that way.”
 
“and you will pay——”
 
“ready money.”
 
20023m
 


and the englishman drew from his pocket bundle of bank-notes, which
 might have been twice the sum m. boville feared to lose. ray of
 joy passed across m. boville’s countenance, yet made an effort at
 self-control, and said:
 
“sir, i ought to tell you that, in all probability, you will not
 realize six per cent of this sum.”
 
“that’s affair of mine,” replied the englishman, “that is the affair
 of the house of thomson & french, in whose name i act. they have,
 perhaps, some motive to serve in hastening the ruin of rival firm.
 but all i know, sir, is, that i am ready to hand you over this sum in
 exchange for your assignment of the debt. i only ask brokerage.”
 
“of course, that is perfectly just,” cried m. boville. “the
 commission is usually one and half; will you have two—three—five per
 cent, or even more? whatever you say.”
 
“sir,” replied the englishman, laughing, “i am like my house, and do
 not do such things—no, the commission i ask is quite different.”
 
“name it, sir, i beg.”
 
“you are the inspector of prisons?”
 
“i have been so these fourteen years.”
 
“you keep the registers of entries and departures?”
 
“i do.”
 
“to these registers there are added notes relative to the prisoners?”
 
“there are special reports on every prisoner.”
 
“well, sir, i was educated at rome by poor devil of an abbé, who
 disappeared suddenly. i have since learned that was confined in the
 château d’if, and i should like to learn some particulars of his
 death.”
 
“what was his name?”
 
“the abbé faria.”
 
“oh, i recollect him perfectly,” cried m. boville; “he was crazy.”
 
“so they said.”
 
“oh, was, decidedly.”
 
“very possibly; but what sort of madness was it?”
 
“he pretended to know of an immense treasure, and offered vast sums to
 the government if they would liberate him.”
 
“poor devil!—and is dead?”
 
“yes, sir, five or six months ago, last february.”
 
“you have good memory, sir, to recollect dates so well.”
 
“i recollect this, because the poor devil’s death was accompanied by a
 singular incident.”
 
“may i ask what that was?” said the englishman with an expression of
 curiosity, which close observer would have been astonished at
 discovering in his phlegmatic countenance.
 
“oh dear, yes, sir; the abbé’s dungeon was forty or fifty feet distant
 from that of one of bonaparte’s emissaries,—one of those who had
 contributed the most to the return of the usurper in 1815, very
 resolute and very dangerous man.”
 
“indeed!” said the englishman.
 
“yes,” replied m. boville; “i myself had occasion to see this man in
 1816 or 1817, and we could only go into his dungeon with file of
 soldiers. that man made deep impression on me; i shall never forget
 his countenance!”
 
20025m
 


the englishman smiled imperceptibly.
 
“and you say, sir,” interposed, “that the two dungeons——”
 
“were separated by distance of fifty feet; but it appears that this
 edmond dantès——”
 
“this dangerous man’s name was——”
 
“edmond dantès. it appears, sir, that this edmond dantès had procured
 tools, or made them, for they found tunnel through which the
 prisoners held communication with one another.”
 
“this tunnel was dug, doubt, with an intention of escape?”
 
“no doubt; but unfortunately for the prisoners, the abbé faria had an
 attack of catalepsy, and died.”
 
“that must have cut short the projects of escape.”
 
“for the dead man, yes,” replied m. boville, “but not for the
 survivor; on the contrary, this dantès saw means of accelerating his
 escape. he, doubt, thought that prisoners who died in the château
 d’if were interred in an ordinary burial-ground, and conveyed the
 dead man into his own cell, took his place in the sack in which they
 had sewed up the corpse, and awaited the moment of interment.”
 
“it was bold step, and one that showed some courage,” remarked the
 englishman.
 
“as i have already told you, sir, was very dangerous man; and,
 fortunately, by his own act disembarrassed the government of the fears
 it had on his account.”
 
“how was that?”
 
“how? do you not comprehend?”
 
“no.”
 
“the château d’if has cemetery, and they simply throw the dead into
 the sea, after fastening thirty-six-pound cannon-ball to their feet.”
 
“well?” observed the englishman as if were slow of comprehension.
 
“well, they fastened thirty-six-pound ball to his feet, and threw him
 into the sea.”
 
“really!” exclaimed the englishman.
 
“yes, sir,” continued the inspector of prisons. “you may imagine the
 amazement of the fugitive when found himself flung headlong over the
 rocks! i should like to have seen his face at that moment.”
 
“that would have been difficult.”
 
“no matter,” replied boville, in supreme good-humor at the certainty
 of recovering his two hundred thousand francs,—“no matter, i can fancy
 it.” and shouted with laughter.
 
“so can i,” said the englishman, and laughed too; but laughed as
 the english do, “at the end of his teeth.”
 
“and so,” continued the englishman who first gained his composure, “he
 was drowned?”
 
“unquestionably.”
 
“so that the governor got rid of the dangerous and the crazy prisoner
 at the same time?”
 
“precisely.”
 
20027m
 


“but some official document was drawn up as to this affair, i suppose?”
 inquired the englishman.
 
“yes, yes, the mortuary deposition. you understand, dantès’ relations,
 if had any, might have some interest in knowing if were dead or
 alive.”
 
“so that now, if there were anything to inherit from him, they may do
 so with easy conscience. is dead, and mistake about it.”
 
“oh, yes; and they may have the fact attested whenever they please.”
 
“so be it,” said the englishman. “but to return to these registers.”
 
“true, this story has diverted our attention from them. excuse me.”
 
“excuse you for what? for the story? by means; it really seems to me
 very curious.”
 
“yes, indeed. so, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor abbé,
 who really was gentleness itself.”
 
“yes, you will much oblige me.”
 
“go into my study here, and i will show it to you.”
 
and they both entered m. boville’s study. everything was here
 arranged in perfect order; each register had its number, each file of
 papers its place. the inspector begged the englishman to seat himself
 in an armchair, and placed before him the register and documents
 relative to the château d’if, giving him all the time desired for
 the examination, while boville seated himself in corner, and began
 to read his newspaper. the englishman easily found the entries relative
 to the abbé faria; but it seemed that the history which the inspector
 had related interested him greatly, for after having perused the first
 documents turned over the leaves until reached the deposition
 respecting edmond dantès. there found everything arranged in due
 order,—the accusation, examination, morrel’s petition, m. de
 villefort’s marginal notes. folded up the accusation quietly, and
 put it as quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the
 name of noirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the application
 dated 10th april, 1815, in which morrel, by the deputy procureur’s
 advice, exaggerated with the best intentions (for napoleon was then on
 the throne) the services dantès had rendered to the imperial
 cause—services which villefort’s certificates rendered indisputable.
 then saw through the whole thing. this petition to napoleon, kept
 back by villefort, had become, under the second restoration, terrible
 weapon against him in the hands of the king’s attorney. was no
 longer astonished when searched on to find in the register this
 note, placed in bracket against his name:
 
edmond dantès.
 
an inveterate bonapartist; took an active part in the return from the
 island of elba.
 
to be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closely watched
 and guarded.
 
beneath these lines was written in another hand: “see note
 above—nothing can be done.”
 
compared the writing in the bracket with the writing of the
 certificate placed beneath morrel’s petition, and discovered that the
 note in the bracket was the same writing as the certificate—that is to
 say, was in villefort’s handwriting.
 
20029m
 


as to the note which accompanied this, the englishman understood that
 it might have been added by some inspector who had taken momentary
 interest in dantès’ situation, but who had, from the remarks we have
 quoted, found it impossible to give any effect to the interest had
 felt.
 
as we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that might not
 disturb the abbé faria’s pupil in his researches, had seated himself in
 corner, and was reading _le drapeau blanc_. did not see the
 englishman fold up and place in his pocket the accusation written by
 danglars under the arbor of réserve, and which had the postmark,
 “marseilles, 27th february, delivery 6 o’clock, p.m.”
 
but it must be said that if had seen it, attached so little
 importance to this scrap of paper, and so much importance to his two
 hundred thousand francs, that would not have opposed whatever the
 englishman might do, however irregular it might be.
 
“thanks,” said the latter, closing the register with slam, “i have
 all i want; now it is for to perform my promise. give simple
 assignment of your debt; acknowledge therein the receipt of the cash,
 and i will hand you over the money.”
 
rose, gave his seat to m. boville, who took it without ceremony,
 and quickly drew up the required assignment, while the englishman
 counted out the bank-notes on the other side of the desk.
 


chapter 29. the house of morrel & son
 
anyone who had quitted marseilles few years previously, well
 acquainted with the interior of morrel’s warehouse, and had returned at
 this date, would have found great change. instead of that air of
 life, of comfort, and of happiness that permeates flourishing and
 prosperous business establishment—instead of merry faces at the
 windows, busy clerks hurrying to and fro in the long corridors—instead
 of the court filled with bales of goods, re-echoing with the cries and
 the jokes of porters, one would have immediately perceived all aspect
 of sadness and gloom. out of all the numerous clerks that used to fill
 the deserted corridor and the empty office, but two remained. one was a
 young man of three or four-and-twenty, who was in love with m. morrel’s
 daughter, and had remained with him in spite of the efforts of his
 friends to induce him to withdraw; the other was an old one-eyed
 cashier, called “cocles,” or “cock-eye,” nickname given him by the
 young men who used to throng this vast now almost deserted bee-hive,
 and which had so completely replaced his real name that would not,
 in all probability, have replied to anyone who addressed him by it.
 
cocles remained in m. morrel’s service, and most singular change had
 taken place in his position; had at the same time risen to the rank
 of cashier, and sunk to the rank of servant. was, however, the
 same cocles, good, patient, devoted, but inflexible on the subject of
 arithmetic, the only point on which would have stood firm against
 the world, even against m. morrel; and strong in the
 multiplication-table, which had at his fingers’ ends, matter what
 scheme or what trap was laid to catch him.
 
in the midst of the disasters that befell the house, cocles was the
 only one unmoved. but this did not arise from want of affection; on
 the contrary, from firm conviction. like the rats that one by one
 forsake the doomed ship even before the vessel weighs anchor, so all
 the numerous clerks had by degrees deserted the office and the
 warehouse. cocles had seen them go without thinking of inquiring the
 cause of their departure. everything was as we have said, question of
 arithmetic to cocles, and during twenty years had always seen all
 payments made with such exactitude, that it seemed as impossible to him
 that the house should stop payment, as it would to miller that the
 river that had so long turned his mill should cease to flow.
 
nothing had as yet occurred to shake cocles’ belief; the last month’s
 payment had been made with the most scrupulous exactitude; cocles had
 detected an overbalance of fourteen sous in his cash, and the same
 evening had brought them to m. morrel, who, with melancholy smile,
 threw them into an almost empty drawer, saying:
 
“thanks, cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers.”
 
cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of m. morrel,
 himself the pearl of the honest men of marseilles, flattered him more
 than present of fifty crowns. but since the end of the month m.
 morrel had passed many an anxious hour.
 
in order to meet the payments then due; had collected all his
 resources, and, fearing lest the report of his distress should get
 bruited abroad at marseilles when was known to be reduced to such an
 extremity, went to the beaucaire fair to sell his wife’s and
 daughter’s jewels and portion of his plate. by this means the end of
 the month was passed, but his resources were now exhausted. credit,
 owing to the reports afloat, was longer to be had; and to meet the
 one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the present month, and
 the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th of the next month to m.
 boville, m. morrel had, in reality, hope but the return of the
 _pharaon_, of whose departure had learnt from vessel which had
 weighed anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived in
 harbor.
 
but this vessel which, like the _pharaon_, came from calcutta, had been
 in for fortnight, while intelligence had been received of the
 _pharaon_.
 
20033m
 


such was the state of affairs when, the day after his interview with m.
 boville, the confidential clerk of the house of thomson & french of
 rome, presented himself at m. morrel’s.
 
emmanuel received him; this young man was alarmed by the appearance of
 every new face, for every new face might be that of new creditor,
 come in anxiety to question the head of the house. the young man,
 wishing to spare his employer the pain of this interview, questioned
 the new-comer; but the stranger declared that had nothing to say to
 m. emmanuel, and that his business was with m. morrel in person.
 
emmanuel sighed, and summoned cocles. cocles appeared, and the young
 man bade him conduct the stranger to m. morrel’s apartment. cocles went
 first, and the stranger followed him. on the staircase they met a
 beautiful girl of sixteen or seventeen, who looked with anxiety at the
 stranger.
 
“m. morrel is in his room, is not, mademoiselle julie?” said the
 cashier.
 
“yes; i think so, at least,” said the young girl hesitatingly. “go and
 see, cocles, and if my father is there, announce this gentleman.”
 
“it will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle,” returned the
 englishman. “m. morrel does not know my name; this worthy gentleman has
 only to announce the confidential clerk of the house of thomson &
 french of rome, with whom your father does business.”
 
the young girl turned pale and continued to descend, while the stranger
 and cocles continued to mount the staircase. she entered the office
 where emmanuel was, while cocles, by the aid of key possessed,
 opened door in the corner of landing-place on the second staircase,
 conducted the stranger into an antechamber, opened second door, which
 closed behind him, and after having left the clerk of the house of
 thomson & french alone, returned and signed to him that could enter.
 
the englishman entered, and found morrel seated at table, turning
 over the formidable columns of his ledger, which contained the list of
 his liabilities. at the sight of the stranger, m. morrel closed the
 ledger, arose, and offered seat to the stranger; and when had seen
 him seated, resumed his own chair. fourteen years had changed the
 worthy merchant, who, in his thirty-sixth year at the opening of this
 history, was now in his fiftieth; his hair had turned white, time and
 sorrow had ploughed deep furrows on his brow, and his look, once so
 firm and penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, as if feared
 being forced to fix his attention on some particular thought or person.
 
the englishman looked at him with an air of curiosity, evidently
 mingled with interest. “monsieur,” said morrel, whose uneasiness was
 increased by this examination, “you wish to speak to me?”
 
“yes, monsieur; you are aware from whom i come?”
 
“the house of thomson & french; at least, so my cashier tells me.”
 
“he has told you rightly. the house of thomson & french had 300,000 or
 400,000 francs to pay this month in france; and, knowing your strict
 punctuality, have collected all the bills bearing your signature, and
 charged as they became due to present them, and to employ the money
 otherwise.”
 
morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead, which was
 covered with perspiration.
 
“so then, sir,” said morrel, “you hold bills of mine?”
 
“yes, and for considerable sum.”
 
“what is the amount?” asked morrel with voice strove to render
 firm.
 
20035m
 


“here is,” said the englishman, taking quantity of papers from his
 pocket, “an assignment of 200,000 francs to our house by m. boville,
 the inspector of prisons, to whom they are due. you acknowledge, of
 course, that you owe this sum to him?”
 
“yes; placed the money in my hands at four and half per cent
 nearly five years ago.”
 
“when are you to pay?”
 
“half the 15th of this month, half the 15th of next.”
 
“just so; and now here are 32,500 francs payable shortly; they are all
 signed by you, and assigned to our house by the holders.”
 
“i recognize them,” said morrel, whose face was suffused, as thought
 that, for the first time in his life, would be unable to honor his
 own signature. “is this all?”
 
“no, i have for the end of the month these bills which have been
 assigned to us by the house of pascal, and the house of wild & turner
 of marseilles, amounting to nearly 55,000 francs; in all, 287,500
 francs.”
 
it is impossible to describe what morrel suffered during this
 enumeration. “two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred
 francs,” repeated he.
 
“yes, sir,” replied the englishman. “i will not,” continued he, after a
 moment’s silence, “conceal from you, that while your probity and
 exactitude up to this moment are universally acknowledged, yet the
 report is current in marseilles that you are not able to meet your
 liabilities.”
 
at this almost brutal speech morrel turned deathly pale.
 
“sir,” said he, “up to this time—and it is now more than
 four-and-twenty years since i received the direction of this house from
 my father, who had himself conducted it for five-and-thirty years—never
 has anything bearing the signature of morrel & been dishonored.”
 
“i know that,” replied the englishman. “but as man of honor should
 answer another, tell fairly, shall you pay these with the same
 punctuality?”
 
morrel shuddered, and looked at the man, who spoke with more assurance
 than had hitherto shown.
 
“to questions frankly put,” said he, “a straightforward answer should
 be given. yes, i shall pay, if, as i hope, my vessel arrives safely;
 for its arrival will again procure the credit which the numerous
 accidents, of which i have been the victim, have deprived me; but if
 the _pharaon_ should be lost, and this last resource be gone——”
 
the poor man’s eyes filled with tears.
 
“well,” said the other, “if this last resource fail you?”
 
“well,” returned morrel, “it is cruel thing to be forced to say, but,
 already used to misfortune, i must habituate myself to shame. i fear i
 shall be forced to suspend payment.”
 
“have you friends who could assist you?”
 
morrel smiled mournfully.
 
“in business, sir,” said he, “one has friends, only correspondents.”
 
“it is true,” murmured the englishman; “then you have but one hope.”
 
“but one.”
 
“the last?”
 
“the last.”
 
“so that if this fail——”
 
“i am ruined,—completely ruined!”
 
“as i was on my way here, vessel was coming into port.”
 
“i know it, sir; young man, who still adheres to my fallen fortunes,
 passes part of his time in belvedere at the top of the house, in
 hopes of being the first to announce good news to me; has informed
 of the arrival of this ship.”
 
“and it is not yours?”
 
“no, she is bordeaux vessel, _la gironde_; she comes from india also;
 but she is not mine.”
 
“perhaps she has spoken to the _pharaon_, and brings you some tidings
 of her?”
 
“shall i tell you plainly one thing, sir? i dread almost as much to
 receive any tidings of my vessel as to remain in doubt. uncertainty is
 still hope.” then in low voice morrel added,—“this delay is not
 natural. the _pharaon_ left calcutta the 5th of february; she ought to
 have been here month ago.”
 
“what is that?” said the englishman. “what is the meaning of that
 noise?”
 
“oh, my god!” cried morrel, turning pale, “what is it?”
 
loud noise was heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, and
 half-stifled sobs. morrel rose and advanced to the door; but his
 strength failed him and sank into chair. the two men remained
 opposite one another, morrel trembling in every limb, the stranger
 gazing at him with an air of profound pity. the noise had ceased; but
 it seemed that morrel expected something—something had occasioned the
 noise, and something must follow. the stranger fancied heard
 footsteps on the stairs; and that the footsteps, which were those of
 several persons, stopped at the door. key was inserted in the lock of
 the first door, and the creaking of hinges was audible.
 
“there are only two persons who have the key to that door,” murmured
 morrel, “cocles and julie.”
 
at this instant the second door opened, and the young girl, her eyes
 bathed with tears, appeared. morrel rose tremblingly, supporting
 himself by the arm of the chair. would have spoken, but his voice
 failed him.
 
“oh, father!” said she, clasping her hands, “forgive your child for
 being the bearer of evil tidings.”
 
morrel again changed color. julie threw herself into his arms.
 
“oh, father, father!” murmured she, “courage!”
 
“the _pharaon_ has gone down, then?” said morrel in hoarse voice. the
 young girl did not speak; but she made an affirmative sign with her
 head as she lay on her father’s breast.
 
“and the crew?” asked morrel.
 
“saved,” said the girl; “saved by the crew of the vessel that has just
 entered the harbor.”
 
morrel raised his two hands to heaven with an expression of resignation
 and sublime gratitude.
 
“thanks, my god,” said he, “at least thou strikest but alone.”
 
tear moistened the eye of the phlegmatic englishman.
 
“come in, come in,” said morrel, “for i presume you are all at the
 door.”
 
scarcely had uttered those words when madame morrel entered weeping
 bitterly. emmanuel followed her, and in the antechamber were visible
 the rough faces of seven or eight half-naked sailors. at the sight of
 these men the englishman started and advanced step; then restrained
 himself, and retired into the farthest and most obscure corner of the
 apartment. madame morrel sat down by her husband and took one of his
 hands in hers, julie still lay with her head on his shoulder, emmanuel
 stood in the centre of the chamber and seemed to form the link between
 morrel’s family and the sailors at the door.
 
“how did this happen?” said morrel.
 
“draw nearer, penelon,” said the young man, “and tell us all about it.”
 
an old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced, twirling the
 remains of hat between his hands.
 
“good-day, m. morrel,” said he, as if had just quitted marseilles
 the previous evening, and had just returned from aix or toulon.
 
“good-day, penelon,” returned morrel, who could not refrain from
 smiling through his tears, “where is the captain?”
 
“the captain, m. morrel,—he has stayed behind sick at palma; but please
 god, it won’t be much, and you will see him in few days all alive and
 hearty.”
 
“well, now tell your story, penelon.”
 
20039m
 


penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand before his mouth,
 turned his head, and sent long jet of tobacco-juice into the
 antechamber, advanced his foot, balanced himself, and began.
 
“you see, m. morrel,” said he, “we were somewhere between cape blanc
 and cape boyador, sailing with fair breeze, south-south-west after a
 week’s calm, when captain gaumard comes up to me—i was at the helm i
 should tell you—and says, ‘penelon, what do you think of those clouds
 coming up over there?’ i was just then looking at them myself. ‘what do
 i think, captain? why i think that they are rising faster than they
 have any business to do, and that they would not be so black if they
 didn’t mean mischief.’—‘that’s my opinion too,’ said the captain, ‘and
 i’ll take precautions accordingly. we are carrying too much canvas.
 avast, there, all hands! take in the studding-sails and stow the flying
 jib.’ it was time; the squall was on us, and the vessel began to heel.
 ‘ah,’ said the captain, ‘we have still too much canvas set; all hands
 lower the mainsail!’ five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed
 under mizzen-topsails and top-gallant sails. ‘well, penelon,’ said the
 captain, ‘what makes you shake your head?’ ‘why,’ i says, ‘i still
 think you’ve got too much on.’ ‘i think you’re right,’ answered he, ‘we
 shall have gale.’ ‘a gale? more than that, we shall have tempest,
 or i don’t know what’s what.’ you could see the wind coming like the
 dust at montredon; luckily the captain understood his business. ‘take
 in two reefs in the top-sails,’ cried the captain; ‘let go the
 bowlin’s, haul the brace, lower the top-gallant sails, haul out the
 reef-tackles on the yards.’”
 
20041m
 


“that was not enough for those latitudes,” said the englishman; “i
 should have taken four reefs in the topsails and furled the spanker.”
 
his firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made everyone start. penelon
 put his hand over his eyes, and then stared at the man who thus
 criticized the manœuvres of his captain.
 
“we did better than that, sir,” said the old sailor respectfully; “we
 put the helm up to run before the tempest; ten minutes after we struck
 our top-sails and scudded under bare poles.”
 
“the vessel was very old to risk that,” said the englishman.
 
“eh, it was that that did the business; after pitching heavily for
 twelve hours we sprung leak. ‘penelon,’ said the captain, ‘i think we
 are sinking, give the helm, and go down into the hold.’ i gave him
 the helm, and descended; there was already three feet of water. ‘all
 hands to the pumps!’ i shouted; but it was too late, and it seemed the
 more we pumped the more came in. ‘ah,’ said i, after four hours’ work,
 ‘since we are sinking, let us sink; we can die but once.’ ‘is that the
 example you set, penelon?’ cries the captain; ‘very well, wait a
 minute.’ went into his cabin and came back with brace of pistols.
 ‘i will blow the brains out of the first man who leaves the pump,’ said
 he.”
 
“well done!” said the englishman.
 
20043m
 


“there’s nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons,” continued
 the sailor; “and during that time the wind had abated, and the gone
 down, but the water kept rising; not much, only two inches an hour, but
 still it rose. two inches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve
 hours that makes two feet, and three we had before, that makes five.
 ‘come,’ said the captain, ‘we have done all in our power, and m. morrel
 will have nothing to reproach us with, we have tried to save the ship,
 let us now save ourselves. to the boats, my lads, as quick as you can.’
 now,” continued penelon, “you see, m. morrel, sailor is attached to
 his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to be told
 twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us, and seemed to
 say, ‘get along—save yourselves.’ we soon launched the boat, and all
 eight of us got into it. the captain descended last, or rather, did
 not descend, would not quit the vessel; so i took him round the
 waist, and threw him into the boat, and then i jumped after him. it was
 time, for just as i jumped the deck burst with noise like the
 broadside of man-of-war. ten minutes after she pitched forward, then
 the other way, spun round and round, and then good-bye to the
 _pharaon_. as for us, we were three days without anything to eat or
 drink, so that we began to think of drawing lots who should feed the
 rest, when we saw _la gironde_; we made signals of distress, she
 perceived us, made for us, and took us all on board. there now, m.
 morrel, that’s the whole truth, on the honor of sailor; is not it
 true, you fellows there?” general murmur of approbation showed that
 the narrator had faithfully detailed their misfortunes and sufferings.
 
“well, well,” said m. morrel, “i know there was one in fault but
 destiny. it was the will of god that this should happen, blessed be his
 name. what wages are due to you?”
 
“oh, don’t let us talk of that, m. morrel.”
 
“yes, but we will talk of it.”
 
“well, then, three months,” said penelon.
 
“cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these good fellows,” said
 morrel. “at another time,” added he, “i should have said, give them,
 besides, two hundred francs over as present; but times are changed,
 and the little money that remains to is not my own, so do not think
 mean on this account.”
 
penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged few words with them.
 
“as for that, m. morrel,” said he, again turning his quid, “as for
 that——”
 
“as for what?”
 
“the money.”
 
“well——”
 
“well, we all say that fifty francs will be enough for us at present,
 and that we will wait for the rest.”
 
“thanks, my friends, thanks!” cried morrel gratefully; “take it—take
 it; and if you can find another employer, enter his service; you are
 free to do so.”
 
these last words produced prodigious effect on the seaman. penelon
 nearly swallowed his quid; fortunately recovered.
 
“what, m. morrel!” said in low voice, “you send us away; you are
 then angry with us!”
 
“no, no,” said m. morrel, “i am not angry, quite the contrary, and i do
 not send you away; but i have more ships, and therefore i do not
 want any sailors.”
 
“no more ships!” returned penelon; “well, then, you’ll build some;
 we’ll wait for you.”
 
“i have money to build ships with, penelon,” said the poor owner
 mournfully, “so i cannot accept your kind offer.”
 
“no more money? then you must not pay us; we can scud, like the
 _pharaon_, under bare poles.”
 
“enough, enough!” cried morrel, almost overpowered; “leave me, i pray
 you; we shall meet again in happier time. emmanuel, go with them, and
 see that my orders are executed.”
 
“at least, we shall see each other again, m. morrel?” asked penelon.
 
“yes; i hope so, at least. now go.” made sign to cocles, who went
 first; the seamen followed him and emmanuel brought up the rear. “now,”
 said the owner to his wife and daughter, “leave me; i wish to speak
 with this gentleman.”
 
20045m
 


and glanced towards the clerk of thomson & french, who had remained
 motionless in the corner during this scene, in which had taken no
 part, except the few words we have mentioned. the two women looked at
 this person whose presence they had entirely forgotten, and retired;
 but, as she left the apartment, julie gave the stranger supplicating
 glance, to which replied by smile that an indifferent spectator
 would have been surprised to see on his stern features. the two men
 were left alone. “well, sir,” said morrel, sinking into chair, “you
 have heard all, and i have nothing further to tell you.”
 
“i see,” returned the englishman, “that fresh and unmerited
 misfortune has overwhelmed you, and this only increases my desire to
 serve you.”
 
“oh, sir!” cried morrel.
 
“let see,” continued the stranger, “i am one of your largest
 creditors.”
 
“your bills, at least, are the first that will fall due.”
 
“do you wish for time to pay?”
 
“a delay would save my honor, and consequently my life.”
 
“how long delay do you wish for?”
 
morrel reflected. “two months,” said he.
 
“i will give you three,” replied the stranger.
 
“but,” asked morrel, “will the house of thomson & french consent?”
 
“oh, i take everything on myself. today is the 5th of june.”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, renew these bills up to the 5th of september; and on the 5th of
 september at eleven o’clock (the hand of the clock pointed to eleven),
 i shall come to receive the money.”
 
“i shall expect you,” returned morrel; “and i will pay you—or i shall
 be dead.” these last words were uttered in so low tone that the
 stranger could not hear them. the bills were renewed, the old ones
 destroyed, and the poor ship-owner found himself with three months
 before him to collect his resources. the englishman received his thanks
 with the phlegm peculiar to his nation; and morrel, overwhelming him
 with grateful blessings, conducted him to the staircase. the stranger
 met julie on the stairs; she pretended to be descending, but in reality
 she was waiting for him. “oh, sir”—said she, clasping her hands.
 
“mademoiselle,” said the stranger, “one day you will receive letter
 signed ‘sinbad the sailor.’ do exactly what the letter bids you,
 however strange it may appear.”
 
“yes, sir,” returned julie.
 
“do you promise?”
 
“i swear to you i will.”
 
“it is well. adieu, mademoiselle. continue to be the good, sweet girl
 you are at present, and i have great hopes that heaven will reward you
 by giving you emmanuel for husband.”
 
julie uttered faint cry, blushed like rose, and leaned against the
 baluster. the stranger waved his hand, and continued to descend. in the
 court found penelon, who, with rouleau of hundred francs in
 either hand, seemed unable to make up his mind to retain them. “come
 with me, my friend,” said the englishman; “i wish to speak to you.”
 


chapter 30. the fifth of september
 
the extension provided for by the agent of thomson & french, at the
 moment when morrel expected it least, was to the poor shipowner so
 decided stroke of good fortune that almost dared to believe that
 fate was at length grown weary of wasting her spite upon him. the same
 day told his wife, emmanuel, and his daughter all that had occurred;
 and ray of hope, if not of tranquillity, returned to the family.
 unfortunately, however, morrel had not only engagements with the house
 of thomson & french, who had shown themselves so considerate towards
 him; and, as had said, in business had correspondents, and not
 friends. when thought the matter over, could by means account
 for this generous conduct on the part of thomson & french towards him;
 and could only attribute it to some such selfish argument as this: “we
 had better help man who owes us nearly 300,000 francs, and have those
 300,000 francs at the end of three months than hasten his ruin, and get
 only six or eight per cent of our money back again.”
 
unfortunately, whether through envy or stupidity, all morrel’s
 correspondents did not take this view; and some even came to contrary
 decision. the bills signed by morrel were presented at his office with
 scrupulous exactitude, and, thanks to the delay granted by the
 englishman, were paid by cocles with equal punctuality. cocles thus
 remained in his accustomed tranquillity. it was morrel alone who
 remembered with alarm, that if had to repay on the 15th the 50,000
 francs of m. boville, and on the 30th the 32,500 francs of bills,
 for which, as well as the debt due to the inspector of prisons, had
 time granted, must be ruined man.
 
the opinion of all the commercial men was that, under the reverses
 which had successively weighed down morrel, it was impossible for him
 to remain solvent. great, therefore, was the astonishment when at the
 end of the month, cancelled all his obligations with his usual
 punctuality. still confidence was not restored to all minds, and the
 general opinion was that the complete ruin of the unfortunate shipowner
 had been postponed only until the end of the month.
 
the month passed, and morrel made extraordinary efforts to get in all
 his resources. formerly his paper, at any date, was taken with
 confidence, and was even in request. morrel now tried to negotiate
 bills at ninety days only, and none of the banks would give him credit.
 fortunately, morrel had some funds coming in on which could rely;
 and, as they reached him, found himself in condition to meet his
 engagements when the end of july came.
 
the agent of thomson & french had not been again seen at marseilles;
 the day after, or two days after his visit to morrel, had
 disappeared; and as in that city had had intercourse but with the
 mayor, the inspector of prisons, and m. morrel, his departure left no
 trace except in the memories of these three persons. as to the sailors
 of the _pharaon_, they must have found snug berths elsewhere, for they
 also had disappeared.
 
captain gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returned from palma.
 delayed presenting himself at morrel’s, but the owner, hearing of
 his arrival, went to see him. the worthy shipowner knew, from penelon’s
 recital, of the captain’s brave conduct during the storm, and tried to
 console him. brought him also the amount of his wages, which captain
 gaumard had not dared to apply for.
 
as descended the staircase, morrel met penelon, who was going up.
 penelon had, it would seem, made good use of his money, for was
 newly clad. when saw his employer, the worthy tar seemed much
 embarrassed, drew on one side into the corner of the landing-place,
 passed his quid from one cheek to the other, stared stupidly with his
 great eyes, and only acknowledged the squeeze of the hand which morrel
 as usual gave him by slight pressure in return. morrel attributed
 penelon’s embarrassment to the elegance of his attire; it was evident
 the good fellow had not gone to such an expense on his own account; he
 was, doubt, engaged on board some other vessel, and thus his
 bashfulness arose from the fact of his not having, if we may so express
 ourselves, worn mourning for the _pharaon_ longer. perhaps had come
 to tell captain gaumard of his good luck, and to offer him employment
 from his new master.
 
“worthy fellows!” said morrel, as went away, “may your new master
 love you as i loved you, and be more fortunate than i have been!”
 
20049m
 


august rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of morrel to renew
 his credit or revive the old. on the 20th of august it was known at
 marseilles that had left town in the mailcoach, and then it was said
 that the bills would go to protest at the end of the month, and that
 morrel had gone away and left his chief clerk emmanuel, and his cashier
 cocles, to meet the creditors. but, contrary to all expectation, when
 the 31st of august came, the house opened as usual, and cocles appeared
 behind the grating of the counter, examined all bills presented with
 the usual scrutiny, and, from first to last, paid all with the usual
 precision. there came in, moreover, two drafts which m. morrel had
 fully anticipated, and which cocles paid as punctually as the bills
 which the shipowner had accepted. all this was incomprehensible, and
 then, with the tenacity peculiar to prophets of bad news, the failure
 was put off until the end of september.
 
on the 1st, morrel returned; was awaited by his family with extreme
 anxiety, for from this journey to paris they hoped great things. morrel
 had thought of danglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under
 great obligations to morrel in former days, since to him it was owing
 that danglars entered the service of the spanish banker, with whom he
 had laid the foundations of his vast wealth. it was said at this moment
 that danglars was worth from six to eight millions of francs, and had
 unlimited credit. danglars, then, without taking crown from his
 pocket, could save morrel; had but to pass his word for loan, and
 morrel was saved. morrel had long thought of danglars, but had kept
 away from some instinctive motive, and had delayed as long as possible
 availing himself of this last resource. and morrel was right, for he
 returned home crushed by the humiliation of refusal.
 
yet, on his arrival, morrel did not utter complaint, or say one harsh
 word. embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressed emmanuel’s
 hand with friendly warmth, and then going to his private room on the
 second floor had sent for cocles.
 
“then,” said the two women to emmanuel, “we are indeed ruined.”
 
it was agreed in brief council held among them, that julie should
 write to her brother, who was in garrison at nîmes, to come to them as
 speedily as possible. the poor women felt instinctively that they
 required all their strength to support the blow that impended. besides,
 maximilian morrel, though hardly two-and-twenty, had great influence
 over his father.
 
was strong-minded, upright young man. at the time when decided
 on his profession his father had desire to choose for him, but had
 consulted young maximilian’s taste. had at once declared for a
 military life, and had in consequence studied hard, passed brilliantly
 through the polytechnic school, and left it as sub-lieutenant of the
 53rd of the line. for year had held this rank, and expected
 promotion on the first vacancy. in his regiment maximilian morrel was
 noted for his rigid observance, not only of the obligations imposed on
 soldier, but also of the duties of man; and thus gained the name
 of “the stoic.” we need hardly say that many of those who gave him this
 epithet repeated it because they had heard it, and did not even know
 what it meant.
 
this was the young man whom his mother and sister called to their aid
 to sustain them under the serious trial which they felt they would soon
 have to endure. they had not mistaken the gravity of this event, for
 the moment after morrel had entered his private office with cocles,
 julie saw the latter leave it pale, trembling, and his features
 betraying the utmost consternation. she would have questioned him as he
 passed by her, but the worthy creature hastened down the staircase with
 unusual precipitation, and only raised his hands to heaven and
 exclaimed:
 
“oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, what dreadful misfortune! who could
 ever have believed it!”
 
moment afterwards julie saw him go upstairs carrying two or three
 heavy ledgers, portfolio, and bag of money.
 
morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and counted the
 money. all his funds amounted to 6,000 or 8,000 francs, his bills
 receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or 5,000, which, making the best of
 everything, gave him 14,000 francs to meet debts amounting to 287,500
 francs. had not even the means for making possible settlement on
 account.
 
however, when morrel went down to his dinner, appeared very calm.
 this calmness was more alarming to the two women than the deepest
 dejection would have been. after dinner morrel usually went out and
 used to take his coffee at the club of the phocéens, and read the
 _semaphore_; this day did not leave the house, but returned to his
 office.
 
as to cocles, seemed completely bewildered. for part of the day he
 went into the courtyard, seated himself on stone with his head bare
 and exposed to the blazing sun. emmanuel tried to comfort the women,
 but his eloquence faltered. the young man was too well acquainted with
 the business of the house, not to feel that great catastrophe hung
 over the morrel family. night came, the two women had watched, hoping
 that when left his room morrel would come to them, but they heard
 him pass before their door, and trying to conceal the noise of his
 footsteps. they listened; went into his sleeping-room, and fastened
 the door inside. madame morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half an
 hour after julie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes, and went
 stealthily along the passage, to see through the keyhole what her
 husband was doing.
 
in the passage she saw retreating shadow; it was julie, who, uneasy
 herself, had anticipated her mother. the young lady went towards madame
 morrel.
 
“he is writing,” she said.
 
they had understood each other without speaking. madame morrel looked
 again through the keyhole, morrel was writing; but madame morrel
 remarked, what her daughter had not observed, that her husband was
 writing on stamped paper. the terrible idea that was writing his
 will flashed across her; she shuddered, and yet had not strength to
 utter word.
 
next day m. morrel seemed as calm as ever, went into his office as
 usual, came to his breakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he
 placed his daughter beside him, took her head in his arms, and held her
 for long time against his bosom. in the evening, julie told her
 mother, that although was apparently so calm, she had noticed that
 her father’s heart beat violently.
 
the next two days passed in much the same way. on the evening of the
 4th of september, m. morrel asked his daughter for the key of his
 study. julie trembled at this request, which seemed to her of bad omen.
 why did her father ask for this key which she always kept, and which
 was only taken from her in childhood as punishment? the young girl
 looked at morrel.
 
“what have i done wrong, father,” she said, “that you should take this
 key from me?”
 
“nothing, my dear,” replied the unhappy man, the tears starting to his
 eyes at this simple question,—“nothing, only i want it.”
 
julie made pretence to feel for the key. “i must have left it in my
 room,” she said.
 
and she went out, but instead of going to her apartment she hastened to
 consult emmanuel.
 
“do not give this key to your father,” said he, “and tomorrow morning,
 if possible, do not quit him for moment.”
 
she questioned emmanuel, but knew nothing, or would not say what he
 knew.
 
during the night, between the 4th and 5th of september, madame morrel
 remained listening for every sound, and, until three o’clock in the
 morning, she heard her husband pacing the room in great agitation. it
 was three o’clock when threw himself on the bed. the mother and
 daughter passed the night together. they had expected maximilian since
 the previous evening. at eight o’clock in the morning morrel entered
 their chamber. was calm; but the agitation of the night was legible
 in his pale and careworn visage. they did not dare to ask him how he
 had slept. morrel was kinder to his wife, more affectionate to his
 daughter, than had ever been. could not cease gazing at and
 kissing the sweet girl. julie, mindful of emmanuel’s request, was
 following her father when quitted the room, but said to her
 quickly:
 
“remain with your mother, dearest.” julie wished to accompany him. “i
 wish you to do so,” said he.
 
this was the first time morrel had ever so spoken, but said it in a
 tone of paternal kindness, and julie did not dare to disobey. she
 remained at the same spot standing mute and motionless. an instant
 afterwards the door opened, she felt two arms encircle her, and mouth
 pressed her forehead. she looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy.
 
20053m
 


“maximilian, my dearest brother!” she cried.
 
at these words madame morrel rose, and threw herself into her son’s
 arms.
 
“mother,” said the young man, looking alternately at madame morrel and
 her daughter, “what has occurred—what has happened? your letter has
 frightened me, and i have come hither with all speed.”
 
“julie,” said madame morrel, making sign to the young man, “go and
 tell your father that maximilian has just arrived.”
 
the young lady rushed out of the apartment, but on the first step of
 the staircase she found man holding letter in his hand.
 
“are you not mademoiselle julie morrel?” inquired the man, with a
 strong italian accent.
 
“yes, sir,” replied julie with hesitation; “what is your pleasure? i do
 not know you.”
 
“read this letter,” said, handing it to her. julie hesitated. “it
 concerns the best interests of your father,” said the messenger.
 
the young girl hastily took the letter from him. she opened it quickly
 and read:
 
“go this moment to the allées meilhan, enter the house no. 15, ask
 the porter for the key of the room on the fifth floor, enter the
 apartment, take from the corner of the mantelpiece purse netted in
 red silk, and give it to your father. it is important that should
 receive it before eleven o’clock. you promised to obey implicitly.
 remember your oath.
 
“sinbad the sailor.”
 
the young girl uttered joyful cry, raised her eyes, looked round to
 question the messenger, but had disappeared. she cast her eyes again
 over the note to peruse it second time, and saw there was a
 postscript. she read:
 
“it is important that you should fulfil this mission in person and
 alone. if you go accompanied by any other person, or should anyone else
 go in your place, the porter will reply that does not know anything
 about it.”
 
this postscript decreased greatly the young girl’s happiness. was there
 nothing to fear? was there not some snare laid for her? her innocence
 had kept her in ignorance of the dangers that might assail young girl
 of her age. but there is need to know danger in order to fear it;
 indeed, it may be observed, that it is usually unknown perils that
 inspire the greatest terror.
 
julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel. yet, through singular
 impulse, it was neither to her mother nor her brother that she applied,
 but to emmanuel. she hastened down and told him what had occurred on
 the day when the agent of thomson & french had come to her father’s,
 related the scene on the staircase, repeated the promise she had made,
 and showed him the letter.
 
“you must go, then, mademoiselle,” said emmanuel.
 
“go there?” murmured julie.
 
“yes; i will accompany you.”
 
“but did you not read that i must be alone?” said julie.
 
“and you shall be alone,” replied the young man. “i will await you at
 the corner of the rue du musée, and if you are so long absent as to
 make uneasy, i will hasten to rejoin you, and woe to him of whom you
 shall have cause to complain to me!”
 
“then, emmanuel?” said the young girl with hesitation, “it is your
 opinion that i should obey this invitation?”
 
“yes. did not the messenger say your father’s safety depended upon it?”
 
“but what danger threatens him, then, emmanuel?” she asked.
 
emmanuel hesitated moment, but his desire to make julie decide
 immediately made him reply.
 
“listen,” said; “today is the 5th of september, is it not?”
 
“yes.”
 
“today, then, at eleven o’clock, your father has nearly three hundred
 thousand francs to pay?”
 
“yes, we know that.”
 
“well, then,” continued emmanuel, “we have not fifteen thousand francs
 in the house.”
 
“what will happen then?”
 
“why, if today before eleven o’clock your father has not found someone
 who will come to his aid, will be compelled at twelve o’clock to
 declare himself bankrupt.”
 
“oh, come, then, come!” cried she, hastening away with the young man.
 
during this time, madame morrel had told her everything. the young
 man knew quite well that, after the succession of misfortunes which had
 befallen his father, great changes had taken place in the style of
 living and housekeeping; but did not know that matters had reached
 such point. was thunderstruck. then, rushing hastily out of the
 apartment, ran upstairs, expecting to find his father in his study,
 but rapped there in vain.
 
while was yet at the door of the study heard the bedroom door
 open, turned, and saw his father. instead of going direct to his study,
 m. morrel had returned to his bedchamber, which was only this moment
 quitting. morrel uttered cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of
 whose arrival was ignorant. remained motionless on the spot,
 pressing with his left hand something had concealed under his coat.
 maximilian sprang down the staircase, and threw his arms round his
 father’s neck; but suddenly recoiled, and placed his right hand on
 morrel’s breast.
 
“father,” exclaimed, turning pale as death, “what are you going to
 do with that brace of pistols under your coat?”
 
“oh, this is what i feared!” said morrel.
 
“father, father, in heaven’s name,” exclaimed the young man, “what are
 these weapons for?”
 
“maximilian,” replied morrel, looking fixedly at his son, “you are a
 man, and man of honor. come, and i will explain to you.”
 
and with firm step morrel went up to his study, while maximilian
 followed him, trembling as went. morrel opened the door, and closed
 it behind his son; then, crossing the anteroom, went to his desk on
 which placed the pistols, and pointed with his finger to an open
 ledger. in this ledger was made out an exact balance-sheet of his
 affairs. morrel had to pay, within half an hour, 287,500 francs. all he
 possessed was 15,257 francs.
 
“read!” said morrel.
 
the young man was overwhelmed as read. morrel said not word. what
 could say? what need add to such desperate proof in figures?
 
“and have you done all that is possible, father, to meet this
 disastrous result?” asked the young man, after moment’s pause.
 
“i have,” replied morrel.
 
“you have money coming in on which you can rely?”
 
“none.”
 
“you have exhausted every resource?”
 
“all.”
 
“and in half an hour,” said maximilian in gloomy voice, “our name is
 dishonored!”
 
“blood washes out dishonor,” said morrel.
 
“you are right, father; i understand you.” then extending his hand
 towards one of the pistols, said, “there is one for you and one for
 me—thanks!”
 
morrel caught his hand. “your mother—your sister! who will support
 them?”
 
shudder ran through the young man’s frame. “father,” said, “do you
 reflect that you are bidding to live?”
 
“yes, i do so bid you,” answered morrel, “it is your duty. you have a
 calm, strong mind, maximilian. maximilian, you are ordinary man. i
 make requests or commands; i only ask you to examine my position as
 if it were your own, and then judge for yourself.”
 
the young man reflected for moment, then an expression of sublime
 resignation appeared in his eyes, and with slow and sad gesture he
 took off his two epaulets, the insignia of his rank.
 
“be it so, then, my father,” said, extending his hand to morrel,
 “die in peace, my father; i will live.”
 
morrel was about to cast himself on his knees before his son, but
 maximilian caught him in his arms, and those two noble hearts were
 pressed against each other for moment.
 
“you know it is not my fault,” said morrel.
 
20057m
 


maximilian smiled. “i know, father, you are the most honorable man i
 have ever known.”
 
“good, my son. and now there is more to be said; go and rejoin your
 mother and sister.”
 
“my father,” said the young man, bending his knee, “bless me!” morrel
 took the head of his between his two hands, drew him forward, and
 kissing his forehead several times said:
 
“oh, yes, yes, i bless you in my own name, and in the name of three
 generations of irreproachable men, who say through me, ‘the edifice
 which misfortune has destroyed, providence may build up again.’ on
 seeing die such death, the most inexorable will have pity on you.
 to you, perhaps, they will accord the time they have refused to me.
 then do your best to keep our name free from dishonor. go to work,
 labor, young man, struggle ardently and courageously; live, yourself,
 your mother and sister, with the most rigid economy, so that from day
 to day the property of those whom i leave in your hands may augment and
 fructify. reflect how glorious day it will be, how grand, how solemn,
 that day of complete restoration, on which you will say in this very
 office, ‘my father died because could not do what i have this day
 done; but died calmly and peaceably, because in dying knew what i
 should do.’”
 
“my father, my father!” cried the young man, “why should you not live?”
 
“if i live, all would be changed; if i live, interest would be
 converted into doubt, pity into hostility; if i live i am only man
 who has broken his word, failed in his engagements—in fact, only a
 bankrupt. if, on the contrary, i die, remember, maximilian, my corpse
 is that of an honest but unfortunate man. living, my best friends would
 avoid my house; dead, all marseilles will follow in tears to my last
 home. living, you would feel shame at my name; dead, you may raise your
 head and say, ‘i am the of him you killed, because, for the first
 time, has been compelled to break his word.’”
 
the young man uttered groan, but appeared resigned.
 
“and now,” said morrel, “leave alone, and endeavor to keep your
 mother and sister away.”
 
“will you not see my sister once more?” asked maximilian. last but
 final hope was concealed by the young man in the effect of this
 interview, and therefore had suggested it. morrel shook his head. “i
 saw her this morning, and bade her adieu.”
 
“have you particular commands to leave with me, my father?” inquired
 maximilian in faltering voice.
 
“yes; my son, and sacred command.”
 
“say it, my father.”
 
“the house of thomson & french is the only one who, from humanity, or,
 it may be, selfishness—it is not for to read men’s hearts—has had
 any pity for me. its agent, who will in ten minutes present himself to
 receive the amount of bill of 287,500 francs, i will not say granted,
 but offered three months. let this house be the first repaid, my
 son, and respect this man.”
 
“father, i will,” said maximilian.
 
“and now, once more, adieu,” said morrel. “go, leave me; i would be
 alone. you will find my will in the secretaire in my bedroom.”
 
the young man remained standing and motionless, having but the force of
 will and not the power of execution.
 
“hear me, maximilian,” said his father. “suppose i were soldier like
 you, and ordered to carry certain redoubt, and you knew i must be
 killed in the assault, would you not say to me, as you said just now,
 ‘go, father; for you are dishonored by delay, and death is preferable
 to shame!’”
 
“yes, yes,” said the young man, “yes;” and once again embracing his
 father with convulsive pressure, said, “be it so, my father.”
 
and rushed out of the study. when his had left him, morrel
 remained an instant standing with his eyes fixed on the door; then
 putting forth his arm, pulled the bell. after moment’s interval,
 cocles appeared.
 
it was longer the same man—the fearful revelations of the three last
 days had crushed him. this thought—the house of morrel is about to stop
 payment—bent him to the earth more than twenty years would otherwise
 have done.
 
“my worthy cocles,” said morrel in tone impossible to describe, “do
 you remain in the antechamber. when the gentleman who came three months
 ago—the agent of thomson & french—arrives, announce his arrival to me.”
 
cocles made reply; made sign with his head, went into the
 anteroom, and seated himself. morrel fell back in his chair, his eyes
 fixed on the clock; there were seven minutes left, that was all. the
 hand moved on with incredible rapidity, seemed to see its motion.
 
what passed in the mind of this man at the supreme moment of his agony
 cannot be told in words. was still comparatively young, was
 surrounded by the loving care of devoted family, but had convinced
 himself by course of reasoning, illogical perhaps, yet certainly
 plausible, that must separate himself from all held dear in the
 world, even life itself. to form the slightest idea of his feelings,
 one must have seen his face with its expression of enforced resignation
 and its tear-moistened eyes raised to heaven. the minute hand moved on.
 the pistols were loaded; stretched forth his hand, took one up, and
 murmured his daughter’s name. then laid it down, seized his pen, and
 wrote few words. it seemed to him as if had not taken sufficient
 farewell of his beloved daughter. then turned again to the clock,
 counting time now not by minutes, but by seconds.
 
took up the deadly weapon again, his lips parted and his eyes fixed
 on the clock, and then shuddered at the click of the trigger as he
 cocked the pistol. at this moment of mortal anguish the cold sweat came
 forth upon his brow, pang stronger than death clutched at his
 heart-strings. heard the door of the staircase creak on its
 hinges—the clock gave its warning to strike eleven—the door of his
 study opened. morrel did not turn round—he expected these words of
 cocles, “the agent of thomson & french.”
 
placed the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth. suddenly heard
 cry—it was his daughter’s voice. turned and saw julie. the pistol
 fell from his hands.
 
“my father!” cried the young girl, out of breath, and half dead with
 joy—“saved, you are saved!” and she threw herself into his arms,
 holding in her extended hand red, netted silk purse.
 
20061m
 


“saved, my child!” said morrel; “what do you mean?”
 
“yes, saved—saved! see, see!” said the young girl.
 
morrel took the purse, and started as did so, for vague
 remembrance reminded him that it once belonged to himself. at one end
 was the receipted bill for the 287,000 francs, and at the other was a
 diamond as large as hazel-nut, with these words on small slip of
 parchment: _julie’s dowry_.
 
morrel passed his hand over his brow; it seemed to him dream. at this
 moment the clock struck eleven. felt as if each stroke of the hammer
 fell upon his heart.
 
“explain, my child,” said, “explain, my child,” said,
 “explain—where did you find this purse?”
 
“in house in the allées meilhan, no. 15, on the corner of a
 mantelpiece in small room on the fifth floor.”
 
“but,” cried morrel, “this purse is not yours!” julie handed to her
 father the letter she had received in the morning.
 
“and did you go alone?” asked morrel, after had read it.
 
“emmanuel accompanied me, father. was to have waited for at the
 corner of the rue du musée, but, strange to say, was not there when
 i returned.”
 
“monsieur morrel!” exclaimed voice on the stairs; “monsieur morrel!”
 
“it is his voice!” said julie. at this moment emmanuel entered, his
 countenance full of animation and joy.
 
“the _pharaon_!” cried; “the _pharaon_!”
 
“what!—what!—the _pharaon_! are you mad, emmanuel? you know the vessel
 is lost.”
 
“the _pharaon_, sir—they signal the _pharaon_! the _pharaon_ is
 entering the harbor!”
 
morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was failing him; his
 understanding weakened by such events, refused to comprehend such
 incredible, unheard-of, fabulous facts. but his came in.
 
“father,” cried maximilian, “how could you say the _pharaon_ was lost?
 the lookout has signalled her, and they say she is now coming into
 port.”
 
20063m
 


“my dear friends,” said morrel, “if this be so, it must be miracle of
 heaven! impossible, impossible!”
 
but what was real and not less incredible was the purse held in his
 hand, the acceptance receipted—the splendid diamond.
 
“ah, sir,” exclaimed cocles, “what can it mean?—the _pharaon_?”
 
“come, dear ones,” said morrel, rising from his seat, “let us go and
 see, and heaven have pity upon us if it be false intelligence!”
 
they all went out, and on the stairs met madame morrel, who had been
 afraid to go up into the study. in moment they were at the canebière.
 there was crowd on the pier. all the crowd gave way before morrel.
 “the _pharaon_! the _pharaon_!” said every voice.
 
and, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of saint-jean, was ship
 bearing on her stern these words, printed in white letters, “the
 _pharaon_, morrel & son, of marseilles.” she was the exact duplicate of
 the other _pharaon_, and loaded, as that had been, with cochineal and
 indigo. she cast anchor, clued up sails, and on the deck was captain
 gaumard giving orders, and good old penelon making signals to m.
 morrel. to doubt any longer was impossible; there was the evidence of
 the senses, and ten thousand persons who came to corroborate the
 testimony.
 
as morrel and his embraced on the pier-head, in the presence and
 amid the applause of the whole city witnessing this event, man, with
 his face half-covered by black beard, and who, concealed behind the
 sentry-box, watched the scene with delight, uttered these words in a
 low tone:
 
“be happy, noble heart, be blessed for all the good thou hast done and
 wilt do hereafter, and let my gratitude remain in obscurity like your
 good deeds.”
 
20064m
 


and with smile expressive of supreme content, left his
 hiding-place, and without being observed, descended one of the flights
 of steps provided for debarkation, and hailing three times, shouted
 “jacopo, jacopo, jacopo!”
 
then launch came to shore, took him on board, and conveyed him to a
 yacht splendidly fitted up, on whose deck sprung with the activity
 of sailor; thence once again looked towards morrel, who, weeping
 with joy, was shaking hands most cordially with all the crowd around
 him, and thanking with look the unknown benefactor whom seemed to
 be seeking in the skies.
 
“and now,” said the unknown, “farewell kindness, humanity, and
 gratitude! farewell to all the feelings that expand the heart! i have
 been heaven’s substitute to recompense the good—now the god of
 vengeance yields to his power to punish the wicked!”
 
at these words gave signal, and, as if only awaiting this signal,
 the yacht instantly put out to sea.
 


chapter 31. italy: sinbad the sailor
 
towards the beginning of the year 1838, two young men belonging to the
 first society of paris, the viscount albert morcerf and the baron
 franz d’Épinay, were at florence. they had agreed to see the carnival
 at rome that year, and that franz, who for the last three or four years
 had inhabited italy, should act as _cicerone_ to albert.
 
as it is inconsiderable affair to spend the carnival at rome,
 especially when you have great desire to sleep on the piazza del
 popolo, or the campo vaccino, they wrote to signor pastrini, the
 proprietor of the hôtel londres, piazza di spagna, to reserve
 comfortable apartments for them. signor pastrini replied that had
 only two rooms and parlor on the third floor, which offered at the
 low charge of louis per diem. they accepted his offer; but wishing to
 make the best use of the time that was left, albert started for naples.
 as for franz, remained at florence, and after having passed few
 days in exploring the paradise of the cascine, and spending two or
 three evenings at the houses of the florentine nobility, took a
 fancy into his head (having already visited corsica, the cradle of
 bonaparte) to visit elba, the waiting-place of napoleon.
 
one evening cast off the painter of sailboat from the iron ring
 that secured it to the dock at leghorn, wrapped himself in his coat and
 lay down, and said to the crew,—“to the island of elba!”
 
the boat shot out of the harbor like bird and the next morning franz
 disembarked at porto-ferrajo. traversed the island, after having
 followed the traces which the footsteps of the giant have left, and
 re-embarked for marciana.
 
two hours after again landed at pianosa, where was assured that
 red partridges abounded. the sport was bad; franz only succeeded in
 killing few partridges, and, like every unsuccessful sportsman, he
 returned to the boat very much out of temper.
 
“ah, if your excellency chose,” said the captain, “you might have
 capital sport.”
 
“where?”
 
“do you see that island?” continued the captain, pointing to conical
 pile rising from the indigo sea.
 
“well, what is this island?”
 
“the island of monte cristo.”
 
“but i have permission to shoot over this island.”
 
“your excellency does not require permit, for the island is
 uninhabited.”
 
“ah, indeed!” said the young man. “a desert island in the midst of the
 mediterranean must be curiosity.”
 
“it is very natural; this island is mass of rocks, and does not
 contain an acre of land capable of cultivation.”
 
“to whom does this island belong?”
 
“to tuscany.”
 
“what game shall i find there!”
 
“thousands of wild goats.”
 
“who live upon the stones, i suppose,” said franz with an incredulous
 smile.
 
“no, but by browsing the shrubs and trees that grow out of the crevices
 of the rocks.”
 
“where can i sleep?”
 
“on shore in the grottos, or on board in your cloak; besides, if your
 excellency pleases, we can leave as soon as you like—we can sail as
 well by night as by day, and if the wind drops we can use our oars.”
 
as franz had sufficient time, and his apartments at rome were not yet
 available, accepted the proposition. upon his answer in the
 affirmative, the sailors exchanged few words together in low tone.
 “well,” asked he, “what now? is there any difficulty in the way?”
 
“no.” replied the captain, “but we must warn your excellency that the
 island is an infected port.”
 
“what do you mean?”
 
“monte cristo although uninhabited, yet serves occasionally as refuge
 for the smugglers and pirates who come from corsica, sardinia, and
 africa, and if it becomes known that we have been there, we shall have
 to perform quarantine for six days on our return to leghorn.”
 
“the deuce! that puts different face on the matter. six days! why,
 that’s as long as the almighty took to make the world! too long a
 wait—too long.”
 
“but who will say your excellency has been to monte cristo?”
 
“oh, i shall not,” cried franz.
 
“nor i, nor i,” chorused the sailors.
 
“then steer for monte cristo.”
 
the captain gave his orders, the helm was put up, and the boat was soon
 sailing in the direction of the island. franz waited until all was in
 order, and when the sail was filled, and the four sailors had taken
 their places—three forward, and one at the helm—he resumed the
 conversation. “gaetano,” said to the captain, “you tell monte
 cristo serves as refuge for pirates, who are, it seems to me, very
 different kind of game from the goats.”
 
“yes, your excellency, and it is true.”
 
“i knew there were smugglers, but i thought that since the capture of
 algiers, and the destruction of the regency, pirates existed only in
 the romances of cooper and captain marryat.”
 
“your excellency is mistaken; there are pirates, like the bandits who
 were believed to have been exterminated by pope leo xii., and who yet,
 every day, rob travellers at the gates of rome. has not your excellency
 heard that the french _chargé d’affaires_ was robbed six months ago
 within five hundred paces of velletri?”
 
“oh, yes, i heard that.”
 
“well, then, if, like us, your excellency lived at leghorn, you would
 hear, from time to time, that little merchant vessel, or an english
 yacht that was expected at bastia, at porto-ferrajo, or at civita
 vecchia, has not arrived; one knows what has become of it, but,
 doubtless, it has struck on rock and foundered. now this rock it has
 met has been long and narrow boat, manned by six or eight men, who
 have surprised and plundered it, some dark and stormy night, near some
 desert and gloomy island, as bandits plunder carriage in the recesses
 of forest.”
 
“but,” asked franz, who lay wrapped in his cloak at the bottom of the
 boat, “why do not those who have been plundered complain to the french,
 sardinian, or tuscan governments?”
 
“why?” said gaetano with smile.
 
“yes, why?”
 
“because, in the first place, they transfer from the vessel to their
 own boat whatever they think worth taking, then they bind the crew hand
 and foot, they attach to everyone’s neck four-and-twenty-pound ball,
 large hole is chopped in the vessel’s bottom, and then they leave
 her. at the end of ten minutes the vessel begins to roll heavily and
 settle down. first one gun’l goes under, then the other. then they lift
 and sink again, and both go under at once. all at once there’s noise
 like cannon—that’s the air blowing up the deck. soon the water rushes
 out of the scupper-holes like whale spouting, the vessel gives last
 groan, spins round and round, and disappears, forming vast whirlpool
 in the ocean, and then all is over, so that in five minutes nothing but
 the eye of god can see the vessel where she lies at the bottom of the
 sea. do you understand now,” said the captain, “why complaints are
 made to the government, and why the vessel never reaches port?”
 
it is probable that if gaetano had related this previous to proposing
 the expedition, franz would have hesitated, but now that they had
 started, thought it would be cowardly to draw back. was one of
 those men who do not rashly court danger, but if danger presents
 itself, combat it with the most unalterable coolness. calm and
 resolute, treated any peril as would an adversary in a
 duel,—calculated its probable method of approach; retreated, if at all,
 as point of strategy and not from cowardice; was quick to see an
 opening for attack, and won victory at single thrust.
 
“bah!” said he, “i have travelled through sicily and calabria—i have
 sailed two months in the archipelago, and yet i never saw even the
 shadow of bandit or pirate.”
 
“i did not tell your excellency this to deter you from your project,”
 replied gaetano, “but you questioned me, and i have answered; that’s
 all.”
 
“yes, and your conversation is most interesting; and as i wish to enjoy
 it as long as possible, steer for monte cristo.”
 
the wind blew strongly, the boat made six or seven knots an hour, and
 they were rapidly reaching the end of their voyage. as they drew near
 the island seemed to lift from the sea, and the air was so clear that
 they could already distinguish the rocks heaped on one another, like
 cannon balls in an arsenal, with green bushes and trees growing in the
 crevices. as for the sailors, although they appeared perfectly tranquil
 yet it was evident that they were on the alert, and that they carefully
 watched the glassy surface over which they were sailing, and on which a
 few fishing-boats, with their white sails, were alone visible.
 
they were within fifteen miles of monte cristo when the sun began to
 set behind corsica, whose mountains appeared against the sky, showing
 their rugged peaks in bold relief; this mass of rock, like the giant
 adamastor, rose dead ahead, formidable barrier, and intercepting the
 light that gilded its massive peaks so that the voyagers were in
 shadow. little by little the shadow rose higher and seemed to drive
 before it the last rays of the expiring day; at last the reflection
 rested on the summit of the mountain, where it paused an instant, like
 the fiery crest of volcano, then gloom gradually covered the summit
 as it had covered the base, and the island now only appeared to be a
 gray mountain that grew continually darker; half an hour after, the
 night was quite dark.
 
fortunately, the mariners were used to these latitudes, and knew every
 rock in the tuscan archipelago; for in the midst of this obscurity
 franz was not without uneasiness—corsica had long since disappeared,
 and monte cristo itself was invisible; but the sailors seemed, like the
 lynx, to see in the dark, and the pilot who steered did not evince the
 slightest hesitation.
 
an hour had passed since the sun had set, when franz fancied saw, at
 quarter of mile to the left, dark mass, but could not
 precisely make out what it was, and fearing to excite the mirth of the
 sailors by mistaking floating cloud for land, remained silent;
 suddenly great light appeared on the strand; land might resemble a
 cloud, but the fire was not meteor.
 
“what is this light?” asked he.
 
“hush!” said the captain; “it is fire.”
 
“but you told the island was uninhabited?”
 
“i said there were fixed habitations on it, but i said also that it
 served sometimes as harbor for smugglers.”
 
“and for pirates?”
 
“and for pirates,” returned gaetano, repeating franz’s words. “it is
 for that reason i have given orders to pass the island, for, as you
 see, the fire is behind us.”
 
“but this fire?” continued franz. “it seems to rather reassuring
 than otherwise; men who did not wish to be seen would not light a
 fire.”
 
“oh, that goes for nothing,” said gaetano. “if you can guess the
 position of the island in the darkness, you will see that the fire
 cannot be seen from the side or from pianosa, but only from the sea.”
 
“you think, then, this fire indicates the presence of unpleasant
 neighbors?”
 
“that is what we must find out,” returned gaetano, fixing his eyes on
 this terrestrial star.
 
“how can you find out?”
 
“you shall see.”
 
gaetano consulted with his companions, and after five minutes’
 discussion manœuvre was executed which caused the vessel to tack
 about, they returned the way they had come, and in few minutes the
 fire disappeared, hidden by an elevation of the land. the pilot again
 changed the course of the boat, which rapidly approached the island,
 and was soon within fifty paces of it. gaetano lowered the sail, and
 the boat came to rest. all this was done in silence, and from the
 moment that their course was changed not word was spoken.
 
gaetano, who had proposed the expedition, had taken all the
 responsibility on himself; the four sailors fixed their eyes on him,
 while they got out their oars and held themselves in readiness to row
 away, which, thanks to the darkness, would not be difficult. as for
 franz, examined his arms with the utmost coolness; had two
 double-barrelled guns and rifle; loaded them, looked at the
 priming, and waited quietly.
 
during this time the captain had thrown off his vest and shirt, and
 secured his trousers round his waist; his feet were naked, so had no
 shoes and stockings to take off; after these preparations placed his
 finger on his lips, and lowering himself noiselessly into the sea, swam
 towards the shore with such precaution that it was impossible to hear
 the slightest sound; could only be traced by the phosphorescent line
 in his wake. this track soon disappeared; it was evident that had
 touched the shore.
 
everyone on board remained motionless for half an hour, when the same
 luminous track was again observed, and the swimmer was soon on board.
 
“well?” exclaimed franz and the sailors in unison.
 
“they are spanish smugglers,” said he; “they have with them two
 corsican bandits.”
 
“and what are these corsican bandits doing here with spanish
 smugglers?”
 
“alas,” returned the captain with an accent of the most profound pity,
 “we ought always to help one another. very often the bandits are hard
 pressed by gendarmes or carbineers; well, they see vessel, and good
 fellows like us on board, they come and demand hospitality of us; you
 can’t refuse help to poor hunted devil; we receive them, and for
 greater security we stand out to sea. this costs us nothing, and saves
 the life, or at least the liberty, of fellow-creature, who on the
 first occasion returns the service by pointing out some safe spot where
 we can land our goods without interruption.”
 
“ah!” said franz, “then you are smuggler occasionally, gaetano?”
 
“your excellency, we must live somehow,” returned the other, smiling
 impenetrably.
 
“then you know the men who are now on monte cristo?”
 
“oh, yes, we sailors are like freemasons, and recognize each other by
 signs.”
 
“and do you think we have nothing to fear if we land?”
 
“nothing at all; smugglers are not thieves.”
 
“but these two corsican bandits?” said franz, calculating the chances
 of peril.
 
“it is not their fault that they are bandits, but that of the
 authorities.”
 
“how so?”
 
“because they are pursued for having made stiff, as if it was not in
 corsican’s nature to revenge himself.”
 
“what do you mean by having made stiff?—having assassinated man?”
 said franz, continuing his investigation.
 
“i mean that they have killed an enemy, which is very different
 thing,” returned the captain.
 
“well,” said the young man, “let us demand hospitality of these
 smugglers and bandits. do you think they will grant it?”
 
“without doubt.”
 
“how many are they?”
 
“four, and the two bandits make six.”
 
“just our number, so that if they prove troublesome, we shall be able
 to hold them in check; so, for the last time, steer to monte cristo.”
 
“yes, but your excellency will permit us to take all due precautions.”
 
“by all means, be as wise as nestor and as prudent as ulysses; i do
 more than permit, i exhort you.”
 
“silence, then!” said gaetano.
 
everyone obeyed. for man who, like franz, viewed his position in its
 true light, it was grave one. was alone in the darkness with
 sailors whom did not know, and who had reason to be devoted to
 him; who knew that had several thousand francs in his belt, and who
 had often examined his weapons,—which were very beautiful,—if not with
 envy, at least with curiosity. on the other hand, was about to land,
 without any other escort than these men, on an island which had,
 indeed, very religious name, but which did not seem to franz likely
 to afford him much hospitality, thanks to the smugglers and bandits.
 the history of the scuttled vessels, which had appeared improbable
 during the day, seemed very probable at night; placed as was between
 two possible sources of danger, kept his eye on the crew, and his
 gun in his hand.
 
the sailors had again hoisted sail, and the vessel was once more
 cleaving the waves. through the darkness franz, whose eyes were now
 more accustomed to it, could see the looming shore along which the boat
 was sailing, and then, as they rounded rocky point, saw the fire
 more brilliant than ever, and about it five or six persons seated. the
 blaze illumined the for hundred paces around. gaetano skirted the
 light, carefully keeping the boat in the shadow; then, when they were
 opposite the fire, steered to the centre of the circle, singing a
 fishing song, of which his companions sung the chorus.
 
at the first words of the song the men seated round the fire arose and
 approached the landing-place, their eyes fixed on the boat, evidently
 seeking to know who the new-comers were and what were their intentions.
 they soon appeared satisfied and returned (with the exception of one,
 who remained at the shore) to their fire, at which the carcass of a
 goat was roasting. when the boat was within twenty paces of the shore,
 the man on the beach, who carried carbine, presented arms after the
 manner of sentinel, and cried, “who comes there?” in sardinian.
 
franz coolly cocked both barrels. gaetano then exchanged few words
 with this man which the traveller did not understand, but which
 evidently concerned him.
 
“will your excellency give your name, or remain _incognito_?” asked the
 captain.
 
“my name must rest unknown,” replied franz; “merely say i am a
 frenchman travelling for pleasure.”
 
as soon as gaetano had transmitted this answer, the sentinel gave an
 order to one of the men seated round the fire, who rose and disappeared
 among the rocks. not word was spoken, everyone seemed occupied, franz
 with his disembarkment, the sailors with their sails, the smugglers
 with their goat; but in the midst of all this carelessness it was
 evident that they mutually observed each other.
 
the man who had disappeared returned suddenly on the opposite side to
 that by which had left; made sign with his head to the
 sentinel, who, turning to the boat, said, “_s’accommodi_.” the italian
 _s’accommodi_ is untranslatable; it means at once, “come, enter, you
 are welcome; make yourself at home; you are the master.” it is like
 that turkish phrase of molière’s that so astonished the bourgeois
 gentleman by the number of things implied in its utterance.
 
the sailors did not wait for second invitation; four strokes of the
 oar brought them to land; gaetano sprang to shore, exchanged few
 words with the sentinel, then his comrades disembarked, and lastly came
 franz. one of his guns was swung over his shoulder, gaetano had the
 other, and sailor held his rifle; his dress, half artist, half dandy,
 did not excite any suspicion, and, consequently, disquietude. the
 boat was moored to the shore, and they advanced few paces to find a
 comfortable bivouac; but, doubtless, the spot they chose did not suit
 the smuggler who filled the post of sentinel, for cried out:
 
“not that way, if you please.”
 
gaetano faltered an excuse, and advanced to the opposite side, while
 two sailors kindled torches at the fire to light them on their way.
 
they advanced about thirty paces, and then stopped at small esplanade
 surrounded with rocks, in which seats had been cut, not unlike
 sentry-boxes. around in the crevices of the rocks grew few dwarf oaks
 and thick bushes of myrtles. franz lowered torch, and saw by the mass
 of cinders that had accumulated that was not the first to discover
 this retreat, which was, doubtless, one of the halting-places of the
 wandering visitors of monte cristo.
 
as for his suspicions, once on _terra firma_, once that had seen the
 indifferent, if not friendly, appearance of his hosts, his anxiety had
 quite disappeared, or rather, at sight of the goat, had turned to
 appetite. mentioned this to gaetano, who replied that nothing could
 be more easy than to prepare supper when they had in their boat,
 bread, wine, half dozen partridges, and good fire to roast them by.
 
“besides,” added he, “if the smell of their roast meat tempts you, i
 will go and offer them two of our birds for slice.”
 
“you are born diplomat,” returned franz; “go and try.”
 
meanwhile the sailors had collected dried sticks and branches with
 which they made fire. franz waited impatiently, inhaling the aroma of
 the roasted meat, when the captain returned with mysterious air.
 
“well,” said franz, “anything new?—do they refuse?”
 
“on the contrary,” returned gaetano, “the chief, who was told you were
 young frenchman, invites you to sup with him.”
 
“well,” observed franz, “this chief is very polite, and i see no
 objection—the more so as i bring my share of the supper.”
 
“oh, it is not that; has plenty, and to spare, for supper; but he
 makes one condition, and rather peculiar one, before will receive
 you at his house.”
 
“his house? has built one here, then?”
 
“no, but has very comfortable one all the same, so they say.”
 
“you know this chief, then?”
 
“i have heard talk of him.”
 
“favorably or otherwise?”
 
“both.”
 
“the deuce!—and what is this condition?”
 
“that you are blindfolded, and do not take off the bandage until he
 himself bids you.”
 
franz looked at gaetano, to see, if possible, what thought of this
 proposal. “ah,” replied he, guessing franz’s thought, “i know this is a
 serious matter.”
 
“what should you do in my place?”
 
“i, who have nothing to lose,—i should go.”
 
20075m
 


“you would accept?”
 
“yes, were it only out of curiosity.”
 
“there is something very peculiar about this chief, then?”
 
“listen,” said gaetano, lowering his voice, “i do not know if what they
 say is true”—he stopped to see if anyone was near.
 
“what do they say?”
 
“that this chief inhabits cavern to which the pitti palace is
 nothing.”
 
“what nonsense!” said franz, reseating himself.
 
“it is nonsense; it is quite true. cama, the pilot of the _saint
 ferdinand_, went in once, and came back amazed, vowing that such
 treasures were only to be heard of in fairy tales.”
 
“do you know,” observed franz, “that with such stories you make me
 think of ali baba’s enchanted cavern?”
 
“i tell you what i have been told.”
 
“then you advise to accept?”
 
“oh, i don’t say that; your excellency will do as you please; i should
 be sorry to advise you in the matter.”
 
franz pondered the matter for few moments, concluded that man so
 rich could not have any intention of plundering him of what little he
 had, and seeing only the prospect of good supper, accepted. gaetano
 departed with the reply. franz was prudent, and wished to learn all he
 possibly could concerning his host. turned towards the sailor, who,
 during this dialogue, had sat gravely plucking the partridges with the
 air of man proud of his office, and asked him how these men had
 landed, as vessel of any kind was visible.
 
“never mind that,” returned the sailor, “i know their vessel.”
 
“is it very beautiful vessel?”
 
“i would not wish for better to sail round the world.”
 
“of what burden is she?”
 
“about hundred tons; but she is built to stand any weather. she is
 what the english call yacht.”
 
“where was she built?”
 
“i know not; but my own opinion is she is genoese.”
 
“and how did leader of smugglers,” continued franz, “venture to build
 vessel designed for such purpose at genoa?”
 
“i did not say that the owner was smuggler,” replied the sailor.
 
“no; but gaetano did, i thought.”
 
“gaetano had only seen the vessel from distance, had not then
 spoken to anyone.”
 
“and if this person be not smuggler, who is he?”
 
“a wealthy signor, who travels for his pleasure.”
 
“come,” thought franz, “he is still more mysterious, since the two
 accounts do not agree.”
 
“what is his name?”
 
“if you ask him, says sinbad the sailor; but i doubt if it be his
 real name.”
 
“sinbad the sailor?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and where does reside?”
 
“on the sea.”
 
“what country does come from?”
 
“i do not know.”
 
“have you ever seen him?”
 
“sometimes.”
 
“what sort of man is he?”
 
“your excellency will judge for yourself.”
 
“where will receive me?”
 
“no doubt in the subterranean palace gaetano told you of.”
 
“have you never had the curiosity, when you have landed and found this
 island deserted, to seek for this enchanted palace?”
 
“oh, yes, more than once, but always in vain; we examined the grotto
 all over, but we never could find the slightest trace of any opening;
 they say that the door is not opened by key, but magic word.”
 
“decidedly,” muttered franz, “this is an arabian nights’ adventure.”
 
“his excellency waits for you,” said voice, which recognized as
 that of the sentinel. was accompanied by two of the yacht’s crew.
 
franz drew his handkerchief from his pocket, and presented it to the
 man who had spoken to him. without uttering word, they bandaged his
 eyes with care that showed their apprehensions of his committing some
 indiscretion. afterwards was made to promise that would not make
 the least attempt to raise the bandage. promised.
 
then his two guides took his arms, and went on, guided by them, and
 preceded by the sentinel. after going about thirty paces, smelt the
 appetizing odor of the kid that was roasting, and knew thus that was
 passing the bivouac; they then led him on about fifty paces farther,
 evidently advancing towards that part of the shore where they would not
 allow gaetano to go—a refusal could now comprehend.
 
presently, by change in the atmosphere, knew that they were
 entering cave; after going on for few seconds more heard a
 crackling, and it seemed to him as though the atmosphere again changed,
 and became balmy and perfumed. at length his feet touched on thick
 and soft carpet, and his guides let go their hold of him. there was a
 moment’s silence, and then voice, in excellent french, although, with
 foreign accent, said:
 
“welcome, sir. i beg you will remove your bandage.”
 
it may be supposed, then, franz did not wait for repetition of this
 permission, but took off the handkerchief, and found himself in the
 presence of man from thirty-eight to forty years of age, dressed in a
 tunisian costume, that is to say, red cap with long blue silk
 tassel, vest of black cloth embroidered with gold, pantaloons of deep
 red, large and full gaiters of the same color, embroidered with gold
 like the vest, and yellow slippers; had splendid cashmere round
 his waist, and small sharp and crooked cangiar was passed through his
 girdle.
 
although of paleness that was almost livid, this man had remarkably
 handsome face; his eyes were penetrating and sparkling; his nose, quite
 straight, and projecting direct from the brow, was of the pure greek
 type, while his teeth, as white as pearls, were set off to admiration
 by the black moustache that encircled them.
 
his pallor was so peculiar, that it seemed to pertain to one who had
 been long entombed, and who was incapable of resuming the healthy glow
 and hue of life. was not particularly tall, but extremely well made,
 and, like the men of the south, had small hands and feet. but what
 astonished franz, who had treated gaetano’s description as fable, was
 the splendor of the apartment in which found himself.
 
the entire chamber was lined with crimson brocade, worked with flowers
 of gold. in recess was kind of divan, surmounted with stand of
 arabian swords in silver scabbards, and the handles resplendent with
 gems; from the ceiling hung lamp of venetian glass, of beautiful
 shape and color, while the feet rested on turkey carpet, in which
 they sunk to the instep; tapestry hung before the door by which franz
 had entered, and also in front of another door, leading into second
 apartment which seemed to be brilliantly illuminated.
 
the host gave franz time to recover from his surprise, and, moreover,
 returned look for look, not even taking his eyes off him.
 
“sir,” said, after pause, “a thousand excuses for the precaution
 taken in your introduction hither; but as, during the greater portion
 of the year, this island is deserted, if the secret of this abode were
 discovered, i should doubtless, find on my return my temporary
 retirement in state of great disorder, which would be exceedingly
 annoying, not for the loss it occasioned me, but because i should not
 have the certainty i now possess of separating myself from all the rest
 of mankind at pleasure. let now endeavor to make you forget this
 temporary unpleasantness, and offer you what doubt you did not
 expect to find here—that is to say, tolerable supper and pretty
 comfortable beds.”
 
“_ma foi_, my dear sir,” replied franz, “make apologies. i have
 always observed that they bandage people’s eyes who penetrate enchanted
 palaces, for instance, those of raoul in the _huguenots_, and really i
 have nothing to complain of, for what i see makes think of the
 wonders of the _arabian nights_.”
 
20079m
 


“alas! i may say with lucullus, if i could have anticipated the honor
 of your visit, i would have prepared for it. but such as is my
 hermitage, it is at your disposal; such as is my supper, it is yours to
 share, if you will. ali, is the supper ready?”
 
at this moment the tapestry moved aside, and nubian, black as ebony,
 and dressed in plain white tunic, made sign to his master that all
 was prepared in the dining-room.
 
“now,” said the unknown to franz, “i do not know if you are of my
 opinion, but i think nothing is more annoying than to remain two or
 three hours together without knowing by name or appellation how to
 address one another. pray observe, that i too much respect the laws of
 hospitality to ask your name or title. i only request you to give me
 one by which i may have the pleasure of addressing you. as for myself,
 that i may put you at your ease, i tell you that i am generally called
 ‘sinbad the sailor.’”
 
“and i,” replied franz, “will tell you, as i only require his wonderful
 lamp to make precisely like aladdin, that i see reason why at
 this moment i should not be called aladdin. that will keep us from
 going away from the east whither i am tempted to think i have been
 conveyed by some good genius.”
 
“well, then, signor aladdin,” replied the singular amphitryon, “you
 heard our repast announced, will you now take the trouble to enter the
 dining-room, your humble servant going first to show the way?”
 
at these words, moving aside the tapestry, sinbad preceded his guest.
 franz now looked upon another scene of enchantment; the table was
 splendidly covered, and once convinced of this important point cast
 his eyes around him. the dining-room was scarcely less striking than
 the room had just left; it was entirely of marble, with antique
 bas-reliefs of priceless value; and at the four corners of this
 apartment, which was oblong, were four magnificent statues, having
 baskets in their hands. these baskets contained four pyramids of most
 splendid fruit; there were sicily pine-apples, pomegranates from
 malaga, oranges from the balearic isles, peaches from france, and dates
 from tunis.
 
the supper consisted of roast pheasant garnished with corsican
 blackbirds; boar’s ham with jelly, quarter of kid with tartar
 sauce, glorious turbot, and gigantic lobster. between these large
 dishes were smaller ones containing various dainties. the dishes were
 of silver, and the plates of japanese china.
 
franz rubbed his eyes in order to assure himself that this was not a
 dream. ali alone was present to wait at table, and acquitted himself so
 admirably, that the guest complimented his host thereupon.
 
“yes,” replied he, while did the honors of the supper with much ease
 and grace—“yes, is poor devil who is much devoted to me, and does
 all can to prove it. remembers that i saved his life, and as he
 has regard for his head, feels some gratitude towards for
 having kept it on his shoulders.”
 
ali approached his master, took his hand, and kissed it.
 
“would it be impertinent, signor sinbad,” said franz, “to ask you the
 particulars of this kindness?”
 
20081m
 


“oh, they are simple enough,” replied the host. “it seems the fellow
 had been caught wandering nearer to the harem of the bey of tunis than
 etiquette permits to one of his color, and was condemned by the bey
 to have his tongue cut out, and his hand and head cut off; the tongue
 the first day, the hand the second, and the head the third. i always
 had desire to have mute in my service, so learning the day his
 tongue was cut out, i went to the bey, and proposed to give him for ali
 splendid double-barreled gun, which i knew was very desirous of
 having. hesitated moment, was so very desirous to complete the
 poor devil’s punishment. but when i added to the gun an english cutlass
 with which i had shivered his highness’s yataghan to pieces, the bey
 yielded, and agreed to forgive the hand and head, but on condition that
 the poor fellow never again set foot in tunis. this was useless
 clause in the bargain, for whenever the coward sees the first glimpse
 of the shores of africa, runs down below, and can only be induced to
 appear again when we are out of sight of that quarter of the globe.”
 
franz remained moment silent and pensive, hardly knowing what to
 think of the half-kindness, half-cruelty, with which his host related
 the brief narrative.
 
“and like the celebrated sailor whose name you have assumed,” said,
 by way of changing the conversation, “you pass your life in
 travelling?”
 
“yes. i made vow at time when i little thought i should ever be
 able to accomplish it,” said the unknown with singular smile; “and i
 made some others also which i hope i may fulfil in due season.”
 
although sinbad pronounced these words with much calmness, his eyes
 gave forth gleams of extraordinary ferocity.
 
“you have suffered great deal, sir?” said franz inquiringly.
 
sinbad started and looked fixedly at him, as replied, “what makes
 you suppose so?”
 
“everything,” answered franz,—“your voice, your look, your pallid
 complexion, and even the life you lead.”
 
“i?—i live the happiest life possible, the real life of pasha. i am
 king of all creation. i am pleased with one place, and stay there; i
 get tired of it, and leave it; i am free as bird and have wings like
 one; my attendants obey my slightest wish. sometimes i amuse myself by
 delivering some bandit or criminal from the bonds of the law. then i
 have my mode of dispensing justice, silent and sure, without respite or
 appeal, which condemns or pardons, and which one sees. ah, if you
 had tasted my life, you would not desire any other, and would never
 return to the world unless you had some great project to accomplish
 there.”
 
“revenge, for instance!” observed franz.
 
the unknown fixed on the young man one of those looks which penetrate
 into the depth of the heart and thoughts. “and why revenge?” asked.
 
“because,” replied franz, “you seem to like man who, persecuted by
 society, has fearful account to settle with it.”
 
“ah!” responded sinbad, laughing with his singular laugh, which
 displayed his white and sharp teeth. “you have not guessed rightly.
 such as you see i am, sort of philosopher, and one day perhaps i
 shall go to paris to rival monsieur appert, and the man in the little
 blue cloak.”
 
“and will that be the first time you ever took that journey?”
 
“yes; it will. i must seem to you by means curious, but i assure you
 that it is not my fault i have delayed it so long—it will happen one
 day or the other.”
 
20083m
 


“and do you propose to make this journey very shortly?”
 
“i do not know; it depends on circumstances which depend on certain
 arrangements.”
 
“i should like to be there at the time you come, and i will endeavor to
 repay you, as far as lies in my power, for your liberal hospitality
 displayed to at monte cristo.”
 
“i should avail myself of your offer with pleasure,” replied the host,
 “but, unfortunately, if i go there, it will be, in all probability,
 _incognito_.”
 
the supper appeared to have been supplied solely for franz, for the
 unknown scarcely touched one or two dishes of the splendid banquet to
 which his guest did ample justice. then ali brought on the dessert, or
 rather took the baskets from the hands of the statues and placed them
 on the table. between the two baskets placed small silver cup with
 silver cover. the care with which ali placed this cup on the table
 roused franz’s curiosity. raised the cover and saw kind of
 greenish paste, something like preserved angelica, but which was
 perfectly unknown to him. replaced the lid, as ignorant of what the
 cup contained as was before had looked at it, and then casting
 his eyes towards his host saw him smile at his disappointment.
 
“you cannot guess,” said he, “what there is in that small vase, can
 you?”
 
“no, i really cannot.”
 
“well, then, that green preserve is nothing less than the ambrosia
 which hebe served at the table of jupiter.”
 
“but,” replied franz, “this ambrosia, doubt, in passing through
 mortal hands has lost its heavenly appellation and assumed human
 name; in vulgar phrase, what may you term this composition, for which,
 to tell the truth, i do not feel any particular desire?”
 
“ah, thus it is that our material origin is revealed,” cried sinbad;
 “we frequently pass so near to happiness without seeing, without
 regarding it, or if we do see and regard it, yet without recognizing
 it. are you man for the substantials, and is gold your god? taste
 this, and the mines of peru, guzerat, and golconda are opened to you.
 are you man of imagination—a poet? taste this, and the boundaries of
 possibility disappear; the fields of infinite space open to you, you
 advance free in heart, free in mind, into the boundless realms of
 unfettered reverie. are you ambitious, and do you seek after the
 greatnesses of the earth? taste this, and in an hour you will be a
 king, not king of petty kingdom hidden in some corner of europe
 like france, spain, or england, but king of the world, king of the
 universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feet of satan, you
 will be king and master of all the kingdoms of the earth. is it not
 tempting what i offer you, and is it not an easy thing, since it is
 only to do thus? look!”
 
at these words uncovered the small cup which contained the substance
 so lauded, took teaspoonful of the magic sweetmeat, raised it to his
 lips, and swallowed it slowly with his eyes half shut and his head bent
 backwards. franz did not disturb him whilst absorbed his favorite
 sweetmeat, but when had finished, inquired:
 
“what, then, is this precious stuff?”
 
“did you ever hear,” replied, “of the old man of the mountain, who
 attempted to assassinate philippe auguste?”
 
“of course i have.”
 
“well, you know reigned over rich valley which was overhung by the
 mountain whence derived his picturesque name. in this valley were
 magnificent gardens planted by hassen-ben-sabah, and in these gardens
 isolated pavilions. into these pavilions admitted the elect, and
 there, says marco polo, gave them to eat certain herb, which
 transported them to paradise, in the midst of ever-blooming shrubs,
 ever-ripe fruit, and ever-lovely virgins. what these happy persons took
 for reality was but dream; but it was dream so soft, so voluptuous,
 so enthralling, that they sold themselves body and soul to him who gave
 it to them, and obedient to his orders as to those of deity, struck
 down the designated victim, died in torture without murmur, believing
 that the death they underwent was but quick transition to that life
 of delights of which the holy herb, now before you, had given them a
 slight foretaste.”
 
“then,” cried franz, “it is hashish! i know that—by name at least.”
 
“that is it precisely, signor aladdin; it is hashish—the purest and
 most unadulterated hashish of alexandria,—the hashish of abou-gor, the
 celebrated maker, the only man, the man to whom there should be built a
 palace, inscribed with these words, _a grateful world to the dealer in
 happiness_.”
 
“do you know,” said franz, “i have very great inclination to judge
 for myself of the truth or exaggeration of your eulogies.”
 
“judge for yourself, signor aladdin—judge, but do not confine yourself
 to one trial. like everything else, we must habituate the senses to a
 fresh impression, gentle or violent, sad or joyous. there is struggle
 in nature against this divine substance,—in nature which is not made
 for joy and clings to pain. nature subdued must yield in the combat,
 the dream must succeed to reality, and then the dream reigns supreme,
 then the dream becomes life, and life becomes the dream. but what
 changes occur! it is only by comparing the pains of actual being with
 the joys of the assumed existence, that you would desire to live no
 longer, but to dream thus forever. when you return to this mundane
 sphere from your visionary world, you would seem to leave neapolitan
 spring for lapland winter—to quit paradise for earth—heaven for hell!
 taste the hashish, guest of mine—taste the hashish.”
 
franz’s only reply was to take teaspoonful of the marvellous
 preparation, about as much in quantity as his host had eaten, and lift
 it to his mouth.
 
“_diable!_” said, after having swallowed the divine preserve. “i do
 not know if the result will be as agreeable as you describe, but the
 thing does not appear to as palatable as you say.”
 
“because your palate his not yet been attuned to the sublimity of the
 substances it flavors. tell me, the first time you tasted oysters, tea,
 porter, truffles, and sundry other dainties which you now adore, did
 you like them? could you comprehend how the romans stuffed their
 pheasants with assafœtida, and the chinese eat swallows’ nests? eh? no!
 well, it is the same with hashish; only eat for week, and nothing in
 the world will seem to you to equal the delicacy of its flavor, which
 now appears to you flat and distasteful. let us now go into the
 adjoining chamber, which is your apartment, and ali will bring us
 coffee and pipes.”
 
they both arose, and while who called himself sinbad—and whom we
 have occasionally named so, that we might, like his guest, have some
 title by which to distinguish him—gave some orders to the servant,
 franz entered still another apartment.
 
it was simply yet richly furnished. it was round, and large divan
 completely encircled it. divan, walls, ceiling, floor, were all covered
 with magnificent skins as soft and downy as the richest carpets; there
 were heavy-maned lion-skins from atlas, striped tiger-skins from
 bengal; panther-skins from the cape, spotted beautifully, like those
 that appeared to dante; bear-skins from siberia, fox-skins from norway,
 and so on; and all these skins were strewn in profusion one on the
 other, so that it seemed like walking over the most mossy turf, or
 reclining on the most luxurious bed.
 
both laid themselves down on the divan; chibouques with jasmine tubes
 and amber mouthpieces were within reach, and all prepared so that there
 was need to smoke the same pipe twice. each of them took one, which
 ali lighted and then retired to prepare the coffee.
 
there was moment’s silence, during which sinbad gave himself up to
 thoughts that seemed to occupy him incessantly, even in the midst of
 his conversation; and franz abandoned himself to that mute reverie,
 into which we always sink when smoking excellent tobacco, which seems
 to remove with its fume all the troubles of the mind, and to give the
 smoker in exchange all the visions of the soul. ali brought in the
 coffee.
 
“how do you take it?” inquired the unknown; “in the french or turkish
 style, strong or weak, sugar or none, cool or boiling? as you please;
 it is ready in all ways.”
 
“i will take it in the turkish style,” replied franz.
 
“and you are right,” said his host; “it shows you have tendency for
 an oriental life. ah, those orientals; they are the only men who know
 how to live. as for me,” added, with one of those singular smiles
 which did not escape the young man, “when i have completed my affairs
 in paris, i shall go and die in the east; and should you wish to see me
 again, you must seek at cairo, bagdad, or ispahan.”
 
20087m
 


“_ma foi_,” said franz, “it would be the easiest thing in the world;
 for i feel eagle’s wings springing out at my shoulders, and with those
 wings i could make tour of the world in four-and-twenty hours.”
 
“ah, yes, the hashish is beginning its work. well, unfurl your wings,
 and fly into superhuman regions; fear nothing, there is watch over
 you; and if your wings, like those of icarus, melt before the sun, we
 are here to ease your fall.”
 
then said something in arabic to ali, who made sign of obedience
 and withdrew, but not to any distance.
 
as to franz strange transformation had taken place in him. all the
 bodily fatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mind which the
 events of the evening had brought on, disappeared as they do at the
 first approach of sleep, when we are still sufficiently conscious to be
 aware of the coming of slumber. his body seemed to acquire an airy
 lightness, his perception brightened in remarkable manner, his senses
 seemed to redouble their power, the horizon continued to expand; but it
 was not the gloomy horizon of vague alarms, and which had seen
 before slept, but blue, transparent, unbounded horizon, with all
 the blue of the ocean, all the spangles of the sun, all the perfumes of
 the summer breeze; then, in the midst of the songs of his
 sailors,—songs so clear and sonorous, that they would have made a
 divine harmony had their notes been taken down,—he saw the island of
 monte cristo, longer as threatening rock in the midst of the
 waves, but as an oasis in the desert; then, as his boat drew nearer,
 the songs became louder, for an enchanting and mysterious harmony rose
 to heaven, as if some loreley had decreed to attract soul thither, or
 amphion, the enchanter, intended there to build city.
 
at length the boat touched the shore, but without effort, without
 shock, as lips touch lips; and entered the grotto amidst continued
 strains of most delicious melody. descended, or rather seemed to
 descend, several steps, inhaling the fresh and balmy air, like that
 which may be supposed to reign around the grotto of circe, formed from
 such perfumes as set the mind a-dreaming, and such fires as burn the
 very senses; and saw again all had seen before his sleep, from
 sinbad, his singular host, to ali, the mute attendant; then all seemed
 to fade away and become confused before his eyes, like the last shadows
 of the magic lantern before it is extinguished, and was again in the
 chamber of statues, lighted only by one of those pale and antique lamps
 which watch in the dead of the night over the sleep of pleasure.
 
they were the same statues, rich in form, in attraction, and poesy,
 with eyes of fascination, smiles of love, and bright and flowing hair.
 they were phryne, cleopatra, messalina, those three celebrated
 courtesans. then among them glided like pure ray, like christian
 angel in the midst of olympus, one of those chaste figures, those calm
 shadows, those soft visions, which seemed to veil its virgin brow
 before these marble wantons.
 
then the three statues advanced towards him with looks of love, and
 approached the couch on which was reposing, their feet hidden in
 their long white tunics, their throats bare, hair flowing like waves,
 and assuming attitudes which the gods could not resist, but which
 saints withstood, and looks inflexible and ardent like those with which
 the serpent charms the bird; and then gave way before looks that
 held him in torturing grasp and delighted his senses as with a
 voluptuous kiss.
 
it seemed to franz that closed his eyes, and in last look about
 him saw the vision of modesty completely veiled; and then followed a
 dream of passion like that promised by the prophet to the elect. lips
 of stone turned to flame, breasts of ice became like heated lava, so
 that to franz, yielding for the first time to the sway of the drug,
 love was sorrow and voluptuousness torture, as burning mouths were
 pressed to his thirsty lips, and was held in cool serpent-like
 embraces. the more strove against this unhallowed passion the more
 his senses yielded to its thrall, and at length, weary of struggle
 that taxed his very soul, gave way and sank back breathless and
 exhausted beneath the kisses of these marble goddesses, and the
 enchantment of his marvellous dream.
 


chapter 32. the waking
 
when franz returned to himself, seemed still to be in dream. he
 thought himself in sepulchre, into which ray of sunlight in pity
 scarcely penetrated. stretched forth his hand, and touched stone; he
 rose to his seat, and found himself lying on his bournous in bed of
 dry heather, very soft and odoriferous. the vision had fled; and as if
 the statues had been but shadows from the tomb, they had vanished at
 his waking.
 
advanced several paces towards the point whence the light came, and
 to all the excitement of his dream succeeded the calmness of reality.
 found that was in grotto, went towards the opening, and through
 kind of fanlight saw blue and an azure sky. the air and water
 were shining in the beams of the morning sun; on the shore the sailors
 were sitting, chatting and laughing; and at ten yards from them the
 boat was at anchor, undulating gracefully on the water.
 
there for some time enjoyed the fresh breeze which played on his
 brow, and listened to the dash of the waves on the beach, that left
 against the rocks lace of foam as white as silver. was for some
 time without reflection or thought for the divine charm which is in the
 things of nature, specially after fantastic dream; then gradually
 this view of the outer world, so calm, so pure, so grand, reminded him
 of the illusiveness of his vision, and once more awakened memory. he
 recalled his arrival on the island, his presentation to smuggler
 chief, subterranean palace full of splendor, an excellent supper, and
 spoonful of hashish.
 
it seemed, however, even in the very face of open day, that at least a
 year had elapsed since all these things had passed, so deep was the
 impression made in his mind by the dream, and so strong hold had it
 taken of his imagination. thus every now and then saw in fancy amid
 the sailors, seated on rock, or undulating in the vessel, one of the
 shadows which had shared his dream with looks and kisses. otherwise,
 his head was perfectly clear, and his body refreshed; was free from
 the slightest headache; on the contrary, felt certain degree of
 lightness, faculty for absorbing the pure air, and enjoying the
 bright sunshine more vividly than ever.
 
went gayly up to the sailors, who rose as soon as they perceived
 him; and the patron, accosting him, said:
 
“the signor sinbad has left his compliments for your excellency, and
 desires us to express the regret feels at not being able to take his
 leave in person; but trusts you will excuse him, as very important
 business calls him to malaga.”
 
“so, then, gaetano,” said franz, “this is, then, all reality; there
 exists man who has received in this island, entertained right
 royally, and has departed while i was asleep?”
 
“he exists as certainly as that you may see his small yacht with all
 her sails spread; and if you will use your glass, you will, in all
 probability, recognize your host in the midst of his crew.”
 
so saying, gaetano pointed in direction in which small vessel was
 making sail towards the southern point of corsica. franz adjusted his
 telescope, and directed it towards the yacht. gaetano was not mistaken.
 at the stern the mysterious stranger was standing up looking towards
 the shore, and holding spy-glass in his hand. was attired as he
 had been on the previous evening, and waved his pocket-handkerchief to
 his guest in token of adieu. franz returned the salute by shaking his
 handkerchief as an exchange of signals. after second, slight cloud
 of smoke was seen at the stern of the vessel, which rose gracefully as
 it expanded in the air, and then franz heard slight report.
 
“there, do you hear?” observed gaetano; “he is bidding you adieu.”
 
the young man took his carbine and fired it in the air, but without any
 idea that the noise could be heard at the distance which separated the
 yacht from the shore.
 
“what are your excellency’s orders?” inquired gaetano.
 
“in the first place, light torch.”
 
“ah, yes, i understand,” replied the patron, “to find the entrance to
 the enchanted apartment. with much pleasure, your excellency, if it
 would amuse you; and i will get you the torch you ask for. but i too
 have had the idea you have, and two or three times the same fancy has
 come over me; but i have always given it up. giovanni, light torch,”
 added, “and give it to his excellency.”
 
giovanni obeyed. franz took the lamp, and entered the subterranean
 grotto, followed by gaetano. recognized the place where had
 awaked by the bed of heather that was there; but it was in vain that he
 carried his torch all round the exterior surface of the grotto. saw
 nothing, unless that, by traces of smoke, others had before him
 attempted the same thing, and, like him, in vain. yet did not leave
 foot of this granite wall, as impenetrable as futurity, without
 strict scrutiny; did not see fissure without introducing the blade
 of his hunting sword into it, or projecting point on which did not
 lean and press in the hopes it would give way. all was vain; and he
 lost two hours in his attempts, which were at last utterly useless. at
 the end of this time gave up his search, and gaetano smiled.
 
when franz appeared again on the shore, the yacht only seemed like a
 small white speck on the horizon. looked again through his glass,
 but even then could not distinguish anything.
 
gaetano reminded him that had come for the purpose of shooting
 goats, which had utterly forgotten. took his fowling-piece, and
 began to hunt over the island with the air of man who is fulfilling a
 duty, rather than enjoying pleasure; and at the end of quarter of
 an hour had killed goat and two kids. these animals, though wild
 and agile as chamois, were too much like domestic goats, and franz
 could not consider them as game. moreover, other ideas, much more
 enthralling, occupied his mind. since, the evening before, had
 really been the hero of one of the tales of the _thousand and one
 nights_, and was irresistibly attracted towards the grotto.
 
then, in spite of the failure of his first search, began second,
 after having told gaetano to roast one of the two kids. the second
 visit was long one, and when returned the kid was roasted and the
 repast ready. franz was sitting on the spot where was on the
 previous evening when his mysterious host had invited him to supper;
 and saw the little yacht, now like sea-gull on the wave,
 continuing her flight towards corsica.
 
“why,” remarked to gaetano, “you told that signor sinbad was
 going to malaga, while it seems is in the direction of
 porto-vecchio.”
 
“don’t you remember,” said the patron, “i told you that among the crew
 there were two corsican brigands?”
 
“true; and is going to land them,” added franz.
 
“precisely so,” replied gaetano. “ah, is one who fears neither god
 nor satan, they say, and would at any time run fifty leagues out of his
 course to do poor devil service.”
 
20093m
 


“but such services as these might involve him with the authorities of
 the country in which practices this kind of philanthropy,” said
 franz.
 
“and what cares for that,” replied gaetano with laugh, “or any
 authorities? smiles at them. let them try to pursue him! why, in the
 first place, his yacht is not ship, but bird, and would beat any
 frigate three knots in every nine; and if were to throw himself on
 the coast, why, is not certain of finding friends everywhere?”
 
it was perfectly clear that the signor sinbad, franz’s host, had the
 honor of being on excellent terms with the smugglers and bandits along
 the whole coast of the mediterranean, and so enjoyed exceptional
 privileges. as to franz, had longer any inducement to remain at
 monte cristo. had lost all hope of detecting the secret of the
 grotto; consequently despatched his breakfast, and, his boat being
 ready, hastened on board, and they were soon under way. at the
 moment the boat began her course they lost sight of the yacht, as it
 disappeared in the gulf of porto-vecchio. with it was effaced the last
 trace of the preceding night; and then supper, sinbad, hashish,
 statues,—all became dream for franz.
 
the boat sailed on all day and all night, and next morning, when the
 sun rose, they had lost sight of monte cristo.
 
when franz had once again set foot on shore, forgot, for the moment
 at least, the events which had just passed, while finished his
 affairs of pleasure at florence, and then thought of nothing but how he
 should rejoin his companion, who was awaiting him at rome.
 
set out, and on the saturday evening reached the place douane
 by the mail-coach. an apartment, as we have said, had been retained
 beforehand, and thus had but to go to signor pastrini’s hotel. but
 this was not so easy matter, for the streets were thronged with
 people, and rome was already prey to that low and feverish murmur
 which precedes all great events; and at rome there are four great
 events in every year,—the carnival, holy week, corpus christi, and the
 feast of st. peter.
 
all the rest of the year the city is in that state of dull apathy,
 between life and death, which renders it similar to kind of station
 between this world and the next—a sublime spot, resting-place full of
 poetry and character, and at which franz had already halted five or six
 times, and at each time found it more marvellous and striking.
 
at last made his way through the mob, which was continually
 increasing and getting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel.
 on his first inquiry was told, with the impertinence peculiar to
 hired hackney-coachmen and innkeepers with their houses full, that
 there was room for him at the hôtel londres. then sent his
 card to signor pastrini, and asked for albert morcerf. this plan
 succeeded; and signor pastrini himself ran to him, excusing himself for
 having made his excellency wait, scolding the waiters, taking the
 candlestick from the porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller
 and was about to lead him to albert, when morcerf himself appeared.
 
the apartment consisted of two small rooms and parlor. the two rooms
 looked on to the street—a fact which signor pastrini commented upon as
 an inappreciable advantage. the rest of the floor was hired by very
 rich gentleman who was supposed to be sicilian or maltese; but the
 host was unable to decide to which of the two nations the traveller
 belonged.
 
“very good, signor pastrini,” said franz; “but we must have some supper
 instantly, and carriage for tomorrow and the following days.”
 
“as to supper,” replied the landlord, “you shall be served immediately;
 but as for the carriage——”
 
“what as to the carriage?” exclaimed albert. “come, come, signor
 pastrini, joking; we must have carriage.”
 
“sir,” replied the host, “we will do all in our power to procure you
 one—this is all i can say.”
 
“and when shall we know?” inquired franz.
 
“tomorrow morning,” answered the innkeeper.
 
“oh, the deuce! then we shall pay the more, that’s all, i see plainly
 enough. at drake’s or aaron’s one pays twenty-five lire for common
 days, and thirty or thirty-five lire day more for sundays and feast
 days; add five lire day more for extras, that will make forty, and
 there’s an end of it.”
 
“i am afraid if we offer them double that we shall not procure a
 carriage.”
 
“then they must put horses to mine. it is little worse for the
 journey, but that’s matter.”
 
“there are horses.”
 
albert looked at franz like man who hears reply does not
 understand.
 
“do you understand that, my dear franz—no horses?” said, “but can’t
 we have post-horses?”
 
“they have been all hired this fortnight, and there are none left but
 those absolutely requisite for posting.”
 
“what are we to say to this?” asked franz.
 
“i say, that when thing completely surpasses my comprehension, i am
 accustomed not to dwell on that thing, but to pass to another. is
 supper ready, signor pastrini?”
 
“yes, your excellency.”
 
“well, then, let us sup.”
 
“but the carriage and horses?” said franz.
 
“be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it is only a
 question of how much shall be charged for them.” morcerf then, with
 that delighted philosophy which believes that nothing is impossible to
 full purse or well-lined pocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept
 soundly, and dreamed was racing all over rome at carnival time in a
 coach with six horses.
 


chapter 33. roman bandits
 
the next morning franz woke first, and instantly rang the bell. the
 sound had not yet died away when signor pastrini himself entered.
 
“well, excellency,” said the landlord triumphantly, and without waiting
 for franz to question him, “i feared yesterday, when i would not
 promise you anything, that you were too late—there is not single
 carriage to be had—that is, for the three last days”
 
“yes,” returned franz, “for the very three days it is most needed.”
 
“what is the matter?” said albert, entering; “no carriage to be had?”
 
“just so,” returned franz, “you have guessed it.”
 
“well, your eternal city is nice sort of place.”
 
“that is to say, excellency,” replied pastrini, who was desirous of
 keeping up the dignity of the capital of the christian world in the
 eyes of his guest, “that there are carriages to be had from sunday
 to tuesday evening, but from now till sunday you can have fifty if you
 please.”
 
“ah, that is something,” said albert; “today is thursday, and who knows
 what may arrive between this and sunday?”
 
“ten or twelve thousand travellers will arrive,” replied franz, “which
 will make it still more difficult.”
 
“my friend,” said morcerf, “let us enjoy the present without gloomy
 forebodings for the future.”
 
“at least we can have window?”
 
“where?”
 
“in the corso.”
 
“ah, window!” exclaimed signor pastrini,—“utterly impossible; there
 was only one left on the fifth floor of the doria palace, and that has
 been let to russian prince for twenty sequins day.”
 
the two young men looked at each other with an air of stupefaction.
 
“well,” said franz to albert, “do you know what is the best thing we
 can do? it is to pass the carnival at venice; there we are sure of
 obtaining gondolas if we cannot have carriages.”
 
“ah, the devil, no,” cried albert; “i came to rome to see the carnival,
 and i will, though i see it on stilts.”
 
“bravo! an excellent idea. we will disguise ourselves as monster
 pulchinellos or shepherds of the landes, and we shall have complete
 success.”
 
“do your excellencies still wish for carriage from now to sunday
 morning?”
 
“_parbleu!_” said albert, “do you think we are going to run about on
 foot in the streets of rome, like lawyers’ clerks?”
 
“i hasten to comply with your excellencies’ wishes; only, i tell you
 beforehand, the carriage will cost you six piastres day.”
 
“and, as i am not millionaire, like the gentleman in the next
 apartments,” said franz, “i warn you, that as i have been four times
 before at rome, i know the prices of all the carriages; we will give
 you twelve piastres for today, tomorrow, and the day after, and then
 you will make good profit.”
 
“but, excellency”—said pastrini, still striving to gain his point.
 
“now go,” returned franz, “or i shall go myself and bargain with your
 _affettatore_, who is mine also; is an old friend of mine, who has
 plundered pretty well already, and, in the hope of making more out
 of me, will take less price than the one i offer you; you will
 lose the preference, and that will be your fault.”
 
“do not give yourselves the trouble, excellency,” returned signor
 pastrini, with the smile peculiar to the italian speculator when he
 confesses defeat; “i will do all i can, and i hope you will be
 satisfied.”
 
“and now we understand each other.”
 
“when do you wish the carriage to be here?”
 
“in an hour.”
 
“in an hour it will be at the door.”
 
an hour after the vehicle was at the door; it was hack conveyance
 which was elevated to the rank of private carriage in honor of the
 occasion, but, in spite of its humble exterior, the young men would
 have thought themselves happy to have secured it for the last three
 days of the carnival.
 
“excellency,” cried the _cicerone_, seeing franz approach the window,
 “shall i bring the carriage nearer to the palace?”
 
accustomed as franz was to the italian phraseology, his first impulse
 was to look round him, but these words were addressed to him. franz was
 the “excellency,” the vehicle was the “carriage,” and the hôtel de
 londres was the “palace.” the genius for laudation characteristic of
 the race was in that phrase.
 
franz and albert descended, the carriage approached the palace; their
 excellencies stretched their legs along the seats; the _cicerone_
 sprang into the seat behind.
 
“where do your excellencies wish to go?” asked he.
 
“to saint peter’s first, and then to the colosseum,” returned albert.
 but albert did not know that it takes day to see saint peter’s, and a
 month to study it. the day was passed at saint peter’s alone.
 
suddenly the daylight began to fade away; franz took out his watch—it
 was half-past four. they returned to the hotel; at the door franz
 ordered the coachman to be ready at eight. wished to show albert the
 colosseum by moonlight, as had shown him saint peter’s by daylight.
 when we show friend city one has already visited, we feel the same
 pride as when we point out woman whose lover we have been.
 
was to leave the city by the porta popolo, skirt the outer wall,
 and re-enter by the porta san giovanni; thus they would behold the
 colosseum without finding their impressions dulled by first looking on
 the capitol, the forum, the arch of septimus severus, the temple of
 antoninus and faustina, and the via sacra.
 
they sat down to dinner. signor pastrini had promised them banquet;
 gave them tolerable repast. at the end of the dinner entered in
 person. franz thought that came to hear his dinner praised, and
 began accordingly, but at the first words was interrupted.
 
“excellency,” said pastrini, “i am delighted to have your approbation,
 but it was not for that i came.”
 
“did you come to tell us you have procured carriage?” asked albert,
 lighting his cigar.
 
“no; and your excellencies will do well not to think of that any
 longer; at rome things can or cannot be done; when you are told
 anything cannot be done, there is an end of it.”
 
“it is much more convenient at paris,—when anything cannot be done, you
 pay double, and it is done directly.”
 
“that is what all the french say,” returned signor pastrini, somewhat
 piqued; “for that reason, i do not understand why they travel.”
 
“but,” said albert, emitting volume of smoke and balancing his chair
 on its hind legs, “only madmen, or blockheads like us, ever do travel.
 men in their senses do not quit their hotel in the rue du helder, their
 walk on the boulevard gand, and the café paris.”
 
it is of course understood that albert resided in the aforesaid street,
 appeared every day on the fashionable walk, and dined frequently at the
 only restaurant where you can really dine, that is, if you are on good
 terms with its waiters.
 
signor pastrini remained silent short time; it was evident that he
 was musing over this answer, which did not seem very clear.
 
“but,” said franz, in his turn interrupting his host’s meditations,
 “you had some motive for coming here, may i beg to know what it was?”
 
20099m
 


“ah, yes; you have ordered your carriage at eight o’clock precisely?”
 
“i have.”
 
“you intend visiting _il colosseo_.”
 
“you mean the colosseum?”
 
“it is the same thing. you have told your coachman to leave the city by
 the porta popolo, to drive round the walls, and re-enter by the
 porta san giovanni?”
 
“these are my words exactly.”
 
“well, this route is impossible.”
 
“impossible!”
 
“very dangerous, to say the least.”
 
“dangerous!—and why?”
 
“on account of the famous luigi vampa.”
 
“pray, who may this famous luigi vampa be?” inquired albert; “he may be
 very famous at rome, but i can assure you is quite unknown at
 paris.”
 
“what! do you not know him?”
 
“i have not that honor.”
 
“you have never heard his name?”
 
“never.”
 
“well, then, is bandit, compared to whom the decesaris and the
 gasparones were mere children.”
 
“now then, albert,” cried franz, “here is bandit for you at last.”
 
“i forewarn you, signor pastrini, that i shall not believe one word of
 what you are going to tell us; having told you this, begin. ‘once upon
 time——’ well, go on.”
 
signor pastrini turned toward franz, who seemed to him the more
 reasonable of the two; we must do him justice,—he had had great many
 frenchmen in his house, but had never been able to comprehend them.
 
“excellency,” said gravely, addressing franz, “if you look upon me
 as liar, it is useless for to say anything; it was for your
 interest i——”
 
“albert does not say you are liar, signor pastrini,” said franz, “but
 that will not believe what you are going to tell us,—but i will
 believe all you say; so proceed.”
 
“but if your excellency doubt my veracity——”
 
“signor pastrini,” returned franz, “you are more susceptible than
 cassandra, who was prophetess, and yet one believed her; while
 you, at least, are sure of the credence of half your audience. come,
 sit down, and tell us all about this signor vampa.”
 
“i had told your excellency is the most famous bandit we have had
 since the days of mastrilla.”
 
“well, what has this bandit to do with the order i have given the
 coachman to leave the city by the porta popolo, and to re-enter by
 the porta san giovanni?”
 
20101m
 


“this,” replied signor pastrini, “that you will go out by one, but i
 very much doubt your returning by the other.”
 
“why?” asked franz.
 
“because, after nightfall, you are not safe fifty yards from the
 gates.”
 
“on your honor, is that true?” cried albert.
 
“count,” returned signor pastrini, hurt at albert’s repeated doubts of
 the truth of his assertions, “i do not say this to you, but to your
 companion, who knows rome, and knows, too, that these things are not to
 be laughed at.”
 
“my dear fellow,” said albert, turning to franz, “here is an admirable
 adventure; we will fill our carriage with pistols, blunderbusses, and
 double-barrelled guns. luigi vampa comes to take us, and we take him—we
 bring him back to rome, and present him to his holiness the pope, who
 asks how can repay so great service; then we merely ask for a
 carriage and pair of horses, and we see the carnival in the carriage,
 and doubtless the roman people will crown us at the capitol, and
 proclaim us, like curtius and horatius cocles, the preservers of their
 country.”
 
whilst albert proposed this scheme, signor pastrini’s face assumed an
 expression impossible to describe.
 
“and pray,” asked franz, “where are these pistols, blunderbusses, and
 other deadly weapons with which you intend filling the carriage?”
 
“not out of my armory, for at terracina i was plundered even of my
 hunting-knife. and you?”
 
“i shared the same fate at aquapendente.”
 
“do you know, signor pastrini,” said albert, lighting second cigar at
 the first, “that this practice is very convenient for bandits, and that
 it seems to be due to an arrangement of their own.”
 
doubtless signor pastrini found this pleasantry compromising, for he
 only answered half the question, and then spoke to franz, as the
 only one likely to listen with attention. “your excellency knows that
 it is not customary to defend yourself when attacked by bandits.”
 
“what!” cried albert, whose courage revolted at the idea of being
 plundered tamely, “not make any resistance!”
 
“no, for it would be useless. what could you do against dozen bandits
 who spring out of some pit, ruin, or aqueduct, and level their pieces
 at you?”
 
“eh, _parbleu!_—they should kill me.”
 
the innkeeper turned to franz with an air that seemed to say, “your
 friend is decidedly mad.”
 
“my dear albert,” returned franz, “your answer is sublime, and worthy
 the ‘_let him die_,’ of corneille, only, when horace made that answer,
 the safety of rome was concerned; but, as for us, it is only to gratify
 whim, and it would be ridiculous to risk our lives for so foolish a
 motive.”
 
albert poured himself out glass of _lacryma christi_, which sipped
 at intervals, muttering some unintelligible words.
 
“well, signor pastrini,” said franz, “now that my companion is quieted,
 and you have seen how peaceful my intentions are, tell who is this
 luigi vampa. is shepherd or nobleman?—young or old?—tall or
 short? describe him, in order that, if we meet him by chance, like jean
 sbogar or lara, we may recognize him.”
 
“you could not apply to anyone better able to inform you on all these
 points, for i knew him when was child, and one day that i fell
 into his hands, going from ferentino to alatri, he, fortunately for me,
 recollected me, and set free, not only without ransom, but made a
 present of very splendid watch, and related his history to me.”
 
“let us see the watch,” said albert.
 
signor pastrini drew from his fob magnificent bréguet, bearing the
 name of its maker, of parisian manufacture, and count’s coronet.
 
“here it is,” said he.
 
“_peste!_” returned albert, “i compliment you on it; i have its
 fellow”—he took his watch from his waistcoat pocket—“and it cost me
 3,000 francs.”
 
“let us hear the history,” said franz, motioning signor pastrini to
 seat himself.
 
“your excellencies permit it?” asked the host.
 
“_pardieu!_” cried albert, “you are not preacher, to remain
 standing!”
 
the host sat down, after having made each of them respectful bow,
 which meant that was ready to tell them all they wished to know
 concerning luigi vampa.
 
“you tell me,” said franz, at the moment signor pastrini was about to
 open his mouth, “that you knew luigi vampa when was child—he is
 still young man, then?”
 
“a young man? is only two-and-twenty;—he will gain himself a
 reputation.”
 
“what do you think of that, albert?—at two-and-twenty to be thus
 famous?”
 
“yes, and at his age, alexander, cæsar, and napoleon, who have all made
 some noise in the world, were quite behind him.”
 
“so,” continued franz, “the hero of this history is only
 two-and-twenty?”
 
“scarcely so much.”
 
“is tall or short?”
 
“of the middle height—about the same stature as his excellency,”
 returned the host, pointing to albert.
 
“thanks for the comparison,” said albert, with bow.
 
“go on, signor pastrini,” continued franz, smiling at his friend’s
 susceptibility. “to what class of society does belong?”
 
“he was shepherd-boy attached to the farm of the count of san-felice,
 situated between palestrina and the lake of gabri; was born at
 pampinara, and entered the count’s service when was five years old;
 his father was also shepherd, who owned small flock, and lived by
 the wool and the milk, which sold at rome. when quite child, the
 little vampa displayed most extraordinary precocity. one day, when he
 was seven years old, came to the curate of palestrina, and asked to
 be taught to read; it was somewhat difficult, for could not quit his
 flock; but the good curate went every day to say mass at little
 hamlet too poor to pay priest and which, having other name, was
 called borgo; told luigi that might meet him on his return, and
 that then would give him lesson, warning him that it would be
 short, and that must profit as much as possible by it. the child
 accepted joyfully. every day luigi led his flock to graze on the road
 that leads from palestrina to borgo; every day, at nine o’clock in the
 morning, the priest and the boy sat down on bank by the wayside, and
 the little shepherd took his lesson out of the priest’s breviary. at
 the end of three months had learned to read. this was not enough—he
 must now learn to write. the priest had writing teacher at rome make
 three alphabets—one large, one middling, and one small; and pointed out
 to him that by the help of sharp instrument could trace the
 letters on slate, and thus learn to write. the same evening, when the
 flock was safe at the farm, the little luigi hastened to the smith at
 palestrina, took large nail, heated and sharpened it, and formed a
 sort of stylus. the next morning gathered an armful of pieces of
 slate and began. at the end of three months had learned to write.
 the curate, astonished at his quickness and intelligence, made him a
 present of pens, paper, and penknife. this demanded new effort, but
 nothing compared to the first; at the end of week wrote as well
 with this pen as with the stylus. the curate related the incident to
 the count of san-felice, who sent for the little shepherd, made him
 read and write before him, ordered his attendant to let him eat with
 the domestics, and to give him two piastres month. with this, luigi
 purchased books and pencils. applied his imitative powers to
 everything, and, like giotto, when young, drew on his slate sheep,
 houses, and trees. then, with his knife, began to carve all sorts of
 objects in wood; it was thus that pinelli, the famous sculptor, had
 commenced.
 
20105m
 


“a girl of six or seven—that is, little younger than vampa—tended
 sheep on farm near palestrina; she was an orphan, born at valmontone
 and was named teresa. the two children met, sat down near each other,
 let their flocks mingle together, played, laughed, and conversed
 together; in the evening they separated the count of san-felice’s flock
 from those of baron cervetri, and the children returned to their
 respective farms, promising to meet the next morning. the next day they
 kept their word, and thus they grew up together. vampa was twelve, and
 teresa eleven. and yet their natural disposition revealed itself.
 beside his taste for the fine arts, which luigi had carried as far as
 could in his solitude, was given to alternating fits of sadness
 and enthusiasm, was often angry and capricious, and always sarcastic.
 none of the lads of pampinara, palestrina, or valmontone had been able
 to gain any influence over him or even to become his companion. his
 disposition (always inclined to exact concessions rather than to make
 them) kept him aloof from all friendships. teresa alone ruled by a
 look, word, gesture, this impetuous character, which yielded
 beneath the hand of woman, and which beneath the hand of man might
 have broken, but could never have been bended. teresa was lively and
 gay, but coquettish to excess. the two piastres that luigi received
 every month from the count of san-felice’s steward, and the price of
 all the little carvings in wood sold at rome, were expended in
 ear-rings, necklaces, and gold hairpins. so that, thanks to her
 friend’s generosity, teresa was the most beautiful and the best-attired
 peasant near rome.
 
“the two children grew up together, passing all their time with each
 other, and giving themselves up to the wild ideas of their different
 characters. thus, in all their dreams, their wishes, and their
 conversations, vampa saw himself the captain of vessel, general of an
 army, or governor of province. teresa saw herself rich, superbly
 attired, and attended by train of liveried domestics. then, when they
 had thus passed the day in building castles in the air, they separated
 their flocks, and descended from the elevation of their dreams to the
 reality of their humble position.
 
“one day the young shepherd told the count’s steward that had seen a
 wolf come out of the sabine mountains, and prowl around his flock. the
 steward gave him gun; this was what vampa longed for. this gun had an
 excellent barrel, made at brescia, and carrying ball with the
 precision of an english rifle; but one day the count broke the stock,
 and had then cast the gun aside. this, however, was nothing to a
 sculptor like vampa; examined the broken stock, calculated what
 change it would require to adapt the gun to his shoulder, and made a
 fresh stock, so beautifully carved that it would have fetched fifteen
 or twenty piastres, had chosen to sell it. but nothing could be
 farther from his thoughts.
 
“for long time gun had been the young man’s greatest ambition. in
 every country where independence has taken the place of liberty, the
 first desire of manly heart is to possess weapon, which at once
 renders him capable of defence or attack, and, by rendering its owner
 terrible, often makes him feared. from this moment vampa devoted all
 his leisure time to perfecting himself in the use of his precious
 weapon; purchased powder and ball, and everything served him for a
 mark—the trunk of some old and moss-grown olive-tree, that grew on the
 sabine mountains; the fox, as quitted his earth on some marauding
 excursion; the eagle that soared above their heads: and thus soon
 became so expert, that teresa overcame the terror she at first felt at
 the report, and amused herself by watching him direct the ball wherever
 pleased, with as much accuracy as if placed it by hand.
 
20107m
 


“one evening wolf emerged from pine-wood near which they were
 usually stationed, but the wolf had scarcely advanced ten yards ere he
 was dead. proud of this exploit, vampa took the dead animal on his
 shoulders, and carried him to the farm. these exploits had gained luigi
 considerable reputation. the man of superior abilities always finds
 admirers, go where will. was spoken of as the most adroit, the
 strongest, and the most courageous _contadino_ for ten leagues around;
 and although teresa was universally allowed to be the most beautiful
 girl of the sabines, one had ever spoken to her of love, because it
 was known that she was beloved by vampa. and yet the two young people
 had never declared their affection; they had grown together like two
 trees whose roots are mingled, whose branches intertwined, and whose
 intermingled perfume rises to the heavens. only their wish to see each
 other had become necessity, and they would have preferred death to a
 day’s separation.
 
“teresa was sixteen, and vampa seventeen. about this time, band of
 brigands that had established itself in the lepini mountains began to
 be much spoken of. the brigands have never been really extirpated from
 the neighborhood of rome. sometimes chief is wanted, but when chief
 presents himself rarely has to wait long for band of followers.
 
“the celebrated cucumetto, pursued in the abruzzo, driven out of the
 kingdom of naples, where had carried on regular war, had crossed
 the garigliano, like manfred, and had taken refuge on the banks of the
 amasine between sonnino and juperno. strove to collect band of
 followers, and followed the footsteps of decesaris and gasparone, whom
 hoped to surpass. many young men of palestrina, frascati, and
 pampinara had disappeared. their disappearance at first caused much
 disquietude; but it was soon known that they had joined cucumetto.
 after some time cucumetto became the object of universal attention; the
 most extraordinary traits of ferocious daring and brutality were
 related of him.
 
“one day carried off young girl, the daughter of surveyor of
 frosinone. the bandit’s laws are positive; young girl belongs first
 to him who carries her off, then the rest draw lots for her, and she is
 abandoned to their brutality until death relieves her sufferings. when
 their parents are sufficiently rich to pay ransom, messenger is
 sent to negotiate; the prisoner is hostage for the security of the
 messenger; should the ransom be refused, the prisoner is irrevocably
 lost. the young girl’s lover was in cucumetto’s troop; his name was
 carlini. when she recognized her lover, the poor girl extended her arms
 to him, and believed herself safe; but carlini felt his heart sink, for
 but too well knew the fate that awaited her. however, as was a
 favorite with cucumetto, as had for three years faithfully served
 him, and as had saved his life by shooting dragoon who was about
 to cut him down, hoped the chief would have pity on him. took
 cucumetto one side, while the young girl, seated at the foot of huge
 pine that stood in the centre of the forest, made veil of her
 picturesque head-dress to hide her face from the lascivious gaze of the
 bandits. there told the chief all—his affection for the prisoner,
 their promises of mutual fidelity, and how every night, since had
 been near, they had met in some neighboring ruins.
 
20109m
 


“it so happened that night that cucumetto had sent carlini to a
 village, so that had been unable to go to the place of meeting.
 cucumetto had been there, however, by accident, as said, and had
 carried the maiden off. carlini besought his chief to make an exception
 in rita’s favor, as her father was rich, and could pay large ransom.
 cucumetto seemed to yield to his friend’s entreaties, and bade him find
 shepherd to send to rita’s father at frosinone.
 
“carlini flew joyfully to rita, telling her she was saved, and bidding
 her write to her father, to inform him what had occurred, and that her
 ransom was fixed at three hundred piastres. twelve hours’ delay was all
 that was granted—that is, until nine the next morning. the instant the
 letter was written, carlini seized it, and hastened to the plain to
 find messenger. found young shepherd watching his flock. the
 natural messengers of the bandits are the shepherds who live between
 the city and the mountains, between civilized and savage life. the boy
 undertook the commission, promising to be in frosinone in less than an
 hour. carlini returned, anxious to see his mistress, and announce the
 joyful intelligence. found the troop in the glade, supping off the
 provisions exacted as contributions from the peasants; but his eye
 vainly sought rita and cucumetto among them.
 
“he inquired where they were, and was answered by burst of laughter.
 cold perspiration burst from every pore, and his hair stood on end.
 repeated his question. one of the bandits rose, and offered him a
 glass filled with orvietto, saying, ‘to the health of the brave
 cucumetto and the fair rita.’ at this moment carlini heard woman’s
 cry; divined the truth, seized the glass, broke it across the face
 of him who presented it, and rushed towards the spot whence the cry
 came. after hundred yards turned the corner of the thicket; he
 found rita senseless in the arms of cucumetto. at the sight of carlini,
 cucumetto rose, pistol in each hand. the two brigands looked at each
 other for moment—the one with smile of lasciviousness on his lips,
 the other with the pallor of death on his brow. terrible battle
 between the two men seemed imminent; but by degrees carlini’s features
 relaxed, his hand, which had grasped one of the pistols in his belt,
 fell to his side. rita lay between them. the moon lighted the group.
 
“‘well,’ said cucumetto, ‘have you executed your commission?’
 
“‘yes, captain,’ returned carlini. ‘at nine o’clock tomorrow rita’s
 father will be here with the money.’
 
“‘it is well; in the meantime, we will have merry night; this young
 girl is charming, and does credit to your taste. now, as i am not
 egotistical, we will return to our comrades and draw lots for her.’
 
“‘you have determined, then, to abandon her to the common law?’ said
 carlini.
 
“‘why should an exception be made in her favor?’
 
“‘i thought that my entreaties——’
 
“‘what right have you, any more than the rest, to ask for an
 exception?’
 
“‘it is true.’
 
“‘but never mind,’ continued cucumetto, laughing, ‘sooner or later your
 turn will come.’ carlini’s teeth clenched convulsively.
 
“‘now, then,’ said cucumetto, advancing towards the other bandits, ‘are
 you coming?’
 
“‘i follow you.’
 
20111m
 


“cucumetto departed, without losing sight of carlini, for, doubtless,
 feared lest should strike him unawares; but nothing betrayed a
 hostile design on carlini’s part. was standing, his arms folded,
 near rita, who was still insensible. cucumetto fancied for moment the
 young man was about to take her in his arms and fly; but this mattered
 little to him now rita had been his; and as for the money, three
 hundred piastres distributed among the band was so small sum that he
 cared little about it. continued to follow the path to the glade;
 but, to his great surprise, carlini arrived almost as soon as himself.
 
“‘let us draw lots! let us draw lots!’ cried all the brigands, when
 they saw the chief.
 
“their demand was fair, and the chief inclined his head in sign of
 acquiescence. the eyes of all shone fiercely as they made their demand,
 and the red light of the fire made them look like demons. the names of
 all, including carlini, were placed in hat, and the youngest of the
 band drew forth ticket; the ticket bore the name of diavolaccio. he
 was the man who had proposed to carlini the health of their chief, and
 to whom carlini replied by breaking the glass across his face. large
 wound, extending from the temple to the mouth, was bleeding profusely.
 diavolaccio, seeing himself thus favored by fortune, burst into loud
 laugh.
 
“‘captain,’ said he, ‘just now carlini would not drink your health when
 i proposed it to him; propose mine to him, and let us see if will be
 more condescending to you than to me.’
 
“everyone expected an explosion on carlini’s part; but to their great
 surprise, took glass in one hand and flask in the other, and
 filling it,—
 
“‘your health, diavolaccio,’ said calmly, and drank it off,
 without his hand trembling in the least. then sitting down by the fire,
 ‘my supper,’ said he; ‘my expedition has given an appetite.’
 
“‘well done, carlini!’ cried the brigands; ‘that is acting like good
 fellow;’ and they all formed circle round the fire, while diavolaccio
 disappeared.
 
“carlini ate and drank as if nothing had happened. the bandits looked
 on with astonishment at this singular conduct until they heard
 footsteps. they turned round, and saw diavolaccio bearing the young
 girl in his arms. her head hung back, and her long hair swept the
 ground. as they entered the circle, the bandits could perceive, by the
 firelight, the unearthly pallor of the young girl and of diavolaccio.
 this apparition was so strange and so solemn, that everyone rose, with
 the exception of carlini, who remained seated, and ate and drank
 calmly. diavolaccio advanced amidst the most profound silence, and laid
 rita at the captain’s feet. then everyone could understand the cause of
 the unearthly pallor in the young girl and the bandit. knife was
 plunged up to the hilt in rita’s left breast. everyone looked at
 carlini; the sheath at his belt was empty.
 
“‘ah, ah,’ said the chief, ‘i now understand why carlini stayed
 behind.’
 
“all savage natures appreciate desperate deed. other of the
 bandits would, perhaps, have done the same; but they all understood
 what carlini had done.
 
“‘now, then,’ cried carlini, rising in his turn, and approaching the
 corpse, his hand on the butt of one of his pistols, ‘does anyone
 dispute the possession of this woman with me?’
 
“‘no,’ returned the chief, ‘she is thine.’
 
“carlini raised her in his arms, and carried her out of the circle of
 firelight. cucumetto placed his sentinels for the night, and the
 bandits wrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay down before the
 fire. at midnight the sentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all
 were on the alert. it was rita’s father, who brought his daughter’s
 ransom in person.
 
“‘here,’ said he, to cucumetto, ‘here are three hundred piastres; give
 back my child.
 
“but the chief, without taking the money, made sign to him to follow.
 the old man obeyed. they both advanced beneath the trees, through whose
 branches streamed the moonlight. cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed
 to two persons grouped at the foot of tree.
 
“‘there,’ said he, ‘demand thy child of carlini; will tell thee what
 has become of her;’ and returned to his companions.
 
“the old man remained motionless; felt that some great and
 unforeseen misfortune hung over his head. at length advanced toward
 the group, the meaning of which could not comprehend. as he
 approached, carlini raised his head, and the forms of two persons
 became visible to the old man’s eyes. woman lay on the ground, her
 head resting on the knees of man, who was seated by her; as raised
 his head, the woman’s face became visible. the old man recognized his
 child, and carlini recognized the old man.
 
“‘i expected thee,’ said the bandit to rita’s father.
 
“‘wretch!’ returned the old man, ‘what hast thou done?’ and gazed
 with terror on rita, pale and bloody, knife buried in her bosom. a
 ray of moonlight poured through the trees, and lighted up the face of
 the dead.
 
“‘cucumetto had violated thy daughter,’ said the bandit; ‘i loved her,
 therefore i slew her; for she would have served as the sport of the
 whole band.’ the old man spoke not, and grew pale as death. ‘now,’
 continued carlini, ‘if i have done wrongly, avenge her;’ and
 withdrawing the knife from the wound in rita’s bosom, held it out to
 the old man with one hand, while with the other tore open his vest.
 
“‘thou hast done well!’ returned the old man in hoarse voice;
 ‘embrace me, my son.’
 
20115m
 


carlini threw himself, sobbing like child, into the arms of his
 mistress’s father. these were the first tears the man of blood had ever
 wept.
 
“‘now,’ said the old man, ‘aid to bury my child.’ carlini fetched
 two pickaxes; and the father and the lover began to dig at the foot of
 huge oak, beneath which the young girl was to repose. when the grave
 was formed, the father embraced her first, and then the lover;
 afterwards, one taking the head, the other the feet, they placed her in
 the grave. then they knelt on each side of the grave, and said the
 prayers of the dead. then, when they had finished, they cast the earth
 over the corpse, until the grave was filled. then, extending his hand,
 the old man said; ‘i thank you, my son; and now leave alone.’
 
“‘yet——’ replied carlini.
 
“‘leave me, i command you.’
 
“carlini obeyed, rejoined his comrades, folded himself in his cloak,
 and soon appeared to sleep as soundly as the rest. it had been resolved
 the night before to change their encampment. an hour before daybreak,
 cucumetto aroused his men, and gave the word to march. but carlini
 would not quit the forest, without knowing what had become of rita’s
 father. went toward the place where had left him. found the
 old man suspended from one of the branches of the oak which shaded his
 daughter’s grave. then took an oath of bitter vengeance over the
 dead body of the one and the tomb of the other. but was unable to
 complete this oath, for two days afterwards, in an encounter with the
 roman carbineers, carlini was killed. there was some surprise, however,
 that, as was with his face to the enemy, should have received a
 ball between his shoulders. that astonishment ceased when one of the
 brigands remarked to his comrades that cucumetto was stationed ten
 paces in carlini’s rear when fell. on the morning of the departure
 from the forest of frosinone had followed carlini in the darkness,
 and heard this oath of vengeance, and, like wise man, anticipated it.
 
“they told ten other stories of this bandit chief, each more singular
 than the other. thus, from fondi to perusia, everyone trembles at the
 name of cucumetto.
 
“these narratives were frequently the theme of conversation between
 luigi and teresa. the young girl trembled very much at hearing the
 stories; but vampa reassured her with smile, tapping the butt of his
 good fowling-piece, which threw its ball so well; and if that did not
 restore her courage, pointed to crow, perched on some dead branch,
 took aim, touched the trigger, and the bird fell dead at the foot of
 the tree. time passed on, and the two young people had agreed to be
 married when vampa should be twenty and teresa nineteen years of age.
 they were both orphans, and had only their employers’ leave to ask,
 which had been already sought and obtained. one day when they were
 talking over their plans for the future, they heard two or three
 reports of firearms, and then suddenly man came out of the wood, near
 which the two young persons used to graze their flocks, and hurried
 towards them. when came within hearing, exclaimed:
 
‘i am pursued; can you conceal me?’
 
“they knew full well that this fugitive must be bandit; but there is
 an innate sympathy between the roman brigand and the roman peasant and
 the latter is always ready to aid the former. vampa, without saying a
 word, hastened to the stone that closed up the entrance to their
 grotto, drew it away, made sign to the fugitive to take refuge there,
 in retreat unknown to everyone, closed the stone upon him, and then
 went and resumed his seat by teresa. instantly afterwards four
 carbineers, on horseback, appeared on the edge of the wood; three of
 them appeared to be looking for the fugitive, while the fourth dragged
 brigand prisoner by the neck. the three carbineers looked about
 carefully on every side, saw the young peasants, and galloping up,
 began to question them. they had seen one.
 
“‘that is very annoying,’ said the brigadier; for the man we are
 looking for is the chief.’
 
“‘cucumetto?’ cried luigi and teresa at the same moment.
 
“‘yes,’ replied the brigadier; ‘and as his head is valued at thousand
 roman crowns, there would have been five hundred for you, if you had
 helped us to catch him.’ the two young persons exchanged looks. the
 brigadier had moment’s hope. five hundred roman crowns are three
 thousand lire, and three thousand lire are fortune for two poor
 orphans who are going to be married.
 
“‘yes, it is very annoying,’ said vampa; ‘but we have not seen him.’
 
“then the carbineers scoured the country in different directions, but
 in vain; then, after time, they disappeared. vampa then removed the
 stone, and cucumetto came out. through the crevices in the granite he
 had seen the two young peasants talking with the carbineers, and
 guessed the subject of their parley. had read in the countenances of
 luigi and teresa their steadfast resolution not to surrender him, and
 drew from his pocket purse full of gold, which offered to them.
 but vampa raised his head proudly; as to teresa, her eyes sparkled when
 she thought of all the fine gowns and gay jewellery she could buy with
 this purse of gold.
 
“cucumetto was cunning fiend, and had assumed the form of brigand
 instead of serpent, and this look from teresa showed to him that she
 was worthy daughter of eve, and returned to the forest, pausing
 several times on his way, under the pretext of saluting his protectors.
 
“several days elapsed, and they neither saw nor heard of cucumetto. the
 time of the carnival was at hand. the count of san-felice announced a
 grand masked ball, to which all that were distinguished in rome were
 invited. teresa had great desire to see this ball. luigi asked
 permission of his protector, the steward, that she and might be
 present amongst the servants of the house. this was granted. the ball
 was given by the count for the particular pleasure of his daughter
 carmela, whom adored. carmela was precisely the age and figure of
 teresa, and teresa was as handsome as carmela. on the evening of the
 ball teresa was attired in her best, her most brilliant ornaments in
 her hair, and gayest glass beads,—she was in the costume of the women
 of frascati. luigi wore the very picturesque garb of the roman peasant
 at holiday time. they both mingled, as they had leave to do, with the
 servants and peasants.
 
“the _festa_ was magnificent; not only was the villa brilliantly
 illuminated, but thousands of colored lanterns were suspended from the
 trees in the garden; and very soon the palace overflowed to the
 terraces, and the terraces to the garden-walks. at each cross-path was
 an orchestra, and tables spread with refreshments; the guests stopped,
 formed quadrilles, and danced in any part of the grounds they pleased.
 carmela was attired like woman of sonnino. her cap was embroidered
 with pearls, the pins in her hair were of gold and diamonds, her girdle
 was of turkey silk, with large embroidered flowers, her bodice and
 skirt were of cashmere, her apron of indian muslin, and the buttons of
 her corset were of jewels. two of her companions were dressed, the one
 as woman of nettuno, and the other as woman of riccia. four
 young men of the richest and noblest families of rome accompanied them
 with that italian freedom which has not its parallel in any other
 country in the world. they were attired as peasants of albano,
 velletri, civita-castellana, and sora. we need hardly add that these
 peasant costumes, like those of the young women, were brilliant with
 gold and jewels.
 
“carmela wished to form quadrille, but there was one lady wanting.
 carmela looked all around her, but not one of the guests had costume
 similar to her own, or those of her companions. the count of san-felice
 pointed out teresa, who was hanging on luigi’s arm in group of
 peasants.
 
“‘will you allow me, father?’ said carmela.
 
“‘certainly,’ replied the count, ‘are we not in carnival time?’
 
“carmela turned towards the young man who was talking with her, and
 saying few words to him, pointed with her finger to teresa. the young
 man looked, bowed in obedience, and then went to teresa, and invited
 her to dance in quadrille directed by the count’s daughter. teresa
 felt flush pass over her face; she looked at luigi, who could not
 refuse his assent. luigi slowly relinquished teresa’s arm, which had
 held beneath his own, and teresa, accompanied by her elegant cavalier,
 took her appointed place with much agitation in the aristocratic
 quadrille. certainly, in the eyes of an artist, the exact and strict
 costume of teresa had very different character from that of carmela
 and her companions; and teresa was frivolous and coquettish, and thus
 the embroidery and muslins, the cashmere waist-girdles, all dazzled
 her, and the reflection of sapphires and diamonds almost turned her
 giddy brain.
 
“luigi felt sensation hitherto unknown arising in his mind. it was
 like an acute pain which gnawed at his heart, and then thrilled through
 his whole body. followed with his eye each movement of teresa and
 her cavalier; when their hands touched, felt as though should
 swoon; every pulse beat with violence, and it seemed as though bell
 were ringing in his ears. when they spoke, although teresa listened
 timidly and with downcast eyes to the conversation of her cavalier, as
 luigi could read in the ardent looks of the good-looking young man that
 his language was that of praise, it seemed as if the whole world was
 turning round with him, and all the voices of hell were whispering in
 his ears ideas of murder and assassination. then fearing that his
 paroxysm might get the better of him, clutched with one hand the
 branch of tree against which was leaning, and with the other
 convulsively grasped the dagger with carved handle which was in his
 belt, and which, unwittingly, drew from the scabbard from time to
 time.
 
“luigi was jealous!
 
“he felt that, influenced by her ambitions and coquettish disposition,
 teresa might escape him.
 
“the young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soon recovered
 herself. we have said that teresa was handsome, but this is not all;
 teresa was endowed with all those wild graces which are so much more
 potent than our affected and studied elegancies. she had almost all the
 honors of the quadrille, and if she were envious of the count of
 san-felice’s daughter, we will not undertake to say that carmela was
 not jealous of her. and with overpowering compliments her handsome
 cavalier led her back to the place whence had taken her, and where
 luigi awaited her. twice or thrice during the dance the young girl had
 glanced at luigi, and each time she saw that was pale and that his
 features were agitated, once even the blade of his knife, half drawn
 from its sheath, had dazzled her eyes with its sinister glare. thus, it
 was almost tremblingly that she resumed her lover’s arm. the quadrille
 had been most perfect, and it was evident there was great demand for
 repetition, carmela alone objecting to it, but the count of
 san-felice besought his daughter so earnestly, that she acceded.
 
“one of the cavaliers then hastened to invite teresa, without whom it
 was impossible for the quadrille to be formed, but the young girl had
 disappeared.
 
“the truth was, that luigi had not felt the strength to support another
 such trial, and, half by persuasion and half by force, had removed
 teresa toward another part of the garden. teresa had yielded in spite
 of herself, but when she looked at the agitated countenance of the
 young man, she understood by his silence and trembling voice that
 something strange was passing within him. she herself was not exempt
 from internal emotion, and without having done anything wrong, yet
 fully comprehended that luigi was right in reproaching her. why, she
 did not know, but yet she did not the less feel that these reproaches
 were merited.
 
“however, to teresa’s great astonishment, luigi remained mute, and not
 word escaped his lips the rest of the evening. when the chill of the
 night had driven away the guests from the gardens, and the gates of the
 villa were closed on them for the _festa_ in-doors, took teresa
 quite away, and as left her at her home, said:
 
“‘teresa, what were you thinking of as you danced opposite the young
 countess of san-felice?’
 
“‘i thought,’ replied the young girl, with all the frankness of her
 nature, ‘that i would give half my life for costume such as she
 wore.’
 
“‘and what said your cavalier to you?’
 
“‘he said it only depended on myself to have it, and i had only one
 word to say.’
 
“‘he was right,’ said luigi. ‘do you desire it as ardently as you say?’
 
“‘yes.’
 
“‘well, then, you shall have it!’
 
“the young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look at him, but
 his face was so gloomy and terrible that her words froze to her lips.
 as luigi spoke thus, left her. teresa followed him with her eyes
 into the darkness as long as she could, and when had quite
 disappeared, she went into the house with sigh.
 
20121m
 


“that night memorable event occurred, due, doubt, to the
 imprudence of some servant who had neglected to extinguish the lights.
 the villa of san-felice took fire in the rooms adjoining the very
 apartment of the lovely carmela. awakened in the night by the light of
 the flames, she sprang out of bed, wrapped herself in dressing-gown,
 and attempted to escape by the door, but the corridor by which she
 hoped to fly was already prey to the flames. she then returned to her
 room, calling for help as loudly as she could, when suddenly her
 window, which was twenty feet from the ground, was opened, young
 peasant jumped into the chamber, seized her in his arms, and with
 superhuman skill and strength conveyed her to the turf of the
 grass-plot, where she fainted. when she recovered, her father was by
 her side. all the servants surrounded her, offering her assistance. an
 entire wing of the villa was burnt down; but what of that, as long as
 carmela was safe and uninjured?
 
“her preserver was everywhere sought for, but did not appear; was
 inquired after, but one had seen him. carmela was greatly troubled
 that she had not recognized him.
 
“as the count was immensely rich, excepting the danger carmela had
 run,—and the marvellous manner in which she had escaped, made that
 appear to him rather favor of providence than real misfortune,—the
 loss occasioned by the conflagration was to him but trifle.
 
“the next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasants were on the
 borders of the forest. luigi arrived first. came toward teresa in
 high spirits, and seemed to have completely forgotten the events of the
 previous evening. the young girl was very pensive, but seeing luigi so
 cheerful, she on her part assumed smiling air, which was natural to
 her when she was not excited or in passion.
 
“luigi took her arm beneath his own, and led her to the door of the
 grotto. then paused. the young girl, perceiving that there was
 something extraordinary, looked at him steadfastly.
 
“‘teresa,’ said luigi, ‘yesterday evening you told you would give
 all the world to have costume similar to that of the count’s
 daughter.’
 
“‘yes,’ replied teresa with astonishment; ‘but i was mad to utter such
 wish.’
 
“‘and i replied, “very well, you shall have it.”’
 
“‘yes,’ replied the young girl, whose astonishment increased at every
 word uttered by luigi, ‘but of course your reply was only to please
 me.’
 
“‘i have promised more than i have given you, teresa,’ said luigi
 proudly. ‘go into the grotto and dress yourself.’
 
“at these words drew away the stone, and showed teresa the grotto,
 lighted up by two wax lights, which burnt on each side of splendid
 mirror; on rustic table, made by luigi, were spread out the pearl
 necklace and the diamond pins, and on chair at the side was laid the
 rest of the costume.
 
“teresa uttered cry of joy, and, without inquiring whence this attire
 came, or even thanking luigi, darted into the grotto, transformed into
 dressing-room.
 
“luigi pushed the stone behind her, for on the crest of small
 adjacent hill which cut off the view toward palestrina, saw a
 traveller on horseback, stopping moment, as if uncertain of his road,
 and thus presenting against the blue sky that perfect outline which is
 peculiar to distant objects in southern climes. when saw luigi, he
 put his horse into gallop and advanced toward him.
 
“luigi was not mistaken. the traveller, who was going from palestrina
 to tivoli, had mistaken his way; the young man directed him; but as at
 distance of quarter of mile the road again divided into three
 ways, and on reaching these the traveller might again stray from his
 route, begged luigi to be his guide.
 
“luigi threw his cloak on the ground, placed his carbine on his
 shoulder, and freed from his heavy covering, preceded the traveller
 with the rapid step of mountaineer, which horse can scarcely keep
 up with. in ten minutes luigi and the traveller reached the
 cross-roads. on arriving there, with an air as majestic as that of an
 emperor, stretched his hand towards that one of the roads which the
 traveller was to follow.
 
“‘that is your road, excellency, and now you cannot again mistake.’
 
“‘and here is your recompense,’ said the traveller, offering the young
 herdsman some small pieces of money.
 
“‘thank you,’ said luigi, drawing back his hand; ‘i render service, i
 do not sell it.’
 
“‘well,’ replied the traveller, who seemed used to this difference
 between the servility of man of the cities and the pride of the
 mountaineer, ‘if you refuse wages, you will, perhaps, accept gift.’
 
“‘ah, yes, that is another thing.’
 
“‘then,’ said the traveller, ‘take these two venetian sequins and give
 them to your bride, to make herself pair of earrings.’
 
“‘and then do you take this poniard,’ said the young herdsman; ‘you
 will not find one better carved between albano and civita-castellana.’
 
“‘i accept it,’ answered the traveller, ‘but then the obligation will
 be on my side, for this poniard is worth more than two sequins.’
 
“‘for dealer perhaps; but for me, who engraved it myself, it is
 hardly worth piastre.’
 
“‘what is your name?’ inquired the traveller.
 
“‘luigi vampa,’ replied the shepherd, with the same air as would
 have replied, alexander, king of macedon. ‘and yours?’
 
“‘i,’ said the traveller, ‘am called sinbad the sailor.’”
 
franz d’Épinay started with surprise.
 
“sinbad the sailor?” said.
 
“yes,” replied the narrator; “that was the name which the traveller
 gave to vampa as his own.”
 
“well, and what may you have to say against this name?” inquired
 albert; “it is very pretty name, and the adventures of the gentleman
 of that name amused very much in my youth, i must confess.”
 
franz said more. the name of sinbad the sailor, as may well be
 supposed, awakened in him world of recollections, as had the name of
 the count of monte cristo on the previous evening.
 
“proceed!” said to the host.
 
“vampa put the two sequins haughtily into his pocket, and slowly
 returned by the way had gone. as came within two or three hundred
 paces of the grotto, thought heard cry. listened to know
 whence this sound could proceed. moment afterwards thought he
 heard his own name pronounced distinctly.
 
“the cry proceeded from the grotto. bounded like chamois, cocking
 his carbine as went, and in moment reached the summit of hill
 opposite to that on which had perceived the traveller. three cries
 for help came more distinctly to his ear. cast his eyes around him
 and saw man carrying off teresa, as nessus, the centaur, carried
 deianira.
 
“this man, who was hastening towards the wood, was already
 three-quarters of the way on the road from the grotto to the forest.
 vampa measured the distance; the man was at least two hundred paces in
 advance of him, and there was not chance of overtaking him. the young
 shepherd stopped, as if his feet had been rooted to the ground; then he
 put the butt of his carbine to his shoulder, took aim at the ravisher,
 followed him for second in his track, and then fired.
 
“the ravisher stopped suddenly, his knees bent under him, and fell
 with teresa in his arms. the young girl rose instantly, but the man lay
 on the earth struggling in the agonies of death. vampa then rushed
 towards teresa; for at ten paces from the dying man her legs had failed
 her, and she had dropped on her knees, so that the young man feared
 that the ball that had brought down his enemy, had also wounded his
 betrothed.
 
“fortunately, she was unscathed, and it was fright alone that had
 overcome teresa. when luigi had assured himself that she was safe and
 unharmed, turned towards the wounded man. had just expired, with
 clenched hands, his mouth in spasm of agony, and his hair on end in
 the sweat of death. his eyes remained open and menacing. vampa
 approached the corpse, and recognized cucumetto.
 
“from the day on which the bandit had been saved by the two young
 peasants, had been enamoured of teresa, and had sworn she should be
 his. from that time had watched them, and profiting by the moment
 when her lover had left her alone, had carried her off, and believed he
 at length had her in his power, when the ball, directed by the unerring
 skill of the young herdsman, had pierced his heart. vampa gazed on him
 for moment without betraying the slightest emotion; while, on the
 contrary, teresa, shuddering in every limb, dared not approach the
 slain ruffian but by degrees, and threw hesitating glance at the dead
 body over the shoulder of her lover. suddenly vampa turned toward his
 mistress:
 
“‘ah,’ said he—‘good, good! you are dressed; it is now my turn to dress
 myself.’
 
20125m
 


“teresa was clothed from head to foot in the garb of the count of
 san-felice’s daughter. vampa took cucumetto’s body in his arms and
 conveyed it to the grotto, while in her turn teresa remained outside.
 if second traveller had passed, would have seen strange thing,—a
 shepherdess watching her flock, clad in cashmere grown, with
 ear-rings and necklace of pearls, diamond pins, and buttons of
 sapphires, emeralds, and rubies. would, doubt, have believed that
 had returned to the times of florian, and would have declared, on
 reaching paris, that had met an alpine shepherdess seated at the
 foot of the sabine hill.
 
“at the end of quarter of an hour vampa quitted the grotto; his
 costume was less elegant than that of teresa. wore vest of
 garnet-colored velvet, with buttons of cut gold; silk waistcoat
 covered with embroidery; roman scarf tied round his neck; a
 cartridge-box worked with gold, and red and green silk; sky-blue velvet
 breeches, fastened above the knee with diamond buckles; garters of
 deerskin, worked with thousand arabesques, and hat whereon hung
 ribbons of all colors; two watches hung from his girdle, and splendid
 poniard was in his belt.
 
“teresa uttered cry of admiration. vampa in this attire resembled a
 painting by léopold robert or schnetz. had assumed the entire
 costume of cucumetto. the young man saw the effect produced on his
 betrothed, and smile of pride passed over his lips.
 
“‘now,’ said to teresa, ‘are you ready to share my fortune, whatever
 it may be?’
 
“‘oh, yes!’ exclaimed the young girl enthusiastically.
 
“‘and follow wherever i go?’
 
“‘to the world’s end.’
 
“‘then take my arm, and let us on; we have time to lose.’
 
“the young girl did so without questioning her lover as to where was
 conducting her, for appeared to her at this moment as handsome,
 proud, and powerful as god. they went towards the forest, and soon
 entered it.
 
“we need scarcely say that all the paths of the mountain were known to
 vampa; therefore went forward without moment’s hesitation,
 although there was beaten track, but knew his path by looking at
 the trees and bushes, and thus they kept on advancing for nearly an
 hour and half. at the end of this time they had reached the thickest
 part of the forest. torrent, whose bed was dry, led into deep
 gorge. vampa took this wild road, which, enclosed between two ridges,
 and shadowed by the tufted umbrage of the pines, seemed, but for the
 difficulties of its descent, that path to avernus of which virgil
 speaks. teresa had become alarmed at the wild and deserted look of the
 plain around her, and pressed closely against her guide, not uttering a
 syllable; but as she saw him advance with even step and composed
 countenance, she endeavored to repress her emotion.
 
“suddenly, about ten paces from them, man advanced from behind tree
 and aimed at vampa.
 
“‘not another step,’ said, ‘or you are dead man.’
 
“‘what, then,’ said vampa, raising his hand with gesture of disdain,
 while teresa, longer able to restrain her alarm, clung closely to
 him, ‘do wolves rend each other?’
 
“‘who are you?’ inquired the sentinel.
 
“‘i am luigi vampa, shepherd of the san-felice farm.’
 
“‘what do you want?’
 
“‘i would speak with your companions who are in the glade at rocca
 bianca.’
 
“‘follow me, then,’ said the sentinel; ‘or, as you know your way, go
 first.’
 
“vampa smiled disdainfully at this precaution on the part of the
 bandit, went before teresa, and continued to advance with the same firm
 and easy step as before. at the end of ten minutes the bandit made them
 sign to stop. the two young persons obeyed. then the bandit thrice
 imitated the cry of crow; croak answered this signal.
 
“‘good!’ said the sentry, ‘you may now go on.’
 
“luigi and teresa again set forward; as they went on teresa clung
 tremblingly to her lover at the sight of weapons and the glistening of
 carbines through the trees. the retreat of rocca bianca was at the top
 of small mountain, which doubt in former days had been a
 volcano—an extinct volcano before the days when remus and romulus had
 deserted alba to come and found the city of rome.
 
“teresa and luigi reached the summit, and all at once found themselves
 in the presence of twenty bandits.
 
“‘here is young man who seeks and wishes to speak to you,’ said the
 sentinel.
 
“‘what has to say?’ inquired the young man who was in command in the
 chief’s absence.
 
“‘i wish to say that i am tired of shepherd’s life,’ was vampa’s
 reply.
 
“‘ah, i understand,’ said the lieutenant; ‘and you seek admittance into
 our ranks?’
 
“‘welcome!’ cried several bandits from ferrusino, pampinara, and
 anagni, who had recognized luigi vampa.
 
“‘yes, but i came to ask something more than to be your companion.’
 
“‘and what may that be?’ inquired the bandits with astonishment.
 
“‘i come to ask to be your captain,’ said the young man.
 
“the bandits shouted with laughter.
 
“‘and what have you done to aspire to this honor?’ demanded the
 lieutenant.
 
“‘i have killed your chief, cucumetto, whose dress i now wear; and i
 set fire to the villa san-felice to procure wedding-dress for my
 betrothed.’
 
“an hour afterwards luigi vampa was chosen captain, vice cucumetto,
 deceased.”
 
20129m
 


“well, my dear albert,” said franz, turning towards his friend; “what
 think you of citizen luigi vampa?”
 
“i say is myth,” replied albert, “and never had an existence.”
 
“and what may myth be?” inquired pastrini.
 
“the explanation would be too long, my dear landlord,” replied franz.
 
“and you say that signor vampa exercises his profession at this moment
 in the environs of rome?”
 
“and with boldness of which bandit before him ever gave an
 example.”
 
“then the police have vainly tried to lay hands on him?”
 
“why, you see, has good understanding with the shepherds in the
 plains, the fishermen of the tiber, and the smugglers of the coast.
 they seek for him in the mountains, and is on the waters; they
 follow him on the waters, and is on the open sea; then they pursue
 him, and has suddenly taken refuge in the islands, at giglio,
 giannutri, or monte cristo; and when they hunt for him there, he
 reappears suddenly at albano, tivoli, or riccia.”
 
“and how does behave towards travellers?”
 
“alas! his plan is very simple. it depends on the distance may be
 from the city, whether gives eight hours, twelve hours, or day
 wherein to pay their ransom; and when that time has elapsed allows
 another hour’s grace. at the sixtieth minute of this hour, if the money
 is not forthcoming, blows out the prisoner’s brains with a
 pistol-shot, or plants his dagger in his heart, and that settles the
 account.”
 
“well, albert,” inquired franz of his companion, “are you still
 disposed to go to the colosseum by the outer wall?”
 
“quite so,” said albert, “if the way be picturesque.”
 
the clock struck nine as the door opened, and coachman appeared.
 
“excellencies,” said he, “the coach is ready.”
 
“well, then,” said franz, “let us to the colosseum.”
 
“by the porta popolo or by the streets, your excellencies?”
 
“by the streets, _morbleu!_ by the streets!” cried franz.
 
“ah, my dear fellow,” said albert, rising, and lighting his third
 cigar, “really, i thought you had more courage.”
 
so saying, the two young men went down the staircase, and got into the
 carriage.
 
20131m
 



chapter 34. the colosseum
 
franz had so managed his route, that during the ride to the colosseum
 they passed not single ancient ruin, so that preliminary
 impression interfered to mitigate the colossal proportions of the
 gigantic building they came to admire. the road selected was a
 continuation of the via sistina; then by cutting off the right angle of
 the street in which stands santa maria maggiore and proceeding by the
 via urbana and san pietro in vincoli, the travellers would find
 themselves directly opposite the colosseum.
 
this itinerary possessed another great advantage,—that of leaving franz
 at full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon the subject of signor
 pastrini’s story, in which his mysterious host of monte cristo was so
 strangely mixed up. seated with folded arms in corner of the
 carriage, continued to ponder over the singular history had so
 lately listened to, and to ask himself an interminable number of
 questions touching its various circumstances without, however, arriving
 at satisfactory reply to any of them.
 
one fact more than the rest brought his friend “sinbad the sailor” back
 to his recollection, and that was the mysterious sort of intimacy that
 seemed to exist between the brigands and the sailors; and pastrini’s
 account of vampa’s having found refuge on board the vessels of
 smugglers and fishermen, reminded franz of the two corsican bandits he
 had found supping so amicably with the crew of the little yacht, which
 had even deviated from its course and touched at porto-vecchio for the
 sole purpose of landing them. the very name assumed by his host of
 monte cristo and again repeated by the landlord of the hôtel de
 londres, abundantly proved to him that his island friend was playing
 his philanthropic part on the shores of piombino, civita vecchia,
 ostia, and gaëta, as on those of corsica, tuscany, and spain; and
 further, franz bethought him of having heard his singular entertainer
 speak both of tunis and palermo, proving thereby how largely his circle
 of acquaintances extended.
 
but however the mind of the young man might be absorbed in these
 reflections, they were at once dispersed at the sight of the dark
 frowning ruins of the stupendous colosseum, through the various
 openings of which the pale moonlight played and flickered like the
 unearthly gleam from the eyes of the wandering dead. the carriage
 stopped near the meta sudans; the door was opened, and the young men,
 eagerly alighting, found themselves opposite _cicerone_, who appeared
 to have sprung up from the ground, so unexpected was his appearance.
 
the usual guide from the hotel having followed them, they had paid two
 conductors, nor is it possible, at rome, to avoid this abundant supply
 of guides; besides the ordinary _cicerone_, who seizes upon you
 directly you set foot in your hotel, and never quits you while you
 remain in the city, there is also special _cicerone_ belonging to
 each monument—nay, almost to each part of monument. it may,
 therefore, be easily imagined there is scarcity of guides at the
 colosseum, that wonder of all ages, which martial thus eulogizes:
 
“let memphis cease to boast the barbarous miracles of her pyramids, and
 the wonders of babylon be talked of more among us; all must bow to
 the superiority of the gigantic labor of the cæsars, and the many
 voices of fame spread far and wide the surpassing merits of this
 incomparable monument.”
 
as for albert and franz, they essayed not to escape from their
 _ciceronian_ tyrants; and, indeed, it would have been so much the more
 difficult to break their bondage, as the guides alone are permitted to
 visit these monuments with torches in their hands. thus, then, the
 young men made attempt at resistance, but blindly and confidingly
 surrendered themselves into the care and custody of their conductors.
 
franz had already made seven or eight similar excursions to the
 colosseum, while his less favored companion trod for the first time in
 his life the classic ground forming the monument of flavius vespasian;
 and, to his credit be it spoken, his mind, even amid the glib loquacity
 of the guides, was duly and deeply touched with awe and enthusiastic
 admiration of all saw; and certainly adequate notion of these
 stupendous ruins can be formed save by such as have visited them, and
 more especially by moonlight, at which time the vast proportions of the
 building appear twice as large when viewed by the mysterious beams of a
 southern moonlit sky, whose rays are sufficiently clear and vivid to
 light the horizon with glow equal to the soft twilight of western
 clime.
 
scarcely, therefore, had the reflective franz walked hundred steps
 beneath the interior porticoes of the ruin, when, abandoning albert to
 the guides (who would by means yield their prescriptive right of
 carrying their victims through the routine regularly laid down, and as
 regularly followed by them, but dragged the unconscious visitor to the
 various objects with pertinacity that admitted of appeal,
 beginning, as matter of course, with the “lions’ den”, the “hall of
 the gladiators” and finishing with “cæsar’s podium”), to escape a
 jargon and mechanical survey of the wonders by which was surrounded,
 franz ascended half-dilapidated staircase, and, leaving them to
 follow their monotonous round, seated himself at the foot of column,
 and immediately opposite large aperture, which permitted him to enjoy
 full and undisturbed view of the gigantic dimensions of the majestic
 ruin.
 
franz had remained for nearly quarter of an hour perfectly hidden by
 the shadow of the vast column at whose base had found a
 resting-place, and from whence his eyes followed the motions of albert
 and his guides, who, holding torches in their hands, had emerged from a
 vomitorium at the opposite extremity of the colosseum, and then again
 disappeared down the steps conducting to the seats reserved for the
 vestal virgins, resembling, as they glided along, some restless shades
 following the flickering glare of so many _ignes fatui_. all at once
 his ear caught sound resembling that of stone rolling down the
 staircase opposite the one by which had himself ascended. there was
 nothing remarkable in the circumstance of fragment of granite giving
 way and falling heavily below; but it seemed to him that the substance
 that fell gave way beneath the pressure of foot, and also that
 someone, who endeavored as much as possible to prevent his footsteps
 from being heard, was approaching the spot where sat.
 
conjecture soon became certainty, for the figure of man was
 distinctly visible to franz, gradually emerging from the staircase
 opposite, upon which the moon was at that moment pouring full tide of
 silvery brightness.
 
the stranger thus presenting himself was probably person who, like
 franz, preferred the enjoyment of solitude and his own thoughts to the
 frivolous gabble of the guides. and his appearance had nothing
 extraordinary in it; but the hesitation with which proceeded,
 stopping and listening with anxious attention at every step took,
 convinced franz that expected the arrival of some person.
 
by sort of instinctive impulse, franz withdrew as much as possible
 behind his pillar.
 
about ten feet from the spot where and the stranger were, the roof
 had given way, leaving large round opening, through which might be
 seen the blue vault of heaven, thickly studded with stars.
 
around this opening, which had, possibly, for ages permitted free
 entrance to the brilliant moonbeams that now illumined the vast pile,
 grew quantity of creeping plants, whose delicate green branches stood
 out in bold relief against the clear azure of the firmament, while
 large masses of thick, strong fibrous shoots forced their way through
 the chasm, and hung floating to and fro, like so many waving strings.
 
the person whose mysterious arrival had attracted the attention of
 franz stood in kind of half-light, that rendered it impossible to
 distinguish his features, although his dress was easily made out. he
 wore large brown mantle, one fold of which, thrown over his left
 shoulder, served likewise to mask the lower part of his countenance,
 while the upper part was completely hidden by his broad-brimmed hat.
 the lower part of his dress was more distinctly visible by the bright
 rays of the moon, which, entering through the broken ceiling, shed
 their refulgent beams on feet cased in elegantly made boots of polished
 leather, over which descended fashionably cut trousers of black cloth.
 
20135m
 


from the imperfect means franz had of judging, could only come to
 one conclusion,—that the person whom was thus watching certainly
 belonged to inferior station of life.
 
some few minutes had elapsed, and the stranger began to show manifest
 signs of impatience, when slight noise was heard outside the aperture
 in the roof, and almost immediately dark shadow seemed to obstruct
 the flood of light that had entered it, and the figure of man was
 clearly seen gazing with eager scrutiny on the immense space beneath
 him; then, as his eye caught sight of him in the mantle, grasped a
 floating mass of thickly matted boughs, and glided down by their help
 to within three or four feet of the ground, and then leaped lightly on
 his feet. the man who had performed this daring act with so much
 indifference wore the transtevere costume.
 
“i beg your excellency’s pardon for keeping you waiting,” said the man,
 in the roman dialect, “but i don’t think i’m many minutes after my
 time, ten o’clock has just struck by the clock of saint john lateran.”
 
“say not word about being late,” replied the stranger in purest
 tuscan; “’tis i who am too soon. but even if you had caused to wait
 little while, i should have felt quite sure that the delay was not
 occasioned by any fault of yours.”
 
“your excellency is perfectly right in so thinking,” said the man; “i
 came here direct from the castle of st. angelo, and i had an immense
 deal of trouble before i could get chance to speak to beppo.”
 
“and who is beppo?”
 
“oh, beppo is employed in the prison, and i give him so much year to
 let know what is going on within his holiness’s castle.”
 
“indeed! you are provident person, i see.”
 
“why, you see, one knows what may happen. perhaps some of these days
 i may be entrapped, like poor peppino and may be very glad to have some
 little nibbling mouse to gnaw the meshes of my net, and so help out
 of prison.”
 
“briefly, what did you learn?”
 
“that two executions of considerable interest will take place the day
 after tomorrow at two o’clock, as is customary at rome at the
 commencement of all great festivals. one of the culprits will be
 _mazzolato_;3 is an atrocious villain, who murdered the priest who
 brought him up, and deserves not the smallest pity. the other sufferer
 is sentenced to be _decapitato_;4 and he, your excellency, is poor
 peppino.”
 
“the fact is, that you have inspired not only the pontifical
 government, but also the neighboring states, with such extreme fear,
 that they are glad of all opportunity of making an example.”
 
“but peppino did not even belong to my band; was merely poor
 shepherd, whose only crime consisted in furnishing us with provisions.”
 
“which makes him your accomplice to all intents and purposes. but mark
 the distinction with which is treated; instead of being knocked on
 the head as you would be if once they caught hold of you, is simply
 sentenced to be guillotined, by which means, too, the amusements of the
 day are diversified, and there is spectacle to please every
 spectator.”
 
“without reckoning the wholly unexpected one i am preparing to surprise
 them with.”
 
“my good friend,” said the man in the cloak, “excuse for saying that
 you seem to precisely in the mood to commit some wild or extravagant
 act.”
 
“perhaps i am; but one thing i have resolved on, and that is, to stop
 at nothing to restore poor devil to liberty, who has got into this
 scrape solely from having served me. i should hate and despise myself
 as coward did i desert the brave fellow in his present extremity.”
 
“and what do you mean to do?”
 
“to surround the scaffold with twenty of my best men, who, at signal
 from me, will rush forward directly peppino is brought for execution,
 and, by the assistance of their stilettos, drive back the guard, and
 carry off the prisoner.”
 
“that seems to as hazardous as uncertain, and convinces that my
 scheme is far better than yours.”
 
“and what is your excellency’s project?”
 
“just this. i will so advantageously bestow 2,000 piastres, that the
 person receiving them shall obtain respite till next year for
 peppino; and during that year, another skilfully placed 1,000 piastres
 will afford him the means of escaping from his prison.”
 
“and do you feel sure of succeeding?”
 
“_pardieu!_” exclaimed the man in the cloak, suddenly expressing
 himself in french.
 
“what did your excellency say?” inquired the other.
 
“i said, my good fellow, that i would do more single-handed by the
 means of gold than you and all your troop could effect with stilettos,
 pistols, carbines, and blunderbusses included. leave me, then, to act,
 and have fears for the result.”
 
“at least, there can be harm in myself and party being in readiness,
 in case your excellency should fail.”
 
“none whatever. take what precautions you please, if it is any
 satisfaction to you to do so; but rely upon my obtaining the reprieve i
 seek.”
 
“remember, the execution is fixed for the day after tomorrow, and that
 you have but one day to work in.”
 
“and what of that? is not day divided into twenty-four hours, each
 hour into sixty minutes, and every minute sub-divided into sixty
 seconds? now in 86,400 seconds very many things can be done.”
 
“and how shall i know whether your excellency has succeeded or not.”
 
“oh, that is very easily arranged. i have engaged the three lower
 windows at the café rospoli; should i have obtained the requisite
 pardon for peppino, the two outside windows will be hung with yellow
 damasks, and the centre with white, having large cross in red marked
 on it.”
 
“and whom will you employ to carry the reprieve to the officer
 directing the execution?”
 
“send one of your men, disguised as penitent friar, and i will give
 it to him. his dress will procure him the means of approaching the
 scaffold itself, and will deliver the official order to the officer,
 who, in his turn, will hand it to the executioner; in the meantime, it
 will be as well to acquaint peppino with what we have determined on, if
 it be only to prevent his dying of fear or losing his senses, because
 in either case very useless expense will have been incurred.”
 
“your excellency,” said the man, “you are fully persuaded of my entire
 devotion to you, are you not?”
 
“nay, i flatter myself that there can be doubt of it,” replied the
 cavalier in the cloak.
 
“well, then, only fulfil your promise of rescuing peppino, and
 henceforward you shall receive not only devotion, but the most absolute
 obedience from myself and those under that one human being can
 render to another.”
 
“have care how far you pledge yourself, my good friend, for i may
 remind you of your promise at some, perhaps, not very distant period,
 when i, in my turn, may require your aid and influence.”
 
“let that day come sooner or later, your excellency will find what i
 have found you in this my heavy trouble; and if from the other end of
 the world you but write word to do such or such thing, you may
 regard it as done, for done it shall be, on the word and faith of——”
 
“hush!” interrupted the stranger; “i hear noise.”
 
“’tis some travellers, who are visiting the colosseum by torchlight.”
 
“’twere better we should not be seen together; those guides are nothing
 but spies, and might possibly recognize you; and, however i may be
 honored by your friendship, my worthy friend, if once the extent of our
 intimacy were known, i am sadly afraid both my reputation and credit
 would suffer thereby.”
 
“well, then, if you obtain the reprieve?”
 
“the middle window at the café rospoli will be hung with white damask,
 bearing red cross.”
 
“and if you fail?”
 
“then all three windows will have yellow draperies.”
 
“and then?”
 
“and then, my good fellow, use your daggers in any way you please, and
 i further promise you to be there as spectator of your prowess.”
 
“we understand each other perfectly, then. adieu, your excellency;
 depend upon as firmly as i do upon you.”
 
saying these words, the transteverin disappeared down the staircase,
 while his companion, muffling his features more closely than before in
 the folds of his mantle, passed almost close to franz, and descended to
 the arena by an outward flight of steps. the next minute franz heard
 himself called by albert, who made the lofty building re-echo with the
 sound of his friend’s name. franz, however, did not obey the summons
 till had satisfied himself that the two men whose conversation he
 had overheard were at sufficient distance to prevent his encountering
 them in his descent. in ten minutes after the strangers had departed,
 franz was on the road to the piazza di spagna, listening with studied
 indifference to the learned dissertation delivered by albert, after the
 manner of pliny and calpurnius, touching the iron-pointed nets used to
 prevent the ferocious beasts from springing on the spectators.
 
franz let him proceed without interruption, and, in fact, did not hear
 what was said; longed to be alone, and free to ponder over all that
 had occurred. one of the two men, whose mysterious meeting in the
 colosseum had so unintentionally witnessed, was an entire stranger
 to him, but not so the other; and though franz had been unable to
 distinguish his features, from his being either wrapped in his mantle
 or obscured by the shadow, the tones of his voice had made too powerful
 an impression on him the first time had heard them for him ever
 again to forget them, hear them when or where might. it was more
 especially when this man was speaking in manner half jesting, half
 bitter, that franz’s ear recalled most vividly the deep sonorous, yet
 well-pitched voice that had addressed him in the grotto of monte
 cristo, and which heard for the second time amid the darkness and
 ruined grandeur of the colosseum. and the more thought, the more
 entire was his conviction, that the person who wore the mantle was no
 other than his former host and entertainer, “sinbad the sailor.”
 
20139m
 


under any other circumstances, franz would have found it impossible to
 resist his extreme curiosity to know more of so singular personage,
 and with that intent have sought to renew their short acquaintance; but
 in the present instance, the confidential nature of the conversation he
 had overheard made him, with propriety, judge that his appearance at
 such time would be anything but agreeable. as we have seen,
 therefore, permitted his former host to retire without attempting a
 recognition, but fully promising himself rich indemnity for his
 present forbearance should chance afford him another opportunity.
 
in vain did franz endeavor to forget the many perplexing thoughts which
 assailed him; in vain did court the refreshment of sleep. slumber
 refused to visit his eyelids and the night was passed in feverish
 contemplation of the chain of circumstances tending to prove the
 identity of the mysterious visitant to the colosseum with the
 inhabitant of the grotto of monte cristo; and the more thought, the
 firmer grew his opinion on the subject.
 
worn out at length, fell asleep at daybreak, and did not awake till
 late. like genuine frenchman, albert had employed his time in
 arranging for the evening’s diversion; had sent to engage box at
 the teatro argentina; and franz, having number of letters to write,
 relinquished the carriage to albert for the whole of the day.
 
at five o’clock albert returned, delighted with his day’s work; had
 been occupied in leaving his letters of introduction, and had received
 in return more invitations to balls and routs than it would be possible
 for him to accept; besides this, had seen (as called it) all the
 remarkable sights at rome. yes, in single day had accomplished
 what his more serious-minded companion would have taken weeks to
 effect. neither had neglected to ascertain the name of the piece to
 be played that night at the teatro argentina, and also what performers
 appeared in it. the opera of _parisina_ was announced for
 representation, and the principal actors were coselli, moriani, and la
 specchia.
 
the young men, therefore, had reason to consider themselves fortunate
 in having the opportunity of hearing one of the best works by the
 composer of _lucia di lammermoor_, supported by three of the most
 renowned vocalists of italy.
 
albert had never been able to endure the italian theatres, with their
 orchestras from which it is impossible to see, and the absence of
 balconies, or open boxes; all these defects pressed hard on man who
 had had his stall at the bouffes, and had shared lower box at the
 opera. still, in spite of this, albert displayed his most dazzling and
 effective costumes each time visited the theatres; but, alas, his
 elegant toilet was wholly thrown away, and one of the most worthy
 representatives of parisian fashion had to carry with him the
 mortifying reflection that had nearly overrun italy without meeting
 with single adventure.
 
sometimes albert would affect to make joke of his want of success;
 but internally was deeply wounded, and his self-love immensely
 piqued, to think that albert morcerf, the most admired and most
 sought after of any young person of his day, should thus be passed
 over, and merely have his labor for his pains. and the thing was so
 much the more annoying, as, according to the characteristic modesty of
 frenchman, albert had quitted paris with the full conviction that he
 had only to show himself in italy to carry all before him, and that
 upon his return should astonish the parisian world with the recital
 of his numerous love-affairs.
 
alas, poor albert! none of those interesting adventures fell in his
 way; the lovely genoese, florentines, and neapolitans were all
 faithful, if not to their husbands, at least to their lovers, and
 thought not of changing even for the splendid appearance of albert de
 morcerf; and all gained was the painful conviction that the ladies
 of italy have this advantage over those of france, that they are
 faithful even in their infidelity.
 
yet could not restrain hope that in italy, as elsewhere, there
 might be an exception to the general rule.
 
albert, besides being an elegant, well-looking young man, was also
 possessed of considerable talent and ability; moreover, was a
 viscount—a recently created one, certainly, but in the present day it
 is not necessary to go as far back as noah in tracing descent, and a
 genealogical tree is equally estimated, whether dated from 1399 or
 merely 1815; but to crown all these advantages, albert morcerf
 commanded an income of 50,000 livres, more than sufficient sum to
 render him personage of considerable importance in paris. it was
 therefore small mortification to him to have visited most of the
 principal cities in italy without having excited the most trifling
 observation.
 
albert, however, hoped to indemnify himself for all these slights and
 indifferences during the carnival, knowing full well that among the
 different states and kingdoms in which this festivity is celebrated,
 rome is the spot where even the wisest and gravest throw off the usual
 rigidity of their lives, and deign to mingle in the follies of this
 time of liberty and relaxation. the carnival was to commence on the
 morrow; therefore albert had not an instant to lose in setting forth
 the programme of his hopes, expectations, and claims to notice.
 
with this design had engaged box in the most conspicuous part of
 the theatre, and exerted himself to set off his personal attractions by
 the aid of the most rich and elaborate toilet. the box taken by albert
 was in the first circle; although each of the three tiers of boxes is
 deemed equally aristocratic, and is, for this reason, generally styled
 the “nobility’s boxes,” and although the box engaged for the two
 friends was sufficiently capacious to contain at least dozen persons,
 it had cost less than would be paid at some of the french theatres for
 one admitting merely four occupants.
 
another motive had influenced albert’s selection of his seat,—who knew
 but that, thus advantageously placed, might not in truth attract the
 notice of some fair roman, and an introduction might ensue that would
 procure him the offer of seat in carriage, or place in princely
 balcony, from which might behold the gayeties of the carnival?
 
these united considerations made albert more lively and anxious to
 please than had hitherto been. totally disregarding the business of
 the stage, leaned from his box and began attentively scrutinizing
 the beauty of each pretty woman, aided by powerful opera-glass; but,
 alas, this attempt to attract notice wholly failed; not even curiosity
 had been excited, and it was but too apparent that the lovely
 creatures, into whose good graces was desirous of stealing, were all
 so much engrossed with themselves, their lovers, or their own thoughts,
 that they had not so much as noticed him or the manipulation of his
 glass.
 
the truth was, that the anticipated pleasures of the carnival, with the
 “holy week” that was to succeed it, so filled every fair breast, as to
 prevent the least attention being bestowed even on the business of the
 stage. the actors made their entries and exits unobserved or unthought
 of; at certain conventional moments, the spectators would suddenly
 cease their conversation, or rouse themselves from their musings, to
 listen to some brilliant effort of moriani’s, well-executed
 recitative by coselli, or to join in loud applause at the wonderful
 powers of specchia; but that momentary excitement over, they quickly
 relapsed into their former state of preoccupation or interesting
 conversation.
 
towards the close of the first act, the door of box which had been
 hitherto vacant was opened; lady entered to whom franz had been
 introduced in paris, where indeed, had imagined she still was. the
 quick eye of albert caught the involuntary start with which his friend
 beheld the new arrival, and, turning to him, said hastily:
 
“do you know the woman who has just entered that box?”
 
“yes; what do you think of her?”
 
“oh, she is perfectly lovely—what complexion! and such magnificent
 hair! is she french?”
 
“no; venetian.”
 
“and her name is——”
 
“countess g——.”
 
“ah, i know her by name!” exclaimed albert; “she is said to possess as
 much wit and cleverness as beauty. i was to have been presented to her
 when i met her at madame villefort’s ball.”
 
“shall i assist you in repairing your negligence?” asked franz.
 
“my dear fellow, are you really on such good terms with her as to
 venture to take to her box?”
 
“why, i have only had the honor of being in her society and conversing
 with her three or four times in my life; but you know that even such an
 acquaintance as that might warrant my doing what you ask.”
 
at that instant, the countess perceived franz, and graciously waved her
 hand to him, to which replied by respectful inclination of the
 head. “upon my word,” said albert, “you seem to be on excellent terms
 with the beautiful countess.”
 
“you are mistaken in thinking so,” returned franz calmly; “but you
 merely fall into the same error which leads so many of our countrymen
 to commit the most egregious blunders,—i mean that of judging the
 habits and customs of italy and spain by our parisian notions; believe
 me, nothing is more fallacious than to form any estimate of the degree
 of intimacy you may suppose existing among persons by the familiar
 terms they seem upon; there is similarity of feeling at this instant
 between ourselves and the countess—nothing more.”
 
“is there, indeed, my good fellow? pray tell me, is it sympathy of
 heart?”
 
“no; of taste,” continued franz gravely.
 
“and in what manner has this congeniality of mind been evinced?”
 
“by the countess’s visiting the colosseum, as we did last night, by
 moonlight, and nearly alone.”
 
“you were with her, then?”
 
“i was.”
 
“and what did you say to her?”
 
“oh, we talked of the illustrious dead of whom that magnificent ruin is
 glorious monument!”
 
“upon my word,” cried albert, “you must have been very entertaining
 companion alone, or all but alone, with beautiful woman in such a
 place of sentiment as the colosseum, and yet to find nothing better to
 talk about than the dead! all i can say is, if ever i should get such a
 chance, the living should be my theme.”
 
20143m
 


“and you will probably find your theme ill-chosen.”
 
“but,” said albert, breaking in upon his discourse, “never mind the
 past; let us only remember the present. are you not going to keep your
 promise of introducing to the fair subject of our remarks?”
 
“certainly, directly the curtain falls on the stage.”
 
“what confounded long time this first act lasts. i believe, on my
 soul, that they never mean to finish it.”
 
“oh, yes, they will; only listen to that charming finale. how
 exquisitely coselli sings his part.”
 
“but what an awkward, inelegant fellow is.”
 
“well, then, what do you say to specchia? did you ever see anything
 more perfect than her acting?”
 
“why, you know, my dear fellow, when one has been accustomed to
 malibran and sontag, such singers as these don’t make the same
 impression on you they perhaps do on others.”
 
“at least, you must admire moriani’s style and execution.”
 
“i never fancied men of his dark, ponderous appearance singing with a
 voice like woman’s.”
 
“my good friend,” said franz, turning to him, while albert continued to
 point his glass at every box in the theatre, “you seem determined not
 to approve; you are really too difficult to please.”
 
the curtain at length fell on the performances, to the infinite
 satisfaction of the viscount of morcerf, who seized his hat, rapidly
 passed his fingers through his hair, arranged his cravat and
 wristbands, and signified to franz that was waiting for him to lead
 the way.
 
franz, who had mutely interrogated the countess, and received from her
 gracious smile in token that would be welcome, sought not to
 retard the gratification of albert’s eager impatience, but began at
 once the tour of the house, closely followed by albert, who availed
 himself of the few minutes required to reach the opposite side of the
 theatre to settle the height and smoothness of his collar, and to
 arrange the lappets of his coat. this important task was just completed
 as they arrived at the countess’s box.
 
at the knock, the door was immediately opened, and the young man who
 was seated beside the countess, in obedience to the italian custom,
 instantly rose and surrendered his place to the strangers, who, in
 turn, would be expected to retire upon the arrival of other visitors.
 
franz presented albert as one of the most distinguished young men of
 the day, both as regarded his position in society and extraordinary
 talents; nor did say more than the truth, for in paris and the
 circle in which the viscount moved, was looked upon and cited as a
 model of perfection. franz added that his companion, deeply grieved at
 having been prevented the honor of being presented to the countess
 during her sojourn in paris, was most anxious to make up for it, and
 had requested him (franz) to remedy the past misfortune by conducting
 him to her box, and concluded by asking pardon for his presumption in
 having taken it upon himself to do so.
 
the countess, in reply, bowed gracefully to albert, and extended her
 hand with cordial kindness to franz; then, inviting albert to take the
 vacant seat beside her, she recommended franz to take the next best, if
 wished to view the ballet, and pointed to the one behind her own
 chair.
 
albert was soon deeply engrossed in discoursing upon paris and parisian
 matters, speaking to the countess of the various persons they both knew
 there. franz perceived how completely was in his element; and,
 unwilling to interfere with the pleasure so evidently felt, took up
 albert’s glass, and began in his turn to survey the audience.
 
sitting alone, in the front of box immediately opposite, but situated
 on the third row, was woman of exquisite beauty, dressed in greek
 costume, which evidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore
 it, was her national attire. behind her, but in deep shadow, was the
 outline of masculine figure; but the features of this latter
 personage it was not possible to distinguish. franz could not forbear
 breaking in upon the apparently interesting conversation passing
 between the countess and albert, to inquire of the former if she knew
 who was the fair albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers was well
 worthy of being observed by either sex.
 
“all i can tell about her,” replied the countess, “is, that she has
 been at rome since the beginning of the season; for i saw her where she
 now sits the very first night of the season, and since then she has
 never missed performance. sometimes she is accompanied by the person
 who is now with her, and at others she is merely attended by black
 servant.”
 
“and what do you think of her personal appearance?”
 
“oh, i consider her perfectly lovely—she is just my idea of what medora
 must have been.”
 
franz and the countess exchanged smile, and then the latter resumed
 her conversation with albert, while franz returned to his previous
 survey of the house and company. the curtain rose on the ballet, which
 was one of those excellent specimens of the italian school, admirably
 arranged and put on the stage by henri, who has established for himself
 great reputation throughout italy for his taste and skill in the
 choreographic art—one of those masterly productions of grace, method,
 and elegance in which the whole _corps ballet_, from the principal
 dancers to the humblest supernumerary, are all engaged on the stage at
 the same time; and hundred and fifty persons may be seen exhibiting
 the same attitude, or elevating the same arm or leg with simultaneous
 movement, that would lead you to suppose that but one mind, one act of
 volition, influenced the moving mass.
 
the ballet was called _poliska_.
 
however much the ballet might have claimed his attention, franz was too
 deeply occupied with the beautiful greek to take any note of it; while
 she seemed to experience an almost childlike delight in watching it,
 her eager, animated looks contrasting strongly with the utter
 indifference of her companion, who, during the whole time the piece
 lasted, never even moved, not even when the furious, crashing din
 produced by the trumpets, cymbals, and chinese bells sounded their
 loudest from the orchestra. of this took heed, but was, as far as
 appearances might be trusted, enjoying soft repose and bright celestial
 dreams.
 
the ballet at length came to close, and the curtain fell amid the
 loud, unanimous plaudits of an enthusiastic and delighted audience.
 
owing to the very judicious plan of dividing the two acts of the opera
 with ballet, the pauses between the performances are very short, the
 singers in the opera having time to repose themselves and change their
 costume, when necessary, while the dancers are executing their
 pirouettes and exhibiting their graceful steps.
 
the overture to the second act began; and, at the first sound of the
 leader’s bow across his violin, franz observed the sleeper slowly arise
 and approach the greek girl, who turned around to say few words to
 him, and then, leaning forward again on the railing of her box, she
 became as absorbed as before in what was going on.
 
the countenance of the person who had addressed her remained so
 completely in the shade, that, though franz tried his utmost, could
 not distinguish single feature. the curtain rose, and the attention
 of franz was attracted by the actors; and his eyes turned from the box
 containing the greek girl and her strange companion to watch the
 business of the stage.
 
most of my readers are aware that the second act of _parisina_ opens
 with the celebrated and effective duet in which parisina, while
 sleeping, betrays to azzo the secret of her love for ugo. the injured
 husband goes through all the emotions of jealousy, until conviction
 seizes on his mind, and then, in frenzy of rage and indignation, he
 awakens his guilty wife to tell her that knows her guilt and to
 threaten her with his vengeance.
 
this duet is one of the most beautiful, expressive and terrible
 conceptions that has ever emanated from the fruitful pen of donizetti.
 franz now listened to it for the third time; yet its notes, so tenderly
 expressive and fearfully grand as the wretched husband and wife give
 vent to their different griefs and passions, thrilled through the soul
 of franz with an effect equal to his first emotions upon hearing it.
 excited beyond his usual calm demeanor, franz rose with the audience,
 and was about to join the loud, enthusiastic applause that followed;
 but suddenly his purpose was arrested, his hands fell by his sides, and
 the half-uttered “bravos” expired on his lips.
 
the occupant of the box in which the greek girl sat appeared to share
 the universal admiration that prevailed; for left his seat to stand
 up in front, so that, his countenance being fully revealed, franz had
 difficulty in recognizing him as the mysterious inhabitant of monte
 cristo, and the very same person had encountered the preceding
 evening in the ruins of the colosseum, and whose voice and figure had
 seemed so familiar to him.
 
all doubt of his identity was now at an end; his singular host
 evidently resided at rome. the surprise and agitation occasioned by
 this full confirmation of franz’s former suspicion had doubt
 imparted corresponding expression to his features; for the countess,
 after gazing with puzzled look at his face, burst into fit of
 laughter, and begged to know what had happened.
 
“countess,” returned franz, totally unheeding her raillery, “i asked
 you short time since if you knew any particulars respecting the
 albanian lady opposite; i must now beseech you to inform who and
 what is her husband?”
 
“nay,” answered the countess, “i know more of him than yourself.”
 
“perhaps you never before noticed him?”
 
“what question—so truly french! do you not know that we italians have
 eyes only for the man we love?”
 
“true,” replied franz.
 
“all i can say is,” continued the countess, taking up the _lorgnette_,
 and directing it toward the box in question, “that the gentleman, whose
 history i am unable to furnish, seems to as though had just been
 dug up; looks more like corpse permitted by some friendly
 grave-digger to quit his tomb for while, and revisit this earth of
 ours, than anything human. how ghastly pale is!”
 
“oh, is always as colorless as you now see him,” said franz.
 
“then you know him?” almost screamed the countess. “oh, pray do, for
 heaven’s sake, tell us all about—is vampire, or resuscitated
 corpse, or what?”
 
“i fancy i have seen him before; and i even think recognizes me.”
 
“and i can well understand,” said the countess, shrugging up her
 beautiful shoulders, as though an involuntary shudder passed through
 her veins, “that those who have once seen that man will never be likely
 to forget him.”
 
the sensation experienced by franz was evidently not peculiar to
 himself; another, and wholly uninterested person, felt the same
 unaccountable awe and misgiving.
 
“well.” inquired franz, after the countess had second time directed
 her _lorgnette_ at the box, “what do you think of our opposite
 neighbor?”
 
20147m
 


“why, that is other than lord ruthven himself in living form.”
 
this fresh allusion to byron5 drew smile to franz’s countenance;
 although could but allow that if anything was likely to induce
 belief in the existence of vampires, it would be the presence of such a
 man as the mysterious personage before him.
 
“i must positively find out who and what is,” said franz, rising
 from his seat.
 
“no, no,” cried the countess; “you must not leave me. i depend upon you
 to escort home. oh, indeed, i cannot permit you to go.”
 
“is it possible,” whispered franz, “that you entertain any fear?”
 
“i’ll tell you,” answered the countess. “byron had the most perfect
 belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured that had
 seen them. the description gave perfectly corresponds with the
 features and character of the man before us. oh, is the exact
 personification of what i have been led to expect! the coal-black hair,
 large bright, glittering eyes, in which wild, unearthly fire seems
 burning,—the same ghastly paleness. then observe, too, that the woman
 with him is altogether unlike all others of her sex. she is a
 foreigner—a stranger. nobody knows who she is, or where she comes from.
 doubt she belongs to the same horrible race does, and is, like
 himself, dealer in magical arts. i entreat of you not to go near
 him—at least tonight; and if tomorrow your curiosity still continues as
 great, pursue your researches if you will; but tonight you neither can
 nor shall. for that purpose i mean to keep you all to myself.”
 
franz protested could not defer his pursuit till the following day,
 for many reasons.
 
“listen to me,” said the countess, “and do not be so very headstrong. i
 am going home. i have party at my house tonight, and therefore cannot
 possibly remain till the end of the opera. now, i cannot for one
 instant believe you so devoid of gallantry as to refuse lady your
 escort when she even condescends to ask you for it.”
 
there was nothing else left for franz to do but to take up his hat,
 open the door of the box, and offer the countess his arm. it was quite
 evident, by her manner, that her uneasiness was not feigned; and franz
 himself could not resist feeling of superstitious dread—so much the
 stronger in him, as it arose from variety of corroborative
 recollections, while the terror of the countess sprang from an
 instinctive belief, originally created in her mind by the wild tales
 she had listened to till she believed them truths. franz could even
 feel her arm tremble as assisted her into the carriage. upon
 arriving at her hotel, franz perceived that she had deceived him when
 she spoke of expecting company; on the contrary, her own return before
 the appointed hour seemed greatly to astonish the servants.
 
“excuse my little subterfuge,” said the countess, in reply to her
 companion’s half-reproachful observation on the subject; “but that
 horrid man had made feel quite uncomfortable, and i longed to be
 alone, that i might compose my startled mind.”
 
franz essayed to smile.
 
“nay,” said she, “do not smile; it ill accords with the expression of
 your countenance, and i am sure it does not spring from your heart.
 however, promise one thing.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“promise me, i say.”
 
“i will do anything you desire, except relinquish my determination of
 finding out who this man is. i have more reasons than you can imagine
 for desiring to know who is, from whence came, and whither is
 going.”
 
“where comes from i am ignorant; but i can readily tell you where he
 is going to, and that is down below, without the least doubt.”
 
“let us only speak of the promise you wished to make,” said franz.
 
“well, then, you must give your word to return immediately to your
 hotel, and make attempt to follow this man tonight. there are
 certain affinities between the persons we quit and those we meet
 afterwards. for heaven’s sake, do not serve as conductor between that
 man and me. pursue your chase after him tomorrow as eagerly as you
 please; but never bring him near me, if you would not see die of
 terror. and now, good-night; go to your rooms, and try to sleep away
 all recollections of this evening. for my own part, i am quite sure i
 shall not be able to close my eyes.”
 
so saying, the countess quitted franz, leaving him unable to decide
 whether she were merely amusing herself at his expense, or whether her
 fears and agitations were genuine.
 
upon his return to the hotel, franz found albert in his dressing-gown
 and slippers, listlessly extended on sofa, smoking cigar.
 
“my dear fellow!” cried he, springing up, “is it really you? why, i did
 not expect to see you before tomorrow.”
 
“my dear albert,” replied franz, “i am glad of this opportunity to tell
 you, once and forever, that you entertain most erroneous notion
 concerning italian women. i should have thought the continual failures
 you have met with in all your own love affairs might have taught you
 better by this time.”
 
“upon my soul, these women would puzzle the very devil to read them
 aright. why, here—they give you their hand—they press yours in
 return—they keep up whispering conversation—permit you to accompany
 them home. why, if parisian were to indulge in quarter of these
 marks of flattering attention, her reputation would be gone forever.”
 
“and the very reason why the women of this fine country, ‘where sounds
 the _si_,’ as dante writes, put so little restraint on their words and
 actions, is because they live so much in public, and have really
 nothing to conceal. besides, you must have perceived that the countess
 was really alarmed.”
 
“at what? at the sight of that respectable gentleman sitting opposite
 to us in the same box with the lovely greek girl? now, for my part, i
 met them in the lobby after the conclusion of the piece; and hang me,
 if i can guess where you took your notions of the other world from. i
 can assure you that this hobgoblin of yours is deuced fine-looking
 fellow—admirably dressed. indeed, i feel quite sure, from the cut of
 his clothes, they are made by first-rate paris tailor—probably blin
 or humann. was rather too pale, certainly; but then, you know,
 paleness is always looked upon as strong proof of aristocratic
 descent and distinguished breeding.”
 
franz smiled; for well remembered that albert particularly prided
 himself on the entire absence of color in his own complexion.
 
“well, that tends to confirm my own ideas,” said franz, “that the
 countess’s suspicions were destitute alike of sense and reason. did he
 speak in your hearing? and did you catch any of his words?”
 
“i did; but they were uttered in the romaic dialect. i knew that from
 the mixture of greek words. i don’t know whether i ever told you that
 when i was at college i was rather—rather strong in greek.”
 
“he spoke the romaic language, did he?”
 
“i think so.”
 
“that settles it,” murmured franz. “’tis he, past all doubt.”
 
“what do you say?”
 
“nothing, nothing. but tell me, what were you thinking about when i
 came in?”
 
“oh, i was arranging little surprise for you.”
 
“indeed. of what nature?”
 
“why, you know it is quite impossible to procure carriage.”
 
“certainly; and i also know that we have done all that human means
 afforded to endeavor to get one.”
 
“now, then, in this difficulty bright idea has flashed across my
 brain.”
 
franz looked at albert as though had not much confidence in the
 suggestions of his imagination.
 
“i tell you what, m. franz,” cried albert, “you deserve to be called
 out for such misgiving and incredulous glance as that you were
 pleased to bestow on just now.”
 
“and i promise to give you the satisfaction of gentleman if your
 scheme turns out as ingenious as you assert.”
 
“well, then, hearken to me.”
 
“i listen.”
 
“you agree, do you not, that obtaining carriage is out of the
 question?”
 
“i do.”
 
“neither can we procure horses?”
 
“true; we have offered any sum, but have failed.”
 
“well, now, what do you say to cart? i dare say such thing might be
 had.”
 
“very possibly.”
 
“and pair of oxen?”
 
“as easily found as the cart.”
 
“then you see, my good fellow, with cart and couple of oxen our
 business can be managed. the cart must be tastefully ornamented; and if
 you and i dress ourselves as neapolitan reapers, we may get up a
 striking tableau, after the manner of that splendid picture by léopold
 robert. it would add greatly to the effect if the countess would join
 us in the costume of peasant from puzzoli or sorrento. our group
 would then be quite complete, more especially as the countess is quite
 beautiful enough to represent madonna.”
 
“well,” said franz, “this time, m. albert, i am bound to give you
 credit for having hit upon most capital idea.”
 
“and quite national one, too,” replied albert with gratified pride.
 “a mere masque borrowed from our own festivities. ha, ha, ye romans!
 you thought to make us, unhappy strangers, trot at the heels of your
 processions, like so many lazzaroni, because carriages or horses are
 to be had in your beggarly city. but you don’t know us; when we can’t
 have one thing we invent another.”
 
“and have you communicated your triumphant idea to anybody?”
 
“only to our host. upon my return home i sent for him, and i then
 explained to him what i wished to procure. assured that nothing
 would be easier than to furnish all i desired. one thing i was sorry
 for; when i bade him have the horns of the oxen gilded, told me
 there would not be time, as it would require three days to do that; so
 you see we must do without this little superfluity.”
 
“and where is now?”
 
“who?”
 
“our host.”
 
“gone out in search of our equipage, by tomorrow it might be too late.”
 
“then will be able to give us an answer tonight.”
 
“oh, i expect him every minute.”
 
at this instant the door opened, and the head of signor pastrini
 appeared. “_permesso_?” inquired he.
 
“certainly—certainly,” cried franz. “come in, my host.”
 
“now, then,” asked albert eagerly, “have you found the desired cart and
 oxen?”
 
“better than that!” replied signor pastrini, with the air of man
 perfectly well satisfied with himself.
 
“take care, my worthy host,” said albert, “_better_ is sure enemy to
 _well_.”
 
“let your excellencies only leave the matter to me,” returned signor
 pastrini in tone indicative of unbounded self-confidence.
 
“but what _have_ you done?” asked franz. “speak out, there’s worthy
 fellow.”
 
“your excellencies are aware,” responded the landlord, swelling with
 importance, “that the count of monte cristo is living on the same floor
 with yourselves!”
 
“i should think we did know it,” exclaimed albert, “since it is owing
 to that circumstance that we are packed into these small rooms, like
 two poor students in the back streets of paris.”
 
“when, then, the count of monte cristo, hearing of the dilemma in which
 you are placed, has sent to offer you seats in his carriage and two
 places at his windows in the palazzo rospoli.” the friends looked at
 each other with unutterable surprise.
 
“but do you think,” asked albert, “that we ought to accept such offers
 from perfect stranger?”
 
“what sort of person is this count of monte cristo?” asked franz of his
 host.
 
“a very great nobleman, but whether maltese or sicilian i cannot
 exactly say; but this i know, that is noble as borghese and rich
 as gold mine.”
 
“it seems to me,” said franz, speaking in an undertone to albert, “that
 if this person merited the high panegyrics of our landlord, would
 have conveyed his invitation through another channel, and not permitted
 it to be brought to us in this unceremonious way. would have
 written—or——”
 
at this instant someone knocked at the door.
 
“come in,” said franz.
 
servant, wearing livery of considerable style and richness,
 appeared at the threshold, and, placing two cards in the landlord’s
 hands, who forthwith presented them to the two young men, said:
 
“please to deliver these, from the count of monte cristo to vicomte
 albert morcerf and m. franz d’Épinay. the count of monte cristo,”
 continued the servant, “begs these gentlemen’s permission to wait upon
 them as their neighbor, and will be honored by an intimation of what
 time they will please to receive him.”
 
“faith, franz,” whispered albert, “there is not much to find fault with
 here.”
 
“tell the count,” replied franz, “that we will do ourselves the
 pleasure of calling on him.”
 
the servant bowed and retired.
 
“that is what i call an elegant mode of attack,” said albert, “you were
 quite correct in what you said, signor pastrini. the count of monte
 cristo is unquestionably man of first-rate breeding and knowledge of
 the world.”
 
“then you accept his offer?” said the host.
 
“of course we do,” replied albert. “still, i must own i am sorry to be
 obliged to give up the cart and the group of reapers—it would have
 produced such an effect! and were it not for the windows at the palazzo
 rospoli, by way of recompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, i
 don’t know but what i should have held on by my original plan. what say
 you, franz?”
 
“oh, i agree with you; the windows in the palazzo rospoli alone decided
 me.”
 
the truth was, that the mention of two places in the palazzo rospoli
 had recalled to franz the conversation had overheard the preceding
 evening in the ruins of the colosseum between the mysterious unknown
 and the transteverin, in which the stranger in the cloak had undertaken
 to obtain the freedom of condemned criminal; and if this muffled-up
 individual proved (as franz felt sure would) the same as the person
 had just seen in the teatro argentina, then should be able to
 establish his identity, and also to prosecute his researches respecting
 him with perfect facility and freedom.
 
franz passed the night in confused dreams respecting the two meetings
 had already had with his mysterious tormentor, and in waking
 speculations as to what the morrow would produce. the next day must
 clear up every doubt; and unless his near neighbor and would-be friend,
 the count of monte cristo, possessed the ring of gyges, and by its
 power was able to render himself invisible, it was very certain he
 could not escape this time.
 
eight o’clock found franz up and dressed, while albert, who had not the
 same motives for early rising, was still soundly asleep. the first act
 of franz was to summon his landlord, who presented himself with his
 accustomed obsequiousness.
 
“pray, signor pastrini,” asked franz, “is not some execution appointed
 to take place today?”
 
“yes, your excellency; but if your reason for inquiry is that you may
 procure window to view it from, you are much too late.”
 
“oh, no,” answered franz, “i had such intention; and even if i had
 felt wish to witness the spectacle, i might have done so from monte
 pincio; could i not?”
 
“ah!” exclaimed mine host, “i did not think it likely your excellency
 would have chosen to mingle with such rabble as are always collected
 on that hill, which, indeed, they consider as exclusively belonging to
 themselves.”
 
“very possibly i may not go,” answered franz; “but in case i feel
 disposed, give some particulars of today’s executions.”
 
“what particulars would your excellency like to hear?”
 
“why, the number of persons condemned to suffer, their names, and
 description of the death they are to die.”
 
“that happens just lucky, your excellency! only few minutes ago they
 brought the _tavolettas_.”
 
“what are they?”
 
“sort of wooden tablets hung up at the corners of streets the evening
 before an execution, on which is pasted up paper containing the names
 of the condemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment. the
 reason for so publicly announcing all this is, that all good and
 faithful catholics may offer up their prayers for the unfortunate
 culprits, and, above all, beseech of heaven to grant them sincere
 repentance.”
 
“and these tablets are brought to you that you may add your prayers to
 those of the faithful, are they?” asked franz somewhat incredulously.
 
“oh, dear, no, your excellency! i have not time for anybody’s affairs
 but my own and those of my honorable guests; but i make an agreement
 with the man who pastes up the papers, and brings them to as he
 would the playbills, that in case any person staying at my hotel should
 like to witness an execution, may obtain every requisite information
 concerning the time and place etc.”
 
“upon my word, that is most delicate attention on your part, signor
 pastrini,” cried franz.
 
“why, your excellency,” returned the landlord, chuckling and rubbing
 his hands with infinite complacency, “i think i may take upon myself to
 say i neglect nothing to deserve the support and patronage of the noble
 visitors to this poor hotel.”
 
“i see that plainly enough, my most excellent host, and you may rely
 upon to proclaim so striking proof of your attention to your
 guests wherever i go. meanwhile, oblige by sight of one of these
 _tavolettas_.”
 
“nothing can be easier than to comply with your excellency’s wish,”
 said the landlord, opening the door of the chamber; “i have caused one
 to be placed on the landing, close by your apartment.”
 
then, taking the tablet from the wall, handed it to franz, who read
 as follows:
 
“‘the public is informed that on wednesday, february 23rd, being the
 first day of the carnival, executions will take place in the piazza del
 popolo, by order of the tribunal of the rota, of two persons, named
 andrea rondolo, and peppino, otherwise called rocca priori; the former
 found guilty of the murder of venerable and exemplary priest, named
 don césar torlini, canon of the church of st. john lateran; and the
 latter convicted of being an accomplice of the atrocious and sanguinary
 bandit, luigi vampa, and his band. the first-named malefactor will be
 _mazzolato_, the second culprit _decapitato_.
 
“‘the prayers of all good christians are entreated for these
 unfortunate men, that it may please god to awaken them to sense of
 their guilt, and to grant them hearty and sincere repentance for
 their crimes.’”
 
this was precisely what franz had heard the evening before in the ruins
 of the colosseum. part of the programme differed,—the names of the
 condemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment, all agreed
 with his previous information. in all probability, therefore, the
 transteverin was other than the bandit luigi vampa himself, and the
 man shrouded in the mantle the same had known as “sinbad the
 sailor,” but who, doubt, was still pursuing his philanthropic
 expedition in rome, as had already done at porto-vecchio and tunis.
 
time was getting on, however, and franz deemed it advisable to awaken
 albert; but at the moment prepared to proceed to his chamber, his
 friend entered the room in perfect costume for the day. the anticipated
 delights of the carnival had so run in his head as to make him leave
 his pillow long before his usual hour.
 
“now, my excellent signor pastrini,” said franz, addressing his
 landlord, “since we are both ready, do you think we may proceed at once
 to visit the count of monte cristo?”
 
“most assuredly,” replied he. “the count of monte cristo is always an
 early riser; and i can answer for his having been up these two hours.”
 
“then you really consider we shall not be intruding if we pay our
 respects to him directly?”
 
20155m
 


“oh, i am quite sure. i will take all the blame on myself if you find i
 have led you into an error.”
 
“well, then, if it be so, are you ready, albert?”
 
“perfectly.”
 
“let us go and return our best thanks for his courtesy.”
 
“yes, let us do so.”
 
the landlord preceded the friends across the landing, which was all
 that separated them from the apartments of the count, rang at the bell,
 and, upon the door being opened by servant, said:
 
“_i signori francesi_.”
 
the domestic bowed respectfully, and invited them to enter. they passed
 through two rooms, furnished in luxurious manner they had not
 expected to see under the roof of signor pastrini, and were shown into
 an elegantly fitted-up drawing-room. the richest turkey carpets covered
 the floor, and the softest and most inviting couches, easy-chairs, and
 sofas, offered their high-piled and yielding cushions to such as
 desired repose or refreshment. splendid paintings by the first masters
 were ranged against the walls, intermingled with magnificent trophies
 of war, while heavy curtains of costly tapestry were suspended before
 the different doors of the room.
 
“if your excellencies will please to be seated,” said the man, “i will
 let the count know that you are here.”
 
and with these words disappeared behind one of the tapestried
 _portières_. as the door opened, the sound of _guzla_ reached the
 ears of the young men, but was almost immediately lost, for the rapid
 closing of the door merely allowed one rich swell of harmony to enter.
 franz and albert looked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeous
 furnishings of the apartment. everything seemed more magnificent at a
 second view than it had done at their first rapid survey.
 
“well,” said franz to his friend, “what think you of all this?”
 
“why, upon my soul, my dear fellow, it strikes that our elegant and
 attentive neighbor must either be some successful stock-jobber who has
 speculated in the fall of the spanish funds, or some prince travelling
 _incog_.”
 
“hush, hush!” replied franz; “we shall ascertain who and what is—he
 comes!”
 
as franz spoke, heard the sound of door turning on its hinges, and
 almost immediately afterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the
 owner of all these riches stood before the two young men. albert
 instantly rose to meet him, but franz remained, in manner, spellbound
 on his chair; for in the person of him who had just entered he
 recognized not only the mysterious visitant to the colosseum, and the
 occupant of the box at the teatro argentina, but also his extraordinary
 host of monte cristo.
 
20157m
 



chapter 35. mazzolata
 
gentlemen,” said the count of monte cristo as entered, “i pray you
 excuse for suffering my visit to be anticipated; but i feared to
 disturb you by presenting myself earlier at your apartments; besides,
 you sent word that you would come to me, and i have held myself at
 your disposal.”
 
“franz and i have to thank you thousand times, count,” returned
 albert; “you extricated us from great dilemma, and we were on the
 point of inventing very fantastic vehicle when your friendly
 invitation reached us.”
 
“indeed,” returned the count, motioning the two young men to sit down.
 “it was the fault of that blockhead pastrini, that i did not sooner
 assist you in your distress. did not mention syllable of your
 embarrassment to me, when knows that, alone and isolated as i am, i
 seek every opportunity of making the acquaintance of my neighbors. as
 soon as i learned i could in any way assist you, i most eagerly seized
 the opportunity of offering my services.”
 
the two young men bowed. franz had, as yet, found nothing to say; he
 had come to determination, and as nothing in the count’s manner
 manifested the wish that should recognize him, did not know
 whether to make any allusion to the past, or wait until had more
 proof; besides, although sure it was who had been in the box the
 previous evening, could not be equally positive that this was the
 man had seen at the colosseum. resolved, therefore, to let things
 take their course without making any direct overture to the count.
 moreover, had this advantage, was master of the count’s secret,
 while the count had hold on franz, who had nothing to conceal.
 however, resolved to lead the conversation to subject which might
 possibly clear up his doubts.
 
“count,” said he, “you have offered us places in your carriage, and at
 your windows in the rospoli palace. can you tell us where we can obtain
 sight of the piazza popolo?”
 
“ah,” said the count negligently, looking attentively at morcerf, “is
 there not something like an execution upon the piazza popolo?”
 
“yes,” returned franz, finding that the count was coming to the point
 wished.
 
“stay, i think i told my steward yesterday to attend to this; perhaps i
 can render you this slight service also.”
 
extended his hand, and rang the bell thrice.
 
“did you ever occupy yourself,” said to franz, “with the employment
 of time and the means of simplifying the summoning your servants? i
 have. when i ring once, it is for my valet; twice, for my majordomo;
 thrice, for my steward,—thus i do not waste minute or word. here he
 is.”
 
man of about forty-five or fifty entered, exactly resembling the
 smuggler who had introduced franz into the cavern; but did not
 appear to recognize him. it was evident had his orders.
 
“monsieur bertuccio,” said the count, “you have procured windows
 looking on the piazza popolo, as i ordered you yesterday.”
 
“yes, excellency,” returned the steward; “but it was very late.”
 
“did i not tell you i wished for one?” replied the count, frowning.
 
“and your excellency has one, which was let to prince lobanieff; but i
 was obliged to pay hundred——”
 
“that will do—that will do, monsieur bertuccio; spare these gentlemen
 all such domestic arrangements. you have the window, that is
 sufficient. give orders to the coachman; and be in readiness on the
 stairs to conduct us to it.”
 
the steward bowed, and was about to quit the room.
 
“ah!” continued the count, “be good enough to ask pastrini if has
 received the _tavoletta_, and if can send us an account of the
 execution.”
 
“there is need to do that,” said franz, taking out his tablets; “for
 i saw the account, and copied it down.”
 
“very well, you can retire, m. bertuccio; i need you longer. let us
 know when breakfast is ready. these gentlemen,” added he, turning to
 the two friends, “will, i trust, do the honor to breakfast with me?”
 
“but, my dear count,” said albert, “we shall abuse your kindness.”
 
“not at all; on the contrary, you will give great pleasure. you
 will, one or other of you, perhaps both, return it to at paris. m.
 bertuccio, lay covers for three.”
 
then took franz’s tablets out of his hand. “‘we announce,’ read,
 in the same tone with which would have read newspaper, ‘that
 today, the 23rd of february, will be executed andrea rondolo, guilty of
 murder on the person of the respected and venerated don césar torlini,
 canon of the church of st. john lateran, and peppino, called rocca
 priori, convicted of complicity with the detestable bandit luigi vampa,
 and the men of his band.’
 
“hum! ‘the first will be _mazzolato_, the second _decapitato_.’ yes,”
 continued the count, “it was at first arranged in this way; but i think
 since yesterday some change has taken place in the order of the
 ceremony.”
 
“really?” said franz.
 
“yes, i passed the evening at the cardinal rospigliosi’s, and there
 mention was made of something like pardon for one of the two men.”
 
“for andrea rondolo?” asked franz.
 
“no,” replied the count, carelessly; “for the other (he glanced at the
 tablets as if to recall the name), for peppino, called rocca priori.
 you are thus deprived of seeing man guillotined; but the _mazzolata_
 still remains, which is very curious punishment when seen for the
 first time, and even the second, while the other, as you must know, is
 very simple. the _mandaïa_6 never fails, never trembles, never strikes
 thirty times ineffectually, like the soldier who beheaded the count of
 chalais, and to whose tender mercy richelieu had doubtless recommended
 the sufferer. ah,” added the count, in contemptuous tone, “do not
 tell of european punishments, they are in the infancy, or rather the
 old age, of cruelty.”
 
“really, count,” replied franz, “one would think that you had studied
 the different tortures of all the nations of the world.”
 
“there are, at least, few that i have not seen,” said the count coldly.
 
“and you took pleasure in beholding these dreadful spectacles?”
 
“my first sentiment was horror, the second indifference, the third
 curiosity.”
 
“curiosity—that is terrible word.”
 
“why so? in life, our greatest preoccupation is death; is it not then,
 curious to study the different ways by which the soul and body can
 part; and how, according to their different characters, temperaments,
 and even the different customs of their countries, different persons
 bear the transition from life to death, from existence to annihilation?
 as for myself, i can assure you of one thing,—the more men you see die,
 the easier it becomes to die yourself; and in my opinion, death may be
 torture, but it is not an expiation.”
 
“i do not quite understand you,” replied franz; “pray explain your
 meaning, for you excite my curiosity to the highest pitch.”
 
“listen,” said the count, and deep hatred mounted to his face, as the
 blood would to the face of any other. “if man had by unheard-of and
 excruciating tortures destroyed your father, your mother, your
 betrothed,—a being who, when torn from you, left desolation, wound
 that never closes, in your breast,—do you think the reparation that
 society gives you is sufficient when it interposes the knife of the
 guillotine between the base of the occiput and the trapezal muscles of
 the murderer, and allows him who has caused us years of moral
 sufferings to escape with few moments of physical pain?”
 
“yes, i know,” said franz, “that human justice is insufficient to
 console us; she can give blood in return for blood, that is all; but
 you must demand from her only what it is in her power to grant.”
 
“i will put another case to you,” continued the count; “that where
 society, attacked by the death of person, avenges death by death. but
 are there not thousand tortures by which man may be made to suffer
 without society taking the least cognizance of them, or offering him
 even the insufficient means of vengeance, of which we have just spoken?
 are there not crimes for which the impalement of the turks, the augers
 of the persians, the stake and the brand of the iroquois indians, are
 inadequate tortures, and which are unpunished by society? answer me, do
 not these crimes exist?”
 
“yes,” answered franz; “and it is to punish them that duelling is
 tolerated.”
 
“ah, duelling,” cried the count; “a pleasant manner, upon my soul, of
 arriving at your end when that end is vengeance! man has carried off
 your mistress, man has seduced your wife, man has dishonored your
 daughter; has rendered the whole life of one who had the right to
 expect from heaven that portion of happiness god has promised to
 everyone of his creatures, an existence of misery and infamy; and you
 think you are avenged because you send ball through the head, or pass
 sword through the breast, of that man who has planted madness in your
 brain, and despair in your heart. and remember, moreover, that it is
 often who comes off victorious from the strife, absolved of all
 crime in the eyes of the world. no, no,” continued the count, “had i to
 avenge myself, it is not thus i would take revenge.”
 
“then you disapprove of duelling? you would not fight duel?” asked
 albert in his turn, astonished at this strange theory.
 
“oh, yes,” replied the count; “understand me, i would fight duel for
 trifle, for an insult, for blow; and the more so that, thanks to my
 skill in all bodily exercises, and the indifference to danger i have
 gradually acquired, i should be almost certain to kill my man. oh, i
 would fight for such cause; but in return for slow, profound,
 eternal torture, i would give back the same, were it possible; an eye
 for an eye, tooth for tooth, as the orientalists say,—our masters
 in everything,—those favored creatures who have formed for themselves a
 life of dreams and paradise of realities.”
 
“but,” said franz to the count, “with this theory, which renders you at
 once judge and executioner of your own cause, it would be difficult to
 adopt course that would forever prevent your falling under the power
 of the law. hatred is blind, rage carries you away; and who pours
 out vengeance runs the risk of tasting bitter draught.”
 
“yes, if be poor and inexperienced, not if be rich and skilful;
 besides, the worst that could happen to him would be the punishment of
 which we have already spoken, and which the philanthropic french
 revolution has substituted for being torn to pieces by horses or broken
 on the wheel. what matters this punishment, as long as is avenged?
 on my word, i almost regret that in all probability this miserable
 peppino will not be beheaded, as you might have had an opportunity then
 of seeing how short time the punishment lasts, and whether it is
 worth even mentioning; but, really this is most singular conversation
 for the carnival, gentlemen; how did it arise? ah, i recollect, you
 asked for place at my window; you shall have it; but let us first sit
 down to table, for here comes the servant to inform us that breakfast
 is ready.”
 
as spoke, servant opened one of the four doors of the apartment,
 saying:
 
“_al suo commodo!_”
 
the two young men arose and entered the breakfast-room.
 
during the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served, franz
 looked repeatedly at albert, in order to observe the impressions which
 doubted not had been made on him by the words of their entertainer;
 but whether with his usual carelessness had paid but little
 attention to him, whether the explanation of the count of monte cristo
 with regard to duelling had satisfied him, or whether the events which
 franz knew of had had their effect on him alone, remarked that his
 companion did not pay the least regard to them, but on the contrary ate
 like man who for the last four or five months had been condemned to
 partake of italian cookery—that is, the worst in the world.
 
as for the count, just touched the dishes; seemed to fulfil the
 duties of host by sitting down with his guests, and awaited their
 departure to be served with some strange or more delicate food. this
 brought back to franz, in spite of himself, the recollection of the
 terror with which the count had inspired the countess g——, and her firm
 conviction that the man in the opposite box was vampire.
 
at the end of the breakfast franz took out his watch.
 
“well,” said the count, “what are you doing?”
 
“you must excuse us, count,” returned franz, “but we have still much to
 do.”
 
“what may that be?”
 
“we have masks, and it is absolutely necessary to procure them.”
 
“do not concern yourself about that; we have, i think, private room
 in the piazza popolo; i will have whatever costumes you choose
 brought to us, and you can dress there.”
 
“after the execution?” cried franz.
 
“before or after, whichever you please.”
 
“opposite the scaffold?”
 
“the scaffold forms part of the _fête_.”
 
“count, i have reflected on the matter,” said franz, “i thank you for
 your courtesy, but i shall content myself with accepting place in
 your carriage and at your window at the rospoli palace, and i leave you
 at liberty to dispose of my place at the piazza popolo.”
 
“but i warn you, you will lose very curious sight,” returned the
 count.
 
“you will describe it to me,” replied franz, “and the recital from your
 lips will make as great an impression on as if i had witnessed it. i
 have more than once intended witnessing an execution, but i have never
 been able to make up my mind; and you, albert?”
 
“i,” replied the viscount,—“i saw castaing executed, but i think i was
 rather intoxicated that day, for i had quitted college the same
 morning, and we had passed the previous night at tavern.”
 
“besides, it is reason because you have not seen an execution at
 paris, that you should not see one anywhere else; when you travel, it
 is to see everything. think what figure you will make when you are
 asked, ‘how do they execute at rome?’ and you reply, ‘i do not know!’
 and, besides, they say that the culprit is an infamous scoundrel, who
 killed with log of wood worthy canon who had brought him up like
 his own son. _diable!_ when churchman is killed, it should be with a
 different weapon than log, especially when has behaved like a
 father. if you went to spain, would you not see the bull-fights? well,
 suppose it is bull-fight you are going to see? recollect the ancient
 romans of the circus, and the sports where they killed three hundred
 lions and hundred men. think of the eighty thousand applauding
 spectators, the sage matrons who took their daughters, and the charming
 vestals who made with the thumb of their white hands the fatal sign
 that said, ‘come, despatch the dying.’”
 
“shall you go, then, albert?” asked franz.
 
“_ma foi_, yes; like you, i hesitated, but the count’s eloquence
 decides me.”
 
“let us go, then,” said franz, “since you wish it; but on our way to
 the piazza popolo, i wish to pass through the corso. is this
 possible, count?”
 
“on foot, yes, in carriage, no.”
 
“i will go on foot, then.”
 
“is it important that you should go that way?”
 
“yes, there is something i wish to see.”
 
“well, we will go by the corso. we will send the carriage to wait for
 us on the piazza popolo, by the via babuino, for i shall be
 glad to pass, myself, through the corso, to see if some orders i have
 given have been executed.”
 
“excellency,” said servant, opening the door, “a man in the dress of
 penitent wishes to speak to you.”
 
“ah! yes,” returned the count, “i know who is, gentlemen; will you
 return to the salon? you will find good cigars on the centre table. i
 will be with you directly.”
 
the young men rose and returned into the salon, while the count, again
 apologizing, left by another door. albert, who was great smoker, and
 who had considered it small sacrifice to be deprived of the cigars
 of the café paris, approached the table, and uttered cry of joy at
 perceiving some veritable _puros_.
 
“well,” asked franz, “what think you of the count of monte cristo?”
 
“what do i think?” said albert, evidently surprised at such question
 from his companion; “i think is delightful fellow, who does the
 honors of his table admirably; who has travelled much, read much, is,
 like brutus, of the stoic school, and moreover,” added he, sending a
 volume of smoke up towards the ceiling, “that has excellent cigars.”
 
such was albert’s opinion of the count, and as franz well knew that
 albert professed never to form an opinion except upon long reflection,
 made attempt to change it.
 
“but,” said he, “did you observe one very singular thing?”
 
“what?”
 
“how attentively looked at you.”
 
“at me?”
 
“yes.”
 
albert reflected. “ah,” replied he, sighing, “that is not very
 surprising; i have been more than year absent from paris, and my
 clothes are of most antiquated cut; the count takes for a
 provincial. the first opportunity you have, undeceive him, i beg, and
 tell him i am nothing of the kind.”
 
franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.
 
“i am now quite at your service, gentlemen,” said he. “the carriage is
 going one way to the piazza popolo, and we will go another; and, if
 you please, by the corso. take some more of these cigars, m. de
 morcerf.”
 
“with all my heart,” returned albert; “italian cigars are horrible.
 when you come to paris, i will return all this.”
 
“i will not refuse; i intend going there soon, and since you allow me,
 i will pay you visit. come, we have not any time to lose, it is
 half-past twelve—let us set off.”
 
all three descended; the coachman received his master’s orders, and
 drove down the via babuino. while the three gentlemen walked along
 the piazza di spagna and the via frattina, which led directly between
 the fiano and rospoli palaces, franz’s attention was directed towards
 the windows of that last palace, for had not forgotten the signal
 agreed upon between the man in the mantle and the transtevere peasant.
 
“which are your windows?” asked of the count, with as much
 indifference as could assume.
 
“the three last,” returned he, with negligence evidently unaffected,
 for could not imagine with what intention the question was put.
 
franz glanced rapidly towards the three windows. the side windows were
 hung with yellow damask, and the centre one with white damask and red
 cross. the man in the mantle had kept his promise to the transteverin,
 and there could now be doubt that was the count.
 
the three windows were still untenanted. preparations were making on
 every side; chairs were placed, scaffolds were raised, and windows were
 hung with flags. the masks could not appear; the carriages could not
 move about; but the masks were visible behind the windows, the
 carriages, and the doors.
 
franz, albert, and the count continued to descend the corso. as they
 approached the piazza popolo, the crowd became more dense, and
 above the heads of the multitude two objects were visible: the obelisk,
 surmounted by cross, which marks the centre of the square, and in
 front of the obelisk, at the point where the three streets, del
 babuino, corso, and di ripetta, meet, the two uprights of the
 scaffold, between which glittered the curved knife of the _mandaïa_.
 
at the corner of the street they met the count’s steward, who was
 awaiting his master. the window, let at an exorbitant price, which the
 count had doubtless wished to conceal from his guests, was on the
 second floor of the great palace, situated between the via babuino
 and the monte pincio. it consisted, as we have said, of small
 dressing-room, opening into bedroom, and, when the door of
 communication was shut, the inmates were quite alone. on chairs were
 laid elegant masquerade costumes of blue and white satin.
 
20167m
 


“as you left the choice of your costumes to me,” said the count to the
 two friends, “i have had these brought, as they will be the most worn
 this year; and they are most suitable, on account of the _confetti_
 (sweetmeats), as they do not show the flour.”
 
franz heard the words of the count but imperfectly, and perhaps did
 not fully appreciate this new attention to their wishes; for was
 wholly absorbed by the spectacle that the piazza popolo presented,
 and by the terrible instrument that was in the centre.
 
it was the first time franz had ever seen guillotine,—we say
 guillotine, because the roman _mandaïa_ is formed on almost the same
 model as the french instrument.7 the knife, which is shaped like a
 crescent, that cuts with the convex side, falls from less height, and
 that is all the difference.
 
two men, seated on the movable plank on which the victim is laid, were
 eating their breakfasts, while waiting for the criminal. their repast
 consisted apparently of bread and sausages. one of them lifted the
 plank, took out flask of wine, drank some, and then passed it to his
 companion. these two men were the executioner’s assistants.
 
at this sight franz felt the perspiration start forth upon his brow.
 
the prisoners, transported the previous evening from the carceri nuove
 to the little church of santa maria popolo, had passed the night,
 each accompanied by two priests, in chapel closed by grating,
 before which were two sentinels, who were relieved at intervals. a
 double line of carbineers, placed on each side of the door of the
 church, reached to the scaffold, and formed circle around it, leaving
 path about ten feet wide, and around the guillotine space of nearly
 hundred feet.
 
all the rest of the square was paved with heads. many women held their
 infants on their shoulders, and thus the children had the best view.
 the monte pincio seemed vast amphitheatre filled with spectators; the
 balconies of the two churches at the corner of the via babuino and
 the via di ripetta were crammed; the steps even seemed parti-colored
 sea, that was impelled towards the portico; every niche in the wall
 held its living statue. what the count said was true—the most curious
 spectacle in life is that of death.
 
and yet, instead of the silence and the solemnity demanded by the
 occasion, laughter and jests arose from the crowd. it was evident that
 the execution was, in the eyes of the people, only the commencement of
 the carnival.
 
suddenly the tumult ceased, as if by magic, and the doors of the church
 opened. brotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robes
 of gray sackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding in their hands
 lighted tapers, appeared first; the chief marched at the head.
 
20169m
 


behind the penitents came man of vast stature and proportions. was
 naked, with the exception of cloth drawers at the left side of which
 hung large knife in sheath, and bore on his right shoulder a
 heavy iron sledge-hammer.
 
this man was the executioner.
 
had, moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords.
 
behind the executioner came, in the order in which they were to die,
 first peppino and then andrea. each was accompanied by two priests.
 neither had his eyes bandaged.
 
peppino walked with firm step, doubtless aware of what awaited him.
 andrea was supported by two priests. each of them, from time to time,
 kissed the crucifix confessor held out to them.
 
at this sight alone franz felt his legs tremble under him. looked at
 albert—he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away his
 cigar, although had not half smoked it. the count alone seemed
 unmoved—nay, more, slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale
 cheeks. his nostrils dilated like those of wild beast that scents its
 prey, and his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and
 sharp like those of jackal. and yet his features wore an expression
 of smiling tenderness, such as franz had never before witnessed in
 them; his black eyes especially were full of kindness and pity.
 
however, the two culprits advanced, and as they approached their faces
 became visible. peppino was handsome young man of four or
 five-and-twenty, bronzed by the sun; carried his head erect, and
 seemed on the watch to see on which side his liberator would appear.
 andrea was short and fat; his visage, marked with brutal cruelty, did
 not indicate age; might be thirty. in prison had suffered his
 beard to grow; his head fell on his shoulder, his legs bent beneath
 him, and his movements were apparently automatic and unconscious.
 
“i thought,” said franz to the count, “that you told there would be
 but one execution.”
 
“i told you true,” replied coldly.
 
“and yet here are two culprits.”
 
“yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has many
 years to live.”
 
“if the pardon is to come, there is time to lose.”
 
“and see, here it is,” said the count. at the moment when peppino
 reached the foot of the _mandaïa_, priest arrived in some haste,
 forced his way through the soldiers, and, advancing to the chief of the
 brotherhood, gave him folded paper. the piercing eye of peppino had
 noticed all. the chief took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his
 hand, “heaven be praised, and his holiness also,” said in loud
 voice; “here is pardon for one of the prisoners!”
 
“a pardon!” cried the people with one voice; “a pardon!”
 
at this cry andrea raised his head.
 
“pardon for whom?” cried he.
 
peppino remained breathless.
 
“a pardon for peppino, called rocca priori,” said the principal friar.
 and passed the paper to the officer commanding the carbineers, who
 read and returned it to him.
 
“for peppino!” cried andrea, who seemed roused from the torpor in which
 had been plunged. “why for him and not for me? we ought to die
 together. i was promised should die with me. you have right to
 put to death alone. i will not die alone—i will not!”
 
and broke from the priests struggling and raving like wild beast,
 and striving desperately to break the cords that bound his hands. the
 executioner made sign, and his two assistants leaped from the
 scaffold and seized him.
 
“what is going on?” asked franz of the count; for, as all the talk was
 in the roman dialect, had not perfectly understood it.
 
“do you not see?” returned the count, “that this human creature who is
 about to die is furious that his fellow-sufferer does not perish with
 him? and, were able, would rather tear him to pieces with his
 teeth and nails than let him enjoy the life himself is about to be
 deprived of. oh, man, man—race of crocodiles,” cried the count,
 extending his clenched hands towards the crowd, “how well do i
 recognize you there, and that at all times you are worthy of
 yourselves!”
 
meanwhile andrea and the two executioners were struggling on the
 ground, and kept exclaiming, “he ought to die!—he shall die!—i will
 not die alone!”
 
“look, look,” cried the count, seizing the young men’s hands; “look,
 for on my soul it is curious. here is man who had resigned himself to
 his fate, who was going to the scaffold to die—like coward, it is
 true, but was about to die without resistance. do you know what gave
 him strength? do you know what consoled him? it was, that another
 partook of his punishment—that another partook of his anguish—that
 another was to die before him! lead two sheep to the butcher’s, two
 oxen to the slaughterhouse, and make one of them understand that his
 companion will not die; the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will
 bellow with joy. but man—man, whom god created in his own image—man,
 upon whom god has laid his first, his sole commandment, to love his
 neighbor—man, to whom god has given voice to express his
 thoughts—what is his first cry when hears his fellow-man is saved? a
 blasphemy. honor to man, this masterpiece of nature, this king of the
 creation!”
 
and the count burst into laugh; terrible laugh, that showed must
 have suffered horribly to be able thus to laugh.
 
however, the struggle still continued, and it was dreadful to witness.
 the two assistants carried andrea up to the scaffold; the people all
 took part against andrea, and twenty thousand voices cried, “put him to
 death! put him to death!”
 
franz sprang back, but the count seized his arm, and held him before
 the window.
 
“what are you doing?” said he. “do you pity him? if you heard the cry
 of ‘mad dog!’ you would take your gun—you would unhesitatingly shoot
 the poor beast, who, after all, was only guilty of having been bitten
 by another dog. and yet you pity man who, without being bitten by one
 of his race, has yet murdered his benefactor; and who, now unable to
 kill anyone, because his hands are bound, wishes to see his companion
 in captivity perish. no, no—look, look!”
 
20172m
 


the recommendation was needless. franz was fascinated by the horrible
 spectacle.
 
the two assistants had borne andrea to the scaffold, and there, in
 spite of his struggles, his bites, and his cries, had forced him to his
 knees. during this time the executioner had raised his mace, and signed
 to them to get out of the way; the criminal strove to rise, but, ere he
 had time, the mace fell on his left temple. dull and heavy sound was
 heard, and the man dropped like an ox on his face, and then turned over
 on his back.
 
the executioner let fall his mace, drew his knife, and with one stroke
 opened his throat, and mounting on his stomach, stamped violently on it
 with his feet. at every stroke jet of blood sprang from the wound.
 
this time franz could contain himself longer, but sank, half
 fainting, into seat.
 
albert, with his eyes closed, was standing grasping the
 window-curtains.
 
the count was erect and triumphant, like the avenging angel!
 


chapter 36. the carnival at rome
 
when franz recovered his senses, saw albert drinking glass of
 water, of which, to judge from his pallor, stood in great need; and
 the count, who was assuming his masquerade costume. glanced
 mechanically towards the piazza—the scene was wholly changed; scaffold,
 executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the people remained,
 full of noise and excitement. the bell of monte citorio, which only
 sounds on the pope’s decease and the opening of the carnival, was
 ringing joyous peal.
 
“well,” asked of the count, “what has, then, happened?”
 
“nothing,” replied the count; “only, as you see, the carnival has
 commenced. make haste and dress yourself.”
 
“in fact,” said franz, “this horrible scene has passed away like a
 dream.”
 
“it is but dream, nightmare, that has disturbed you.”
 
“yes, that i have suffered; but the culprit?”
 
“that is dream also; only has remained asleep, while you have
 awakened; and who knows which of you is the most fortunate?”
 
“but peppino—what has become of him?”
 
“peppino is lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who are happy in
 proportion as they are noticed, was delighted to see that the general
 attention was directed towards his companion. profited by this
 distraction to slip away among the crowd, without even thanking the
 worthy priests who accompanied him. decidedly man is an ungrateful and
 egotistical animal. but dress yourself; see, m. morcerf sets you the
 example.”
 
albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon over his black trousers and
 varnished boots.
 
“well, albert,” said franz, “do you feel much inclined to join the
 revels? come, answer frankly.”
 
“_ma foi_, no,” returned albert. “but i am really glad to have seen
 such sight; and i understand what the count said—that when you have
 once habituated yourself to similar spectacle, it is the only one
 that causes you any emotion.”
 
20175m
 


“without reflecting that this is the only moment in which you can study
 character,” said the count; “on the steps of the scaffold death tears
 off the mask that has been worn through life, and the real visage is
 disclosed. it must be allowed that andrea was not very handsome, the
 hideous scoundrel! come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dress
 yourselves.”
 
franz felt it would be ridiculous not to follow his two companions’
 example. assumed his costume, and fastened on the mask that scarcely
 equalled the pallor of his own face. their toilet finished, they
 descended; the carriage awaited them at the door, filled with
 sweetmeats and bouquets. they fell into the line of carriages.
 
it is difficult to form an idea of the perfect change that had taken
 place. instead of the spectacle of gloomy and silent death, the piazza
 popolo presented spectacle of gay and noisy mirth and revelry. a
 crowd of masks flowed in from all sides, emerging from the doors,
 descending from the windows. from every street and every corner drove
 carriages filled with clowns, harlequins, dominoes, mummers,
 pantomimists, transteverins, knights, and peasants, screaming,
 fighting, gesticulating, throwing eggs filled with flour, confetti,
 nosegays, attacking, with their sarcasms and their missiles, friends
 and foes, companions and strangers, indiscriminately, and one took
 offence, or did anything but laugh.
 
franz and albert were like men who, to drive away violent sorrow,
 have recourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become intoxicated,
 feel thick veil drawn between the past and the present. they saw, or
 rather continued to see, the image of what they had witnessed; but
 little by little the general vertigo seized them, and they felt
 themselves obliged to take part in the noise and confusion.
 
handful of confetti that came from neighboring carriage, and which,
 while it covered morcerf and his two companions with dust, pricked his
 neck and that portion of his face uncovered by his mask like hundred
 pins, incited him to join in the general combat, in which all the masks
 around him were engaged. rose in his turn, and seizing handfuls of
 confetti and sweetmeats, with which the carriage was filled, cast them
 with all the force and skill was master of.
 
20177m
 


the strife had fairly begun, and the recollection of what they had seen
 half an hour before was gradually effaced from the young men’s minds,
 so much were they occupied by the gay and glittering procession they
 now beheld.
 
as for the count of monte cristo, had never for an instant shown any
 appearance of having been moved. imagine the large and splendid corso,
 bordered from one end to the other with lofty palaces, with their
 balconies hung with carpets, and their windows with flags. at these
 balconies are three hundred thousand spectators—romans, italians,
 strangers from all parts of the world, the united aristocracy of birth,
 wealth, and genius. lovely women, yielding to the influence of the
 scene, bend over their balconies, or lean from their windows, and
 shower down confetti, which are returned by bouquets; the air seems
 darkened with the falling confetti and flying flowers. in the streets
 the lively crowd is dressed in the most fantastic costumes—gigantic
 cabbages walk gravely about, buffaloes’ heads bellow from men’s
 shoulders, dogs walk on their hind legs; in the midst of all this a
 mask is lifted, and, as in callot’s temptation of st. anthony, lovely
 face is exhibited, which we would fain follow, but from which we are
 separated by troops of fiends. this will give faint idea of the
 carnival at rome.
 
at the second turn, the count stopped the carriage, and requested
 permission to withdraw, leaving the vehicle at their disposal. franz
 looked up—they were opposite the rospoli palace. at the centre window,
 the one hung with white damask with red cross, was blue domino,
 beneath which franz’s imagination easily pictured the beautiful greek
 of the argentina.
 
“gentlemen,” said the count, springing out, “when you are tired of
 being actors, and wish to become spectators of this scene, you know you
 have places at my windows. in the meantime, dispose of my coachman, my
 carriage, and my servants.”
 
we have forgotten to mention, that the count’s coachman was attired in
 bear-skin, exactly resembling odry’s in _the bear and the pasha_; and
 the two footmen behind were dressed up as green monkeys, with spring
 masks, with which they made grimaces at everyone who passed.
 
franz thanked the count for his attention. as for albert, was busily
 occupied throwing bouquets at carriage full of roman peasants that
 was passing near him. unfortunately for him, the line of carriages
 moved on again, and while descended the piazza popolo, the other
 ascended towards the palazzo di venezia.
 
“ah, my dear fellow,” said to franz; “you did not see?”
 
“what?”
 
“there,—that calash filled with roman peasants.”
 
“no.”
 
“well, i am convinced they are all charming women.”
 
“how unfortunate that you were masked, albert,” said franz; “here was
 an opportunity of making up for past disappointments.”
 
“oh,” replied he, half laughing, half serious; “i hope the carnival
 will not pass without some amends in one shape or the other.”
 
but, in spite of albert’s hope, the day passed unmarked by any
 incident, excepting two or three encounters with the carriage full of
 roman peasants. at one of these encounters, accidentally or purposely,
 albert’s mask fell off. instantly rose and cast the remainder of the
 bouquets into the carriage. doubtless one of the charming females
 albert had detected beneath their coquettish disguise was touched by
 his gallantry; for, as the carriage of the two friends passed her, she
 threw bunch of violets. albert seized it, and as franz had reason
 to suppose it was meant for him, suffered albert to retain it.
 albert placed it in his button-hole, and the carriage went triumphantly
 on.
 
“well,” said franz to him; “there is the beginning of an adventure.”
 
“laugh if you please—i really think so. so i will not abandon this
 bouquet.”
 
“_pardieu_,” returned franz, laughing, “in token of your ingratitude.”
 
the jest, however, soon appeared to become earnest; for when albert and
 franz again encountered the carriage with the _contadini_, the one who
 had thrown the violets to albert, clapped her hands when she beheld
 them in his button-hole.
 
“bravo, bravo,” said franz; “things go wonderfully. shall i leave you?
 perhaps you would prefer being alone?”
 
“no,” replied he; “i will not be caught like fool at first
 disclosure by rendezvous under the clock, as they say at the
 opera-balls. if the fair peasant wishes to carry matters any further,
 we shall find her, or rather, she will find us tomorrow; then she will
 give some sign or other, and i shall know what i have to do.”
 
“on my word,” said franz, “you are as wise as nestor and prudent as
 ulysses, and your fair circe must be very skilful or very powerful if
 she succeed in changing you into beast of any kind.”
 
albert was right; the fair unknown had resolved, doubtless, to carry
 the intrigue farther; for although the young men made several more
 turns, they did not again see the calash, which had turned up one of
 the neighboring streets. then they returned to the rospoli palace; but
 the count and the blue domino had also disappeared; the two windows,
 hung with yellow damask, were still occupied by the persons whom the
 count had invited.
 
at this moment the same bell that had proclaimed the beginning of the
 mascherata sounded the retreat. the file on the corso broke the line,
 and in second all the carriages had disappeared. franz and albert
 were opposite the via delle muratte; the coachman, without saying a
 word, drove up it, passed along the piazza di spagna and the rospoli
 palace and stopped at the door of the hotel. signor pastrini came to
 the door to receive his guests.
 
franz hastened to inquire after the count, and to express regret that
 had not returned in sufficient time; but pastrini reassured him by
 saying that the count of monte cristo had ordered second carriage for
 himself, and that it had gone at four o’clock to fetch him from the
 rospoli palace.
 
the count had, moreover, charged him to offer the two friends the key
 of his box at the argentina. franz questioned albert as to his
 intentions; but albert had great projects to put into execution before
 going to the theatre; and instead of making any answer, inquired if
 signor pastrini could procure him tailor.
 
“a tailor,” said the host; “and for what?”
 
“to make us between now and tomorrow two roman peasant costumes,”
 returned albert.
 
the host shook his head.
 
“to make you two costumes between now and tomorrow? i ask your
 excellencies’ pardon, but this is quite french demand; for the next
 week you will not find single tailor who would consent to sew six
 buttons on waistcoat if you paid him crown piece for each
 button.”
 
“then i must give up the idea?”
 
“no; we have them ready-made. leave all to me; and tomorrow, when you
 awake, you shall find collection of costumes with which you will be
 satisfied.”
 
“my dear albert,” said franz, “leave all to our host; has already
 proved himself full of resources; let us dine quietly, and afterwards
 go and see _l’italienne à alger!_
 
“agreed,” returned albert; “but remember, signor pastrini, that both my
 friend and myself attach the greatest importance to having tomorrow the
 costumes we have asked for.”
 
the host again assured them they might rely on him, and that their
 wishes should be attended to; upon which franz and albert mounted to
 their apartments, and proceeded to disencumber themselves of their
 costumes. albert, as took off his dress, carefully preserved the
 bunch of violets; it was his token reserved for the morrow.
 
the two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from
 remarking the difference between the count of monte cristo’s table and
 that of signor pastrini. truth compelled franz, in spite of the dislike
 seemed to have taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was
 not on pastrini’s side. during dessert, the servant inquired at what
 time they wished for the carriage. albert and franz looked at each
 other, fearing really to abuse the count’s kindness. the servant
 understood them.
 
“his excellency the count of monte cristo had,” said, “given
 positive orders that the carriage was to remain at their lordships’
 orders all day, and they could therefore dispose of it without fear of
 indiscretion.”
 
they resolved to profit by the count’s courtesy, and ordered the horses
 to be harnessed, while they substituted evening dress for that which
 they had on, and which was somewhat the worse for the numerous combats
 they had sustained.
 
20181m
 


this precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed
 themselves in the count’s box. during the first act, the countess g——
 entered. her first look was at the box where she had seen the count the
 previous evening, so that she perceived franz and albert in the place
 of the very person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an
 opinion to franz. her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them,
 that franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and,
 availing himself of one of the privileges of the spectators of the
 italian theatres, who use their boxes to hold receptions, the two
 friends went to pay their respects to the countess. scarcely had they
 entered, when she motioned to franz to assume the seat of honor.
 albert, in his turn, sat behind.
 
“well,” said she, hardly giving franz time to sit down, “it seems you
 have nothing better to do than to make the acquaintance of this new
 lord ruthven, and you are already the best friends in the world.”
 
“without being so far advanced as that, my dear countess,” returned
 franz, “i cannot deny that we have abused his good nature all day.”
 
“all day?”
 
“yes; this morning we breakfasted with him; we rode in his carriage all
 day, and now we have taken possession of his box.”
 
“you know him, then?”
 
“yes, and no.”
 
“how so?”
 
“it is long story.”
 
“tell it to me.”
 
“it would frighten you too much.”
 
“so much the more reason.”
 
“at least wait until the story has conclusion.”
 
“very well; i prefer complete histories; but tell how you made his
 acquaintance? did anyone introduce you to him?”
 
“no; it was who introduced himself to us.”
 
“when?”
 
“last night, after we left you.”
 
“through what medium?”
 
“the very prosaic one of our landlord.”
 
“he is staying, then, at the hôtel londres with you?”
 
“not only in the same hotel, but on the same floor.”
 
“what is his name; for, of course, you know?”
 
“the count of monte cristo.”
 
“that is not family name?”
 
“no, it is the name of the island has purchased.”
 
“and is count?”
 
“a tuscan count.”
 
“well, we must put up with that,” said the countess, who was herself
 from one of the oldest venetian families. “what sort of man is he?”
 
“ask the vicomte morcerf.”
 
“you hear, m. morcerf, i am referred to you,” said the countess.
 
“we should be very hard to please, madam,” returned albert, “did we not
 think him delightful. friend of ten years’ standing could not have
 done more for us, or with more perfect courtesy.”
 
“come,” observed the countess, smiling, “i see my vampire is only some
 millionaire, who has taken the appearance of lara in order to avoid
 being confounded with m. rothschild; and you have seen her?”
 
“her?”
 
20183m
 


“the beautiful greek of yesterday.”
 
“no; we heard, i think, the sound of her _guzla_, but she remained
 perfectly invisible.”
 
“when you say invisible,” interrupted albert, “it is only to keep up
 the mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino at the window with
 the white curtains?”
 
“where was this window with white hangings?” asked the countess.
 
“at the rospoli palace.”
 
“the count had three windows at the rospoli palace?”
 
“yes. did you pass through the corso?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, did you notice two windows hung with yellow damask, and one with
 white damask with red cross? those were the count’s windows.”
 
“why, must be nabob. do you know what those three windows were
 worth?”
 
“two or three hundred roman crowns?”
 
“two or three thousand.”
 
“the deuce!”
 
“does his island produce him such revenue?”
 
“it does not bring him bajocco.”
 
“then why did purchase it?”
 
“for whim.”
 
“he is an original, then?”
 
“in reality,” observed albert, “he seemed to somewhat eccentric;
 were at paris, and frequenter of the theatres, i should say was
 poor devil literally mad. this morning made two or three exits
 worthy of didier or anthony.”
 
at this moment fresh visitor entered, and, according to custom, franz
 gave up his seat to him. this circumstance had, moreover, the effect of
 changing the conversation; an hour afterwards the two friends returned
 to their hotel.
 
signor pastrini had already set about procuring their disguises for the
 morrow; and assured them that they would be perfectly satisfied. the
 next morning, at nine o’clock, entered franz’s room, followed by a
 tailor, who had eight or ten roman peasant costumes on his arm; they
 selected two exactly alike, and charged the tailor to sew on each of
 their hats about twenty yards of ribbon, and to procure them two of the
 long silk sashes of different colors with which the lower orders
 decorate themselves on fête days.
 
albert was impatient to see how looked in his new dress—a jacket and
 breeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with
 buckles, and silk waistcoat. this picturesque attire set him off to
 great advantage; and when had bound the scarf around his waist, and
 when his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder
 stream of ribbons, franz was forced to confess that costume has much
 to do with the physical superiority we accord to certain nations. the
 turks used to be so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but
 are they not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up to the
 chin, and their red caps, which make them look like bottle of wine
 with red seal? franz complimented albert, who looked at himself in
 the glass with an unequivocal smile of satisfaction. they were thus
 engaged when the count of monte cristo entered.
 
20185m
 


“gentlemen,” said he, “although companion is agreeable, perfect
 freedom is sometimes still more agreeable. i come to say that today,
 and for the remainder of the carnival, i leave the carriage entirely at
 your disposal. the host will tell you i have three or four more, so
 that you will not inconvenience in any way. make use of it, i pray
 you, for your pleasure or your business.”
 
the young men wished to decline, but they could find good reason for
 refusing an offer which was so agreeable to them. the count of monte
 cristo remained quarter of an hour with them, conversing on all
 subjects with the greatest ease. was, as we have already said,
 perfectly well acquainted with the literature of all countries. a
 glance at the walls of his salon proved to franz and albert that was
 connoisseur of pictures. few words let fall showed them that he
 was stranger to the sciences, and seemed much occupied with
 chemistry. the two friends did not venture to return the count the
 breakfast had given them; it would have been too absurd to offer him
 in exchange for his excellent table the very inferior one of signor
 pastrini. they told him so frankly, and received their excuses with
 the air of man who appreciated their delicacy. albert was charmed
 with the count’s manners, and was only prevented from recognizing
 him for perfect gentleman by reason of his varied knowledge.
 
the permission to do what liked with the carriage pleased him above
 all, for the fair peasants had appeared in most elegant carriage the
 preceding evening, and albert was not sorry to be upon an equal footing
 with them. at half-past one they descended, the coachman and footman
 had put on their livery over their disguises, which gave them more
 ridiculous appearance than ever, and which gained them the applause of
 franz and albert. albert had fastened the faded bunch of violets to his
 button-hole. at the first sound of the bell they hastened into the
 corso by the via vittoria.
 
at the second turn, bunch of fresh violets, thrown from carriage
 filled with harlequins, indicated to albert that, like himself and his
 friend, the peasants had changed their costume also; and whether it was
 the result of chance, or whether similar feeling had possessed them
 both, while had donned their costume, they had assumed his.
 
albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but kept the
 faded one in his hand; and when again met the calash, raised it
 to his lips, an action which seemed greatly to amuse not only the fair
 lady who had thrown it, but her joyous companions also. the day was as
 gay as the preceding one, perhaps even more animated and noisy; the
 count appeared for an instant at his window, but when they again passed
 had disappeared. it is almost needless to say that the flirtation
 between albert and the fair peasant continued all day.
 
in the evening, on his return, franz found letter from the embassy,
 informing him that would have the honor of being received by his
 holiness the next day. at each previous visit had made to rome, he
 had solicited and obtained the same favor; and incited as much by a
 religious feeling as by gratitude, was unwilling to quit the capital
 of the christian world without laying his respectful homage at the feet
 of one of st. peter’s successors who has set the rare example of all
 the virtues. did not then think of the carnival, for in spite of his
 condescension and touching kindness, one cannot incline one’s self
 without awe before the venerable and noble old man called gregory xvi.
 
on his return from the vatican, franz carefully avoided the corso; he
 brought away with him treasure of pious thoughts, to which the mad
 gayety of the maskers would have been profanation.
 
at ten minutes past five albert entered overjoyed. the harlequin had
 reassumed her peasant’s costume, and as she passed she raised her mask.
 she was charming. franz congratulated albert, who received his
 congratulations with the air of man conscious that they are merited.
 had recognized by certain unmistakable signs, that his fair
 _incognita_ belonged to the aristocracy. had made up his mind to
 write to her the next day.
 
franz remarked, while gave these details, that albert seemed to have
 something to ask of him, but that was unwilling to ask it. he
 insisted upon it, declaring beforehand that was willing to make any
 sacrifice the other wished.
 
albert let himself be pressed just as long as friendship required, and
 then avowed to franz that would do him great favor by allowing him
 to occupy the carriage alone the next day. albert attributed to franz’s
 absence the extreme kindness of the fair peasant in raising her mask.
 franz was not sufficiently egotistical to stop albert in the middle of
 an adventure that promised to prove so agreeable to his curiosity and
 so flattering to his vanity. felt assured that the perfect
 indiscretion of his friend would duly inform him of all that happened;
 and as, during three years that had travelled all over italy, a
 similar piece of good fortune had never fallen to his share, franz was
 by means sorry to learn how to act on such an occasion. therefore
 promised albert that would content himself the morrow with
 witnessing the carnival from the windows of the rospoli palace.
 
the next morning saw albert pass and repass, holding an enormous
 bouquet, which doubtless meant to make the bearer of his amorous
 epistle. this belief was changed into certainty when franz saw the
 bouquet (conspicuous by circle of white camellias) in the hand of a
 charming harlequin dressed in rose-colored satin.
 
the evening was longer joy, but delirium. albert nothing doubted but
 that the fair unknown would reply in the same manner. franz anticipated
 his wishes by saying that the noise fatigued him, and that should
 pass the next day in writing and looking over his journal. albert was
 not deceived, for the next evening franz saw him enter triumphantly
 shaking folded paper which held by one corner.
 
“well,” said he, “was i mistaken?”
 
“she has answered you!” cried franz.
 
“read.”
 
this word was pronounced in manner impossible to describe. franz took
 the letter, and read:
 
“tuesday evening, at seven o’clock, descend from your carriage opposite
 the via dei pontefici, and follow the roman peasant who snatches your
 torch from you. when you arrive at the first step of the church of san
 giacomo, be sure to fasten knot of rose-colored ribbons to the
 shoulder of your harlequin costume, in order that you may be
 recognized. until then you will not see me. —constancy and discretion.”
 
“well,” asked he, when franz had finished, “what do you think of that?”
 
“i think that the adventure is assuming very agreeable appearance.”
 
“i think so, also,” replied albert; “and i very much fear you will go
 alone to the duke of bracciano’s ball.”
 
franz and albert had received that morning an invitation from the
 celebrated roman banker.
 
“take care, albert,” said franz. “all the nobility of rome will be
 present, and if your fair _incognita_ belong to the higher class of
 society, she must go there.”
 
“whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same,” returned
 albert. “you have read the letter?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you know how imperfectly the women of the _mezzo cito_ are educated in
 italy?” (this is the name of the lower class.)
 
“yes.”
 
“well, read the letter again. look at the writing, and find if you can,
 any blemish in the language or orthography.” the writing was, in
 reality, charming, and the orthography irreproachable.
 
“you are born to good fortune,” said franz, as returned the letter.
 
“laugh as much as you will,” replied albert, “i am in love.”
 
“you alarm me,” cried franz. “i see that i shall not only go alone to
 the duke of bracciano’s, but also return to florence alone.”
 
“if my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful,” said albert, “i
 shall fix myself at rome for six weeks, at least. i adore rome, and i
 have always had great taste for archæology.”
 
20189m
 


“come, two or three more such adventures, and i do not despair of
 seeing you member of the academy.”
 
doubtless albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the
 academic chair when they were informed that dinner was ready. albert’s
 love had not taken away his appetite. hastened with franz to seat
 himself, free to recommence the discussion after dinner. after dinner,
 the count of monte cristo was announced. they had not seen him for two
 days. signor pastrini informed them that business had called him to
 civita vecchia. had started the previous evening, and had only
 returned an hour since. was charming. whether kept watch over
 himself, or whether by accident did not sound the acrimonious chords
 that in other circumstances had been touched, was tonight like
 everybody else.
 
the man was an enigma to franz. the count must feel sure that franz
 recognized him; and yet had not let fall single word indicating
 any previous acquaintance between them. on his side, however great
 franz’s desire was to allude to their former interview, the fear of
 being disagreeable to the man who had loaded him and his friend with
 kindness prevented him from mentioning it.
 
the count had learned that the two friends had sent to secure box at
 the argentina theatre, and were told they were all let. in consequence,
 brought them the key of his own—at least such was the apparent
 motive of his visit. franz and albert made some difficulty, alleging
 their fear of depriving him of it; but the count replied that, as he
 was going to the palli theatre, the box at the argentina theatre would
 be lost if they did not profit by it. this assurance determined the two
 friends to accept it.
 
franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count’s pallor, which had
 so forcibly struck him at their first meeting. could not refrain
 from admiring the severe beauty of his features, the only defect, or
 rather the principal quality of which was the pallor. truly, byronic
 hero! franz could not, we will not say see him, but even think of him
 without imagining his stern head upon manfred’s shoulders, or beneath
 lara’s helmet. his forehead was marked with the line that indicates the
 constant presence of bitter thoughts; had the fiery eyes that seem
 to penetrate to the very soul, and the haughty and disdainful upper lip
 that gives to the words it utters peculiar character that impresses
 them on the minds of those to whom they are addressed.
 
the count was longer young. was at least forty; and yet it was
 easy to understand that was formed to rule the young men with whom
 associated at present. and, to complete his resemblance with the
 fantastic heroes of the english poet, the count seemed to have the
 power of fascination. albert was constantly expatiating on their good
 fortune in meeting such man. franz was less enthusiastic; but the
 count exercised over him also the ascendency strong mind always
 acquires over mind less domineering. thought several times of the
 project the count had of visiting paris; and had doubt but that,
 with his eccentric character, his characteristic face, and his colossal
 fortune, would produce great effect there. and yet did not wish
 to be at paris when the count was there.
 
the evening passed as evenings mostly pass at italian theatres; that
 is, not in listening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing.
 the countess g—— wished to revive the subject of the count, but franz
 announced had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of
 albert’s demonstrations of false modesty, informed the countess of
 the great event which had preoccupied them for the last three days. as
 similar intrigues are not uncommon in italy, if we may credit
 travellers, the comtess did not manifest the least incredulity, but
 congratulated albert on his success. they promised, upon separating, to
 meet at the duke of bracciano’s ball, to which all rome was invited.
 
the heroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave albert sign of
 her existence the morrow or the day after.
 
at length tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day of the
 carnival. on tuesday, the theatres open at ten o’clock in the morning,
 as lent begins after eight at night. on tuesday, all those who through
 want of money, time, or enthusiasm, have not been to see the carnival
 before, mingle in the gayety, and contribute to the noise and
 excitement. from two o’clock till five franz and albert followed in the
 _fête_, exchanging handfuls of _confetti_ with the other carriages and
 the pedestrians, who crowded amongst the horses’ feet and the carriage
 wheels without single accident, single dispute, or single fight.
 
the _fêtes_ are veritable pleasure days to the italians. the author of
 this history, who has resided five or six years in italy, does not
 recollect to have ever seen ceremony interrupted by one of those
 events so common in other countries. albert was triumphant in his
 harlequin costume. knot of rose-colored ribbons fell from his
 shoulder almost to the ground. in order that there might be no
 confusion, franz wore his peasant’s costume.
 
as the day advanced, the tumult became greater. there was not on the
 pavement, in the carriages, at the windows, single tongue that was
 silent, single arm that did not move. it was human storm, made up
 of thunder of cries, and hail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs,
 oranges, and nosegays.
 
at three o’clock the sound of fireworks, let off on the piazza del
 popolo and the piazza di venezia (heard with difficulty amid the din
 and confusion) announced that the races were about to begin.
 
the races, like the _moccoli_, are one of the episodes peculiar to the
 last days of the carnival. at the sound of the fireworks the carriages
 instantly broke ranks, and retired by the adjacent streets. all these
 evolutions are executed with an inconceivable address and marvellous
 rapidity, without the police interfering in the matter. the pedestrians
 ranged themselves against the walls; then the trampling of horses and
 the clashing of steel were heard. detachment of carbineers, fifteen
 abreast, galloped up the corso in order to clear it for the _barberi_.
 when the detachment arrived at the piazza di venezia, second volley
 of fireworks was discharged, to announce that the street was clear.
 
almost instantly, in the midst of tremendous and general outcry,
 seven or eight horses, excited by the shouts of three hundred thousand
 spectators, passed by like lightning. then the castle of saint angelo
 fired three cannon to indicate that number three had won.
 
immediately, without any other signal, the carriages moved on, flowing
 on towards the corso, down all the streets, like torrents pent up for a
 while, which again flow into the parent river; and the immense stream
 again continued its course between its two granite banks.
 
new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd. the sellers
 of _moccoletti_ entered on the scene. the _moccoli_, or _moccoletti_,
 are candles which vary in size from the pascal taper to the rushlight,
 and which give to each actor in the great final scene of the carnival
 two very serious problems to grapple with,—first, how to keep his own
 _moccoletto_ alight; and secondly, how to extinguish the _moccoletti_
 of others. the _moccoletto_ is like life: man has found but one means
 of transmitting it, and that one comes from god. but has discovered
 thousand means of taking it away, and the devil has somewhat aided
 him. the _moccoletto_ is kindled by approaching it to light. but who
 can describe the thousand means of extinguishing the _moccoletto_?—the
 gigantic bellows, the monstrous extinguishers, the superhuman fans.
 everyone hastened to purchase _moccoletti_—franz and albert among the
 rest.
 
the night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cry of
 “_moccoletti_!” repeated by the shrill voices of thousand vendors,
 two or three stars began to burn among the crowd. it was signal. at
 the end of ten minutes fifty thousand lights glittered, descending from
 the palazzo di venezia to the piazza popolo, and mounting from the
 piazza popolo to the palazzo di venezia. it seemed like the _fête_
 of jack-o’-lanterns.
 
it is impossible to form any idea of it without having seen it. suppose
 that all the stars had descended from the sky and mingled in wild
 dance on the face of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that
 were never heard in any other part of the world. the _facchino_ follows
 the prince, the transteverin the citizen, everyone blowing,
 extinguishing, relighting. had old Æolus appeared at this moment, he
 would have been proclaimed king of the _moccoli_, and aquilo the
 heir-presumptive to the throne.
 
this battle of folly and flame continued for two hours; the corso was
 light as day; the features of the spectators on the third and fourth
 stories were visible.
 
every five minutes albert took out his watch; at length it pointed to
 seven. the two friends were in the via dei pontefici. albert sprang
 out, bearing his _moccoletto_ in his hand. two or three masks strove to
 knock his _moccoletto_ out of his hand; but albert, first-rate
 pugilist, sent them rolling in the street, one after the other, and
 continued his course towards the church of san giacomo.
 
the steps were crowded with masks, who strove to snatch each other’s
 torches. franz followed albert with his eyes, and saw him mount the
 first step.
 
instantly mask, wearing the well-known costume of peasant woman,
 snatched his _moccoletto_ from him without his offering any resistance.
 franz was too far off to hear what they said; but, without doubt,
 nothing hostile passed, for saw albert disappear arm-in-arm with the
 peasant girl. watched them pass through the crowd for some time, but
 at length lost sight of them in the via macello.
 
suddenly the bell that gives the signal for the end of the carnival
 sounded, and at the same instant all the _moccoletti_ were extinguished
 as if by enchantment. it seemed as though one immense blast of the wind
 had extinguished everyone.
 
franz found himself in utter darkness. sound was audible save that
 of the carriages that were carrying the maskers home; nothing was
 visible save few lights that burnt behind the windows.
 
the carnival was over.
 
20193m
 



chapter 37. the catacombs of saint sebastian
 
in his whole life, perhaps, franz had never before experienced so
 sudden an impression, so rapid transition from gayety to sadness, as
 in this moment. it seemed as though rome, under the magic breath of
 some demon of the night, had suddenly changed into vast tomb. by a
 chance, which added yet more to the intensity of the darkness, the
 moon, which was on the wane, did not rise until eleven o’clock, and the
 streets which the young man traversed were plunged in the deepest
 obscurity.
 
the distance was short, and at the end of ten minutes his carriage, or
 rather the count’s, stopped before the hôtel londres.
 
dinner was waiting, but as albert had told him that should not
 return so soon, franz sat down without him. signor pastrini, who had
 been accustomed to see them dine together, inquired into the cause of
 his absence, but franz merely replied that albert had received on the
 previous evening an invitation which had accepted.
 
the sudden extinction of the _moccoletti_, the darkness which had
 replaced the light, and the silence which had succeeded the turmoil,
 had left in franz’s mind certain depression which was not free from
 uneasiness. therefore dined very silently, in spite of the officious
 attention of his host, who presented himself two or three times to
 inquire if wanted anything.
 
franz resolved to wait for albert as late as possible. ordered the
 carriage, therefore, for eleven o’clock, desiring signor pastrini to
 inform him the moment that albert returned to the hotel.
 
at eleven o’clock albert had not come back. franz dressed himself, and
 went out, telling his host that was going to pass the night at the
 duke of bracciano’s. the house of the duke of bracciano is one of the
 most delightful in rome, the duchess, one of the last heiresses of the
 colonnas, does its honors with the most consummate grace, and thus
 their _fêtes_ have european celebrity.
 
franz and albert had brought to rome letters of introduction to them,
 and their first question on his arrival was to inquire the whereabouts
 of his travelling companion. franz replied that had left him at the
 moment they were about to extinguish the _moccoli_, and that had
 lost sight of him in the via macello.
 
“then has not returned?” said the duke.
 
“i waited for him until this hour,” replied franz.
 
“and do you know whither went?”
 
“no, not precisely; however, i think it was something very like a
 rendezvous.”
 
“_diavolo!_” said the duke, “this is bad day, or rather bad night,
 to be out late; is it not, countess?”
 
these words were addressed to the countess g——, who had just arrived,
 and was leaning on the arm of signor torlonia, the duke’s brother.
 
“i think, on the contrary, that it is charming night,” replied the
 countess, “and those who are here will complain of but one thing, that
 of its too rapid flight.”
 
“i am not speaking,” said the duke with smile, “of the persons who
 are here; the men run other danger than that of falling in love with
 you, and the women of falling ill of jealousy at seeing you so lovely;
 i meant persons who were out in the streets of rome.”
 
“ah,” asked the countess, “who is out in the streets of rome at this
 hour, unless it be to go to ball?”
 
“our friend, albert morcerf, countess, whom i left in pursuit of his
 unknown about seven o’clock this evening,” said franz, “and whom i have
 not seen since.”
 
“and don’t you know where is?”
 
“not at all.”
 
“is armed?”
 
“he is in masquerade.”
 
“you should not have allowed him to go,” said the duke to franz; “you,
 who know rome better than does.”
 
“you might as well have tried to stop number three of the _barberi_,
 who gained the prize in the race today,” replied franz; “and then
 moreover, what could happen to him?”
 
“who can tell? the night is gloomy, and the tiber is very near the via
 macello.” franz felt shudder run through his veins at observing that
 the feeling of the duke and the countess was so much in unison with his
 own personal disquietude.
 
“i informed them at the hotel that i had the honor of passing the night
 here, duke,” said franz, “and desired them to come and inform of his
 return.”
 
“ah,” replied the duke, “here i think, is one of my servants who is
 seeking you.”
 
the duke was not mistaken; when saw franz, the servant came up to
 him.
 
“your excellency,” said, “the master of the hôtel londres has
 sent to let you know that man is waiting for you with letter from
 the viscount of morcerf.”
 
“a letter from the viscount!” exclaimed franz.
 
“yes.”
 
“and who is the man?”
 
“i do not know.”
 
“why did not bring it to here?”
 
“the messenger did not say.”
 
“and where is the messenger?”
 
“he went away directly saw enter the ball-room to find you.”
 
“oh,” said the countess to franz, “go with all speed—poor young man!
 perhaps some accident has happened to him.”
 
“i will hasten,” replied franz.
 
“shall we see you again to give us any information?” inquired the
 countess.
 
“yes, if it is not any serious affair, otherwise i cannot answer as to
 what i may do myself.”
 
“be prudent, in any event,” said the countess.
 
“oh! pray be assured of that.”
 
franz took his hat and went away in haste. had sent away his
 carriage with orders for it to fetch him at two o’clock; fortunately
 the palazzo bracciano, which is on one side in the corso, and on the
 other in the square of the holy apostles, is hardly ten minutes’ walk
 from the hôtel londres.
 
as came near the hotel, franz saw man in the middle of the street.
 had doubt that it was the messenger from albert. the man was
 wrapped up in large cloak. went up to him, but, to his extreme
 astonishment, the stranger first addressed him.
 
“what wants your excellency of me?” inquired the man, retreating step
 or two, as if to keep on his guard.
 
“are not you the person who brought letter,” inquired franz, “from
 the viscount of morcerf?”
 
“your excellency lodges at pastrini’s hotel?”
 
“i do.”
 
“your excellency is the travelling companion of the viscount?”
 
“i am.”
 
“your excellency’s name——”
 
“is the baron franz d’Épinay.”
 
20199m
 


“then it is to your excellency that this letter is addressed.”
 
“is there any answer?” inquired franz, taking the letter from him.
 
“yes—your friend at least hopes so.”
 
“come upstairs with me, and i will give it to you.”
 
“i prefer waiting here,” said the messenger, with smile.
 
“and why?”
 
“your excellency will know when you have read the letter.”
 
“shall i find you here, then?”
 
“certainly.”
 
franz entered the hotel. on the staircase met signor pastrini.
 “well?” said the landlord.
 
“well—what?” responded franz.
 
“you have seen the man who desired to speak with you from your friend?”
 asked of franz.
 
“yes, i have seen him,” replied, “and has handed this letter to
 me. light the candles in my apartment, if you please.”
 
the innkeeper gave orders to servant to go before franz with light.
 the young man had found signor pastrini looking very much alarmed, and
 this had only made him the more anxious to read albert’s letter; and so
 went instantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. it was written
 and signed by albert. franz read it twice before could comprehend
 what it contained. it was thus worded:
 
“my dear fellow,
 
“the moment you have received this, have the kindness to take the
 letter of credit from my pocket-book, which you will find in the square
 drawer of the _secrétaire_; add your own to it, if it be not
 sufficient. run to torlonia, draw from him instantly four thousand
 piastres, and give them to the bearer. it is urgent that i should have
 this money without delay. i do not say more, relying on you as you may
 rely on me.
 
“your friend,
 
“albert morcerf.
 
“p.s.—i now believe in italian _banditti_.”
 
below these lines were written, in strange hand, the following in
 italian:
 
“_se alle sei della mattina quattro mille piastre non sono nelle mie
 mani, alla sette il conte alberto avrà cessato di vivere_.
 
“luigi vampa.”
 
“_if by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in my
 hands, by seven o’clock the count albert will have ceased to live_.”
 
this second signature explained everything to franz, who now understood
 the objection of the messenger to coming up into the apartment; the
 street was safer for him. albert, then, had fallen into the hands of
 the famous bandit chief, in whose existence had for so long time
 refused to believe.
 
there was time to lose. hastened to open the _secrétaire_, and
 found the pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter of credit.
 there were in all six thousand piastres, but of these six thousand
 albert had already expended three thousand.
 
as to franz, had letter of credit, as lived at florence, and
 had only come to rome to pass seven or eight days; had brought but a
 hundred louis, and of these had not more than fifty left. thus seven
 or eight hundred piastres were wanting to them both to make up the sum
 that albert required. true, might in such case rely on the
 kindness of signor torlonia. was, therefore, about to return to the
 palazzo bracciano without loss of time, when suddenly luminous idea
 crossed his mind.
 
remembered the count of monte cristo. franz was about to ring for
 signor pastrini, when that worthy presented himself.
 
“my dear sir,” said, hastily, “do you know if the count is within?”
 
“yes, your excellency; has this moment returned.”
 
“is in bed?”
 
“i should say no.”
 
“then ring at his door, if you please, and request him to be so kind as
 to give an audience.”
 
signor pastrini did as was desired, and returning five minutes
 after, said:
 
“the count awaits your excellency.”
 
franz went along the corridor, and servant introduced him to the
 count. was in small room which franz had not yet seen, and which
 was surrounded with divans. the count came towards him.
 
“well, what good wind blows you hither at this hour?” said he; “have
 you come to sup with me? it would be very kind of you.”
 
“no; i have come to speak to you of very serious matter.”
 
“a serious matter,” said the count, looking at franz with the
 earnestness usual to him; “and what may it be?”
 
“are we alone?”
 
“yes,” replied the count, going to the door, and returning. franz gave
 him albert’s letter.
 
“read that,” said.
 
the count read it.
 
“well, well!” said he.
 
“did you see the postscript?”
 
“i did, indeed.
 
“_‘se alle sei della mattina quattro mille piastre non sono nelle
 mie mani, alla sette il conte alberto avrà cessato di vivere. _
 
“‘luigi vampa.’”
 
“what think you of that?” inquired franz.
 
“have you the money demands?”
 
“yes, all but eight hundred piastres.”
 
the count went to his _secrétaire_, opened it, and pulling out drawer
 filled with gold, said to franz, “i hope you will not offend by
 applying to anyone but myself.”
 
“you see, on the contrary, i come to you first and instantly,” replied
 franz.
 
“and i thank you; have what you will;” and made sign to franz to
 take what pleased.
 
“is it absolutely necessary, then, to send the money to luigi vampa?”
 asked the young man, looking fixedly in his turn at the count.
 
“judge for yourself,” replied he. “the postscript is explicit.”
 
“i think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting, you could
 find way of simplifying the negotiation,” said franz.
 
“how so?” returned the count, with surprise.
 
“if we were to go together to luigi vampa, i am sure would not
 refuse you albert’s freedom.”
 
“what influence can i possibly have over bandit?”
 
“have you not just rendered him service that can never be forgotten?”
 
“what is that?”
 
“have you not saved peppino’s life?”
 
“well, well,” said the count, “who told you that?”
 
“no matter; i know it.” the count knit his brows, and remained silent
 an instant.
 
“and if i went to seek vampa, would you accompany me?”
 
“if my society would not be disagreeable.”
 
“be it so. it is lovely night, and walk without rome will do us
 both good.”
 
“shall i take any arms?”
 
“for what purpose?”
 
“any money?”
 
“it is useless. where is the man who brought the letter?”
 
“in the street.”
 
“he awaits the answer?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i must learn where we are going. i will summon him hither.”
 
“it is useless; would not come up.”
 
“to your apartments, perhaps; but will not make any difficulty at
 entering mine.”
 
the count went to the window of the apartment that looked on to the
 street, and whistled in peculiar manner. the man in the mantle
 quitted the wall, and advanced into the middle of the street.
 “_salite!_” said the count, in the same tone in which would have
 given an order to his servant. the messenger obeyed without the least
 hesitation, but rather with alacrity, and, mounting the steps at a
 bound, entered the hotel; five seconds afterwards was at the door of
 the room.
 
“ah, it is you, peppino,” said the count. but peppino, instead of
 answering, threw himself on his knees, seized the count’s hand, and
 covered it with kisses. “ah,” said the count, “you have, then, not
 forgotten that i saved your life; that is strange, for it is week
 ago.”
 
20203m
 


“no, excellency; and never shall i forget it,” returned peppino, with
 an accent of profound gratitude.
 
“never? that is long time; but it is something that you believe so.
 rise and answer.”
 
peppino glanced anxiously at franz.
 
“oh, you may speak before his excellency,” said he; “he is one of my
 friends. you allow to give you this title?” continued the count in
 french, “it is necessary to excite this man’s confidence.”
 
“you can speak before me,” said franz; “i am friend of the count’s.”
 
“good!” returned peppino. “i am ready to answer any questions your
 excellency may address to me.”
 
“how did the viscount albert fall into luigi’s hands?”
 
“excellency, the frenchman’s carriage passed several times the one in
 which was teresa.”
 
“the chief’s mistress?”
 
“yes. the frenchman threw her bouquet; teresa returned it—all this
 with the consent of the chief, who was in the carriage.”
 
“what?” cried franz, “was luigi vampa in the carriage with the roman
 peasants?”
 
“it was who drove, disguised as the coachman,” replied peppino.
 
“well?” said the count.
 
“well, then, the frenchman took off his mask; teresa, with the chief’s
 consent, did the same. the frenchman asked for rendezvous; teresa
 gave him one—only, instead of teresa, it was beppo who was on the steps
 of the church of san giacomo.”
 
“what!” exclaimed franz, “the peasant girl who snatched his _mocoletto_
 from him——”
 
“was lad of fifteen,” replied peppino. “but it was disgrace to
 your friend to have been deceived; beppo has taken in plenty of
 others.”
 
“and beppo led him outside the walls?” said the count.
 
“exactly so; carriage was waiting at the end of the via macello.
 beppo got in, inviting the frenchman to follow him, and did not wait
 to be asked twice. gallantly offered the right-hand seat to beppo,
 and sat by him. beppo told him was going to take him to villa a
 league from rome; the frenchman assured him would follow him to the
 end of the world. the coachman went up the via di ripetta and the porta
 san paolo; and when they were two hundred yards outside, as the
 frenchman became somewhat too forward, beppo put brace of pistols to
 his head, the coachman pulled up and did the same. at the same time,
 four of the band, who were concealed on the banks of the almo,
 surrounded the carriage. the frenchman made some resistance, and nearly
 strangled beppo; but could not resist five armed men, and was forced
 to yield. they made him get out, walk along the banks of the river, and
 then brought him to teresa and luigi, who were waiting for him in the
 catacombs of st. sebastian.”
 
“well,” said the count, turning towards franz, “it seems to that
 this is very likely story. what do you say to it?”
 
“why, that i should think it very amusing,” replied franz, “if it had
 happened to anyone but poor albert.”
 
“and, in truth, if you had not found here,” said the count, “it
 might have proved gallant adventure which would have cost your friend
 dear; but now, be assured, his alarm will be the only serious
 consequence.”
 
“and shall we go and find him?” inquired franz.
 
“oh, decidedly, sir. is in very picturesque place—do you know the
 catacombs of st. sebastian?”
 
“i was never in them; but i have often resolved to visit them.”
 
“well, here is an opportunity made to your hand, and it would be
 difficult to contrive better. have you carriage?”
 
“no.”
 
“that is of consequence; i always have one ready, day and night.”
 
“always ready?”
 
“yes. i am very capricious being, and i should tell you that
 sometimes when i rise, or after my dinner, or in the middle of the
 night, i resolve on starting for some particular point, and away i go.”
 
the count rang, and footman appeared.
 
“order out the carriage,” said, “and remove the pistols which are in
 the holsters. you need not awaken the coachman; ali will drive.”
 
in very short time the noise of wheels was heard, and the carriage
 stopped at the door. the count took out his watch.
 
“half-past twelve,” said. “we might start at five o’clock and be in
 time, but the delay may cause your friend to pass an uneasy night, and
 therefore we had better go with all speed to extricate him from the
 hands of the infidels. are you still resolved to accompany me?”
 
“more determined than ever.”
 
“well, then, come along.”
 
franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by peppino. at the
 door they found the carriage. ali was on the box, in whom franz
 recognized the dumb slave of the grotto of monte cristo. franz and the
 count got into the carriage. peppino placed himself beside ali, and
 they set off at rapid pace. ali had received his instructions, and
 went down the corso, crossed the campo vaccino, went up the strada san
 gregorio, and reached the gates of st. sebastian. then the porter
 raised some difficulties, but the count of monte cristo produced a
 permit from the governor of rome, allowing him to leave or enter the
 city at any hour of the day or night; the portcullis was therefore
 raised, the porter had louis for his trouble, and they went on their
 way.
 
the road which the carriage now traversed was the ancient appian way,
 and bordered with tombs. from time to time, by the light of the moon,
 which began to rise, franz imagined that saw something like a
 sentinel appear at various points among the ruins, and suddenly retreat
 into the darkness on signal from peppino.
 
short time before they reached the baths of caracalla the carriage
 stopped, peppino opened the door, and the count and franz alighted.
 
“in ten minutes,” said the count to his companion, “we shall be there.”
 
then took peppino aside, gave him an order in low voice, and
 peppino went away, taking with him torch, brought with them in the
 carriage. five minutes elapsed, during which franz saw the shepherd
 going along narrow path that led over the irregular and broken
 surface of the campagna; and finally disappeared in the midst of the
 tall red herbage, which seemed like the bristling mane of an enormous
 lion.
 
“now,” said the count, “let us follow him.”
 
franz and the count in their turn then advanced along the same path,
 which, at the distance of hundred paces, led them over declivity to
 the bottom of small valley. they then perceived two men conversing in
 the obscurity.
 
“ought we to go on?” asked franz of the count; “or should we pause?”
 
“let us go on; peppino will have warned the sentry of our coming.”
 
one of the two men was peppino, and the other bandit on the lookout.
 franz and the count advanced, and the bandit saluted them.
 
“your excellency,” said peppino, addressing the count, “if you will
 follow me, the opening of the catacombs is close at hand.”
 
“go on, then,” replied the count. they came to an opening behind a
 clump of bushes and in the midst of pile of rocks, by which man
 could scarcely pass. peppino glided first into this crevice; after they
 got along few paces the passage widened. peppino passed, lighted his
 torch, and turned to see if they came after him. the count first
 reached an open space and franz followed him closely. the passageway
 sloped in gentle descent, enlarging as they proceeded; still franz
 and the count were compelled to advance in stooping posture, and were
 scarcely able to proceed abreast of one another. they went on hundred
 and fifty paces in this way, and then were stopped by, “who comes
 there?” at the same time they saw the reflection of torch on a
 carbine barrel.
 
“a friend!” responded peppino; and, advancing alone towards the sentry,
 said few words to him in low tone; and then he, like the first,
 saluted the nocturnal visitors, making sign that they might proceed.
 
behind the sentinel was staircase with twenty steps. franz and the
 count descended these, and found themselves in mortuary chamber. five
 corridors diverged like the rays of star, and the walls, dug into
 niches, which were arranged one above the other in the shape of
 coffins, showed that they were at last in the catacombs. down one of
 the corridors, whose extent it was impossible to determine, rays of
 light were visible. the count laid his hand on franz’s shoulder.
 
“would you like to see camp of bandits in repose?” inquired.
 
“exceedingly,” replied franz.
 
“come with me, then. peppino, put out the torch.” peppino obeyed, and
 franz and the count were in utter darkness, except that fifty paces in
 advance of them reddish glare, more evident since peppino had put out
 his torch, was visible along the wall.
 
they advanced silently, the count guiding franz as if had the
 singular faculty of seeing in the dark. franz himself, however, saw his
 way more plainly in proportion as went on towards the light, which
 served in some manner as guide. three arcades were before them, and
 the middle one was used as door. these arcades opened on one side
 into the corridor where the count and franz were, and on the other into
 large square chamber, entirely surrounded by niches similar to those
 of which we have spoken.
 
in the midst of this chamber were four stones, which had formerly
 served as an altar, as was evident from the cross which still
 surmounted them. lamp, placed at the base of pillar, lighted up
 with its pale and flickering flame the singular scene which presented
 itself to the eyes of the two visitors concealed in the shadow.
 
man was seated with his elbow leaning on the column, and was reading
 with his back turned to the arcades, through the openings of which the
 new-comers contemplated him. this was the chief of the band, luigi
 vampa. around him, and in groups, according to their fancy, lying in
 their mantles, or with their backs against sort of stone bench, which
 went all round the columbarium, were to be seen twenty brigands or
 more, each having his carbine within reach. at the other end, silent,
 scarcely visible, and like shadow, was sentinel, who was walking up
 and down before grotto, which was only distinguishable because in
 that spot the darkness seemed more dense than elsewhere.
 
when the count thought franz had gazed sufficiently on this picturesque
 tableau, raised his finger to his lips, to warn him to be silent,
 and, ascending the three steps which led to the corridor of the
 columbarium, entered the chamber by the middle arcade, and advanced
 towards vampa, who was so intent on the book before him that did not
 hear the noise of his footsteps.
 
“who comes there?” cried the sentinel, who was less abstracted, and who
 saw by the lamp-light shadow approaching his chief. at this
 challenge, vampa rose quickly, drawing at the same moment pistol from
 his girdle. in moment all the bandits were on their feet, and twenty
 carbines were levelled at the count.
 
“well,” said in voice perfectly calm, and muscle of his
 countenance disturbed, “well, my dear vampa, it appears to that you
 receive friend with great deal of ceremony.”
 
20207m
 


“ground arms,” exclaimed the chief, with an imperative sign of the
 hand, while with the other took off his hat respectfully; then,
 turning to the singular personage who had caused this scene, said,
 “your pardon, your excellency, but i was so far from expecting the
 honor of visit, that i did not really recognize you.”
 
“it seems that your memory is equally short in everything, vampa,” said
 the count, “and that not only do you forget people’s faces, but also
 the conditions you make with them.”
 
“what conditions have i forgotten, your excellency?” inquired the
 bandit, with the air of man who, having committed an error, is
 anxious to repair it.
 
“was it not agreed,” asked the count, “that not only my person, but
 also that of my friends, should be respected by you?”
 
“and how have i broken that treaty, your excellency?”
 
“you have this evening carried off and conveyed hither the viscount
 albert morcerf. well,” continued the count, in tone that made
 franz shudder, “this young gentleman is one of _my friends_—this young
 gentleman lodges in the same hotel as myself—this young gentleman has
 been up and down the corso for eight hours in my private carriage, and
 yet, i repeat to you, you have carried him off, and conveyed him
 hither, and,” added the count, taking the letter from his pocket, “you
 have set ransom on him, as if were an utter stranger.”
 
“why did you not tell all this—you?” inquired the brigand chief,
 turning towards his men, who all retreated before his look. “why have
 you caused thus to fail in my word towards gentleman like the
 count, who has all our lives in his hands? by heavens! if i thought one
 of you knew that the young gentleman was the friend of his excellency,
 i would blow his brains out with my own hand!”
 
20211m
 


“well,” said the count, turning towards franz, “i told you there was
 some mistake in this.”
 
“are you not alone?” asked vampa with uneasiness.
 
“i am with the person to whom this letter was addressed, and to whom i
 desired to prove that luigi vampa was man of his word. come, your
 excellency,” the count added, turning to franz, “here is luigi vampa,
 who will himself express to you his deep regret at the mistake has
 committed.”
 
franz approached, the chief advancing several steps to meet him.
 
“welcome among us, your excellency,” said to him; “you heard what
 the count just said, and also my reply; let add that i would not for
 the four thousand piastres at which i had fixed your friend’s ransom,
 that this had happened.”
 
“but,” said franz, looking round him uneasily, “where is the
 viscount?—i do not see him.”
 
“nothing has happened to him, i hope,” said the count frowningly.
 
“the prisoner is there,” replied vampa, pointing to the hollow space in
 front of which the bandit was on guard, “and i will go myself and tell
 him is free.”
 
the chief went towards the place had pointed out as albert’s prison,
 and franz and the count followed him.
 
“what is the prisoner doing?” inquired vampa of the sentinel.
 
“_ma foi_, captain,” replied the sentry, “i do not know; for the last
 hour i have not heard him stir.”
 
“come in, your excellency,” said vampa. the count and franz ascended
 seven or eight steps after the chief, who drew back bolt and opened a
 door. then, by the gleam of lamp, similar to that which lighted the
 columbarium, albert was to be seen wrapped up in cloak which one of
 the bandits had lent him, lying in corner in profound slumber.
 
“come,” said the count, smiling with his own peculiar smile, “not so
 bad for man who is to be shot at seven o’clock tomorrow morning.”
 
vampa looked at albert with kind of admiration; was not insensible
 to such proof of courage.
 
“you are right, your excellency,” said; “this must be one of your
 friends.”
 
then going to albert, touched him on the shoulder, saying, “will
 your excellency please to awaken?”
 
albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids, and opened his eyes.
 
“oh,” said he, “is it you, captain? you should have allowed to
 sleep. i had such delightful dream. i was dancing the galop at
 torlonia’s with the countess g——.” then drew his watch from his
 pocket, that might see how time sped.
 
“half-past one only?” said he. “why the devil do you rouse at this
 hour?”
 
“to tell you that you are free, your excellency.”
 
“my dear fellow,” replied albert, with perfect ease of mind, “remember,
 for the future, napoleon’s maxim, ‘never awaken but for bad news;’
 if you had let sleep on, i should have finished my galop, and have
 been grateful to you all my life. so, then, they have paid my ransom?”
 
“no, your excellency.”
 
“well, then, how am i free?”
 
“a person to whom i can refuse nothing has come to demand you.”
 
“come hither?”
 
“yes, hither.”
 
“really? then that person is most amiable person.”
 
albert looked around and perceived franz. “what,” said he, “is it you,
 my dear franz, whose devotion and friendship are thus displayed?”
 
“no, not i,” replied franz, “but our neighbor, the count of monte
 cristo.”
 
“oh, my dear count,” said albert gayly, arranging his cravat and
 wristbands, “you are really most kind, and i hope you will consider me
 as under eternal obligations to you, in the first place for the
 carriage, and in the next for this visit,” and put out his hand to
 the count, who shuddered as gave his own, but who nevertheless did
 give it.
 
the bandit gazed on this scene with amazement; was evidently
 accustomed to see his prisoners tremble before him, and yet here was
 one whose gay temperament was not for moment altered; as for franz,
 was enchanted at the way in which albert had sustained the national
 honor in the presence of the bandit.
 
“my dear albert,” said, “if you will make haste, we shall yet have
 time to finish the night at torlonia’s. you may conclude your
 interrupted galop, so that you will owe ill-will to signor luigi,
 who has, indeed, throughout this whole affair acted like gentleman.”
 
“you are decidedly right, and we may reach the palazzo by two o’clock.
 signor luigi,” continued albert, “is there any formality to fulfil
 before i take leave of your excellency?”
 
“none, sir,” replied the bandit, “you are as free as air.”
 
“well, then, happy and merry life to you. come, gentlemen, come.”
 
and albert, followed by franz and the count, descended the staircase,
 crossed the square chamber, where stood all the bandits, hat in hand.
 
“peppino,” said the brigand chief, “give the torch.”
 
“what are you going to do?” inquired the count.
 
“i will show you the way back myself,” said the captain; “that is the
 least honor that i can render to your excellency.”
 
and taking the lighted torch from the hands of the herdsman, he
 preceded his guests, not as servant who performs an act of civility,
 but like king who precedes ambassadors. on reaching the door, he
 bowed.
 
“and now, your excellency,” added he, “allow to repeat my apologies,
 and i hope you will not entertain any resentment at what has occurred.”
 
“no, my dear vampa,” replied the count; “besides, you compensate for
 your mistakes in so gentlemanly way, that one almost feels obliged to
 you for having committed them.”
 
20214m
 


“gentlemen,” added the chief, turning towards the young men, “perhaps
 the offer may not appear very tempting to you; but if you should ever
 feel inclined to pay second visit, wherever i may be, you shall be
 welcome.”
 
franz and albert bowed. the count went out first, then albert. franz
 paused for moment.
 
“has your excellency anything to ask me?” said vampa with smile.
 
“yes, i have,” replied franz; “i am curious to know what work you were
 perusing with so much attention as we entered.”
 
“cæsar’s _commentaries_,” said the bandit, “it is my favorite work.”
 
“well, are you coming?” asked albert.
 
“yes,” replied franz, “here i am,” and he, in his turn, left the caves.
 they advanced to the plain.
 
“ah, your pardon,” said albert, turning round; “will you allow me,
 captain?”
 
and lighted his cigar at vampa’s torch.
 
“now, my dear count,” said, “let us on with all the speed we may. i
 am enormously anxious to finish my night at the duke of bracciano’s.”
 
they found the carriage where they had left it. the count said word
 in arabic to ali, and the horses went on at great speed.
 
it was just two o’clock by albert’s watch when the two friends entered
 into the dancing-room. their return was quite an event, but as they
 entered together, all uneasiness on albert’s account ceased instantly.
 
“madame,” said the viscount of morcerf, advancing towards the countess,
 “yesterday you were so condescending as to promise galop; i am
 rather late in claiming this gracious promise, but here is my friend,
 whose character for veracity you well know, and will assure you the
 delay arose from fault of mine.”
 
and as at this moment the orchestra gave the signal for the waltz,
 albert put his arm round the waist of the countess, and disappeared
 with her in the whirl of dancers.
 
in the meanwhile franz was considering the singular shudder that had
 passed over the count of monte cristo at the moment when had been,
 in some sort, forced to give his hand to albert.
 


chapter 38. the rendezvous
 
the first words that albert uttered to his friend, on the following
 morning, contained request that franz would accompany him on visit
 to the count; true, the young man had warmly and energetically thanked
 the count on the previous evening; but services such as had rendered
 could never be too often acknowledged. franz, who seemed attracted by
 some invisible influence towards the count, in which terror was
 strangely mingled, felt an extreme reluctance to permit his friend to
 be exposed alone to the singular fascination that this mysterious
 personage seemed to exercise over him, and therefore made objection
 to albert’s request, but at once accompanied him to the desired spot,
 and, after short delay, the count joined them in the salon.
 
“my dear count,” said albert, advancing to meet him, “permit to
 repeat the poor thanks i offered last night, and to assure you that the
 remembrance of all i owe to you will never be effaced from my memory;
 believe me, as long as i live, i shall never cease to dwell with
 grateful recollection on the prompt and important service you rendered
 me; and also to remember that to you i am indebted even for my life.”
 
“my very good friend and excellent neighbor,” replied the count, with a
 smile, “you really exaggerate my trifling exertions. you owe nothing
 but some trifle of 20,000 francs, which you have been saved out of your
 travelling expenses, so that there is not much of score between
 us;—but you must really permit to congratulate you on the ease and
 unconcern with which you resigned yourself to your fate, and the
 perfect indifference you manifested as to the turn events might take.”
 
“upon my word,” said albert, “i deserve credit for what i could not
 help, namely, determination to take everything as i found it, and to
 let those bandits see, that although men get into troublesome scrapes
 all over the world, there is nation but the french that can smile
 even in the face of grim death himself. all that, however, has nothing
 to do with my obligations to you, and i now come to ask you whether, in
 my own person, my family, or connections, i can in any way serve you?
 my father, the comte morcerf, although of spanish origin, possesses
 considerable influence, both at the court of france and madrid, and i
 unhesitatingly place the best services of myself, and all to whom my
 life is dear, at your disposal.”
 
“monsieur morcerf,” replied the count, “your offer, far from
 surprising me, is precisely what i expected from you, and i accept it
 in the same spirit of hearty sincerity with which it is made;—nay, i
 will go still further, and say that i had previously made up my mind to
 ask great favor at your hands.”
 
“oh, pray name it.”
 
“i am wholly stranger to paris—it is city i have never yet seen.”
 
“is it possible,” exclaimed albert, “that you have reached your present
 age without visiting the finest capital in the world? i can scarcely
 credit it.”
 
“nevertheless, it is quite true; still, i agree with you in thinking
 that my present ignorance of the first city in europe is reproach to
 in every way, and calls for immediate correction; but, in all
 probability, i should have performed so important, so necessary duty,
 as that of making myself acquainted with the wonders and beauties of
 your justly celebrated capital, had i known any person who would have
 introduced into the fashionable world, but unfortunately i possessed
 acquaintance there, and, of necessity, was compelled to abandon the
 idea.”
 
“so distinguished an individual as yourself,” cried albert, “could
 scarcely have required an introduction.”
 
“you are most kind; but as regards myself, i can find merit i
 possess, save that, as millionaire, i might have become partner in
 the speculations of m. aguado and m. rothschild; but as my motive in
 travelling to your capital would not have been for the pleasure of
 dabbling in stocks, i stayed away till some favorable chance should
 present itself of carrying my wish into execution. your offer, however,
 smooths all difficulties, and i have only to ask you, my dear m. de
 morcerf” (these words were accompanied by most peculiar smile),
 “whether you undertake, upon my arrival in france, to open to the
 doors of that fashionable world of which i know more than huron or
 native of cochin-china?”
 
“oh, that i do, and with infinite pleasure,” answered albert; “and so
 much the more readily as letter received this morning from my father
 summons to paris, in consequence of treaty of marriage (my dear
 franz, do not smile, i beg of you) with family of high standing, and
 connected with the very cream of parisian society.”
 
“connected by marriage, you mean,” said franz, laughingly.
 
“well, never mind how it is,” answered albert, “it comes to the same
 thing in the end. perhaps by the time you return to paris, i shall be
 quite sober, staid father of family! most edifying representative
 i shall make of all the domestic virtues—don’t you think so? but as
 regards your wish to visit our fine city, my dear count, i can only say
 that you may command and mine to any extent you please.”
 
“then it is settled,” said the count, “and i give you my solemn
 assurance that i only waited an opportunity like the present to realize
 plans that i have long meditated.”
 
franz did not doubt that these plans were the same concerning which the
 count had dropped few words in the grotto of monte cristo, and while
 the count was speaking the young man watched him closely, hoping to
 read something of his purpose in his face, but his countenance was
 inscrutable especially when, as in the present case, it was veiled in a
 sphinx-like smile.
 
“but tell now, count,” exclaimed albert, delighted at the idea of
 having to chaperon so distinguished person as monte cristo; “tell me
 truly whether you are in earnest, or if this project of visiting paris
 is merely one of the chimerical and uncertain air castles of which we
 make so many in the course of our lives, but which, like house built
 on the sand, is liable to be blown over by the first puff of wind?”
 
“i pledge you my honor,” returned the count, “that i mean to do as i
 have said; both inclination and positive necessity compel to visit
 paris.”
 
“when do you propose going thither?”
 
“have you made up your mind when you shall be there yourself?”
 
“certainly i have; in fortnight or three weeks’ time, that is to say,
 as fast as i can get there!”
 
“nay,” said the count; “i will give you three months ere i join you;
 you see i make an ample allowance for all delays and difficulties.
 
“and in three months’ time,” said albert, “you will be at my house?”
 
“shall we make positive appointment for particular day and hour?”
 inquired the count; “only let warn you that i am proverbial for my
 punctilious exactitude in keeping my engagements.”
 
“day for day, hour for hour,” said albert; “that will suit to a
 dot.”
 
“so be it, then,” replied the count, and extending his hand towards a
 calendar, suspended near the chimney-piece, said, “today is the 21st
 of february;” and drawing out his watch, added, “it is exactly
 half-past ten o’clock. now promise to remember this, and expect me
 the 21st of may at the same hour in the forenoon.”
 
“capital!” exclaimed albert; “your breakfast shall be waiting.”
 
“where do you live?”
 
“no. 27, rue du helder.”
 
“have you bachelor’s apartments there? i hope my coming will not put
 you to any inconvenience.”
 
“i reside in my father’s house, but occupy pavilion at the farther
 side of the courtyard, entirely separated from the main building.”
 
“quite sufficient,” replied the count, as, taking out his tablets, he
 wrote down “no. 27, rue du helder, 21st may, half-past ten in the
 morning.”
 
“now then,” said the count, returning his tablets to his pocket, “make
 yourself perfectly easy; the hand of your time-piece will not be more
 accurate in marking the time than myself.”
 
“shall i see you again ere my departure?” asked albert.
 
“that depends; when do you leave?”
 
“tomorrow evening, at five o’clock.”
 
“in that case i must say adieu to you, as i am compelled to go to
 naples, and shall not return hither before saturday evening or sunday
 morning. and you, baron,” pursued the count, addressing franz, “do you
 also depart tomorrow?”
 
“yes.”
 
“for france?”
 
“no, for venice; i shall remain in italy for another year or two.”
 
“then we shall not meet in paris?”
 
“i fear i shall not have that honor.”
 
“well, since we must part,” said the count, holding out hand to each
 of the young men, “allow to wish you both safe and pleasant
 journey.”
 
it was the first time the hand of franz had come in contact with that
 of the mysterious individual before him, and unconsciously shuddered
 at its touch, for it felt cold and icy as that of corpse.
 
20219m
 


“let us understand each other,” said albert; “it is agreed—is it
 not?—that you are to be at no. 27, in the rue du helder, on the 21st of
 may, at half-past ten in the morning, and your word of honor passed for
 your punctuality?”
 
“the 21st of may, at half-past ten in the morning, rue du helder, no.
 27,” replied the count.
 
the young men then rose, and bowing to the count, quitted the room.
 
“what is the matter?” asked albert of franz, when they had returned to
 their own apartments; “you seem more than commonly thoughtful.”
 
“i will confess to you, albert,” replied franz, “the count is very
 singular person, and the appointment you have made to meet him in paris
 fills with thousand apprehensions.”
 
“my dear fellow,” exclaimed albert, “what can there possibly be in that
 to excite uneasiness? why, you must have lost your senses.”
 
“whether i am in my senses or not,” answered franz, “that is the way i
 feel.”
 
“listen to me, franz,” said albert; “i am glad that the occasion has
 presented itself for saying this to you, for i have noticed how cold
 you are in your bearing towards the count, while he, on the other hand,
 has always been courtesy itself to us. have you anything particular
 against him?”
 
“possibly.”
 
“did you ever meet him previously to coming hither?”
 
“i have.”
 
“and where?”
 
“will you promise not to repeat single word of what i am about to
 tell you?”
 
“i promise.”
 
“upon your honor?”
 
“upon my honor.”
 
“then listen to me.”
 
franz then related to his friend the history of his excursion to the
 island of monte cristo and of his finding party of smugglers there,
 and the two corsican bandits with them. dwelt with considerable
 force and energy on the almost magical hospitality had received from
 the count, and the magnificence of his entertainment in the grotto of
 the _thousand and one nights_.
 
recounted, with circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of
 the supper, the hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at his
 awakening, there remained proof or trace of all these events, save
 the small yacht, seen in the distant horizon driving under full sail
 toward porto-vecchio.
 
then detailed the conversation overheard by him at the colosseum,
 between the count and vampa, in which the count had promised to obtain
 the release of the bandit peppino,—an engagement which, as our readers
 are aware, most faithfully fulfilled.
 
at last arrived at the adventure of the preceding night, and the
 embarrassment in which found himself placed by not having sufficient
 cash by six or seven hundred piastres to make up the sum required, and
 finally of his application to the count and the picturesque and
 satisfactory result that followed. albert listened with the most
 profound attention.
 
“well,” said he, when franz had concluded, “what do you find to object
 to in all you have related? the count is fond of travelling, and, being
 rich, possesses vessel of his own. go but to portsmouth or
 southampton, and you will find the harbors crowded with the yachts
 belonging to such of the english as can afford the expense, and have
 the same liking for this amusement. now, by way of having a
 resting-place during his excursions, avoiding the wretched
 cookery—which has been trying its best to poison during the last
 four months, while you have manfully resisted its effects for as many
 years,—and obtaining bed on which it is possible to slumber, monte
 cristo has furnished for himself temporary abode where you first
 found him; but, to prevent the possibility of the tuscan government
 taking fancy to his enchanted palace, and thereby depriving him of
 the advantages naturally expected from so large an outlay of capital,
 has wisely enough purchased the island, and taken its name. just ask
 yourself, my good fellow, whether there are not many persons of our
 acquaintance who assume the names of lands and properties they never in
 their lives were masters of?”
 
“but,” said franz, “the corsican bandits that were among the crew of
 his vessel?”
 
“why, really the thing seems to simple enough. nobody knows better
 than yourself that the bandits of corsica are not rogues or thieves,
 but purely and simply fugitives, driven by some sinister motive from
 their native town or village, and that their fellowship involves no
 disgrace or stigma; for my own part, i protest that, should i ever go
 to corsica, my first visit, ere even i presented myself to the mayor or
 prefect, should be to the bandits of colomba, if i could only manage to
 find them; for, on my conscience, they are race of men i admire
 greatly.”
 
“still,” persisted franz, “i suppose you will allow that such men as
 vampa and his band are regular villains, who have other motive than
 plunder when they seize your person. how do you explain the influence
 the count evidently possessed over those ruffians?”
 
“my good friend, as in all probability i own my present safety to that
 influence, it would ill become to search too closely into its
 source; therefore, instead of condemning him for his intimacy with
 outlaws, you must give leave to excuse any little irregularity there
 may be in such connection; not altogether for preserving my life, for
 my own idea was that it never was in much danger, but certainly for
 saving 4,000 piastres, which, being translated, means neither more
 nor less than 24,000 livres of our money—a sum at which, most
 assuredly, i should never have been estimated in france, proving most
 indisputably,” added albert with laugh, “that prophet is honored
 in his own country.”
 
“talking of countries,” replied franz, “of what country is the count,
 what is his native tongue, whence does derive his immense fortune,
 and what were those events of his early life—a life as marvellous as
 unknown—that have tinctured his succeeding years with so dark and
 gloomy misanthropy? certainly these are questions that, in your
 place, i should like to have answered.”
 
“my dear franz,” replied albert, “when, upon receipt of my letter, you
 found the necessity of asking the count’s assistance, you promptly went
 to him, saying, ‘my friend albert morcerf is in danger; help to
 deliver him.’ was not that nearly what you said?”
 
20222m
 


“it was.”
 
“well, then, did ask you, ‘who is m. albert morcerf? how does he
 come by his name—his fortune? what are his means of existence? what is
 his birthplace? of what country is native?’ tell me, did put
 all these questions to you?”
 
“i confess asked none.”
 
“no; merely came and freed from the hands of signor vampa, where,
 i can assure you, in spite of all my outward appearance of ease and
 unconcern, i did not very particularly care to remain. now, then,
 franz, when, for services so promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he
 but asks in return to do for him what is done daily for any russian
 prince or italian nobleman who may pass through paris—merely to
 introduce him into society—would you have refuse? my good fellow,
 you must have lost your senses to think it possible i could act with
 such cold-blooded policy.”
 
and this time it must be confessed that, contrary to the usual state of
 affairs in discussions between the young men, the effective arguments
 were all on albert’s side.
 
“well,” said franz with sigh, “do as you please my dear viscount, for
 your arguments are beyond my powers of refutation. still, in spite of
 all, you must admit that this count of monte cristo is most singular
 personage.”
 
“he is philanthropist,” answered the other; “and doubt his motive
 in visiting paris is to compete for the monthyon prize, given, as you
 are aware, to whoever shall be proved to have most materially advanced
 the interests of virtue and humanity. if my vote and interest can
 obtain it for him, i will readily give him the one and promise the
 other. and now, my dear franz, let us talk of something else. come,
 shall we take our luncheon, and then pay last visit to st. peter’s?”
 
franz silently assented; and the following afternoon, at half-past five
 o’clock, the young men parted. albert morcerf to return to paris,
 and franz d’Épinay to pass fortnight at venice.
 
but, ere entered his travelling carriage, albert, fearing that his
 expected guest might forget the engagement had entered into, placed
 in the care of waiter at the hotel card to be delivered to the
 count of monte cristo, on which, beneath the name of viscount albert de
 morcerf, had written in pencil:
 
“27, _rue du helder, on the_ 21_st may, half-past ten_ a.m.”
 


chapter 39. the guests
 
in the house in the rue du helder, where albert had invited the count
 of monte cristo, everything was being prepared on the morning of the
 21st of may to do honor to the occasion. albert morcerf inhabited a
 pavilion situated at the corner of large court, and directly opposite
 another building, in which were the servants’ apartments. two windows
 only of the pavilion faced the street; three other windows looked into
 the court, and two at the back into the garden.
 
between the court and the garden, built in the heavy style of the
 imperial architecture, was the large and fashionable dwelling of the
 count and countess of morcerf.
 
high wall surrounded the whole of the property, surmounted at
 intervals by vases filled with flowers, and broken in the centre by a
 large gate of gilded iron, which served as the carriage entrance. a
 small door, close to the lodge of the _concierge_, gave ingress and
 egress to the servants and masters when they were on foot.
 
it was easy to discover that the delicate care of mother, unwilling
 to part from her son, and yet aware that young man of the viscount’s
 age required the full exercise of his liberty, had chosen this
 habitation for albert. there were not lacking, however, evidences of
 what we may call the intelligent egoism of youth who is charmed with
 the indolent, careless life of an only son, and who lives as it were in
 gilded cage. by means of the two windows looking into the street,
 albert could see all that passed; the sight of what is going on is
 necessary to young men, who always want to see the world traverse their
 horizon, even if that horizon is only public thoroughfare. then,
 should anything appear to merit more minute examination, albert de
 morcerf could follow up his researches by means of small gate,
 similar to that close to the _concierge’s_ door, and which merits a
 particular description.
 
it was little entrance that seemed never to have been opened since
 the house was built, so entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; but
 the well-oiled hinges and locks told quite another story. this door was
 mockery to the _concierge_, from whose vigilance and jurisdiction it
 was free, and, like that famous portal in the _arabian nights_, opening
 at the “_sesame_” of ali baba, it was wont to swing backward at a
 cabalistic word or concerted tap from without from the sweetest
 voices or whitest fingers in the world.
 
at the end of long corridor, with which the door communicated, and
 which formed the antechamber, was, on the right, albert’s
 breakfast-room, looking into the court, and on the left the salon,
 looking into the garden. shrubs and creeping plants covered the
 windows, and hid from the garden and court these two apartments, the
 only rooms into which, as they were on the ground floor, the prying
 eyes of the curious could penetrate.
 
on the floor above were similar rooms, with the addition of third,
 formed out of the antechamber; these three rooms were salon, a
 boudoir, and bedroom. the salon downstairs was only an algerian
 divan, for the use of smokers. the boudoir upstairs communicated with
 the bedchamber by an invisible door on the staircase; it was evident
 that every precaution had been taken. above this floor was large
 _atelier_, which had been increased in size by pulling down the
 partitions—a pandemonium, in which the artist and the dandy strove for
 pre-eminence.
 
there were collected and piled up all albert’s successive caprices,
 hunting-horns, bass-viols, flutes—a whole orchestra, for albert had had
 not taste but fancy for music; easels, palettes, brushes,
 pencils—for music had been succeeded by painting; foils, boxing-gloves,
 broadswords, and single-sticks—for, following the example of the
 fashionable young men of the time, albert morcerf cultivated, with
 far more perseverance than music and drawing, the three arts that
 complete dandy’s education, i.e., fencing, boxing, and single-stick;
 and it was here that received grisier, cooks, and charles leboucher.
 
the rest of the furniture of this privileged apartment consisted of old
 cabinets, filled with chinese porcelain and japanese vases, lucca della
 robbia _faïences_, and palissy platters; of old armchairs, in which
 perhaps had sat henry iv. or sully, louis xiii. or richelieu—for two of
 these armchairs, adorned with carved shield, on which were engraved
 the fleur-de-lis of france on an azure field, evidently came from the
 louvre, or, at least, some royal residence.
 
over these dark and sombre chairs were thrown splendid stuffs, dyed
 beneath persia’s sun, or woven by the fingers of the women of calcutta
 or of chandernagor. what these stuffs did there, it was impossible to
 say; they awaited, while gratifying the eyes, destination unknown to
 their owner himself; in the meantime they filled the place with their
 golden and silky reflections.
 
in the centre of the room was roller and blanchet “baby grand” piano
 in rosewood, but holding the potentialities of an orchestra in its
 narrow and sonorous cavity, and groaning beneath the weight of the
 _chefs-d’œuvre_ of beethoven, weber, mozart, haydn, grétry, and
 porpora.
 
on the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling, were swords, daggers,
 malay creeses, maces, battle-axes; gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits
 of armor; dried plants, minerals, and stuffed birds, their
 flame-colored wings outspread in motionless flight, and their beaks
 forever open. this was albert’s favorite lounging place.
 
however, the morning of the appointment, the young man had established
 himself in the small salon downstairs. there, on table, surrounded at
 some distance by large and luxurious divan, every species of tobacco
 known,—from the yellow tobacco of petersburg to the black of sinai, and
 so on along the scale from maryland and porto rico, to latakia,—was
 exposed in pots of crackled earthenware of which the dutch are so fond;
 beside them, in boxes of fragrant wood, were ranged, according to their
 size and quality, puros, regalias, havanas, and manillas; and, in an
 open cabinet, collection of german pipes, of chibouques, with their
 amber mouth-pieces ornamented with coral, and of narghiles, with their
 long tubes of morocco, awaiting the caprice or the sympathy of the
 smokers.
 
albert had himself presided at the arrangement, or, rather, the
 symmetrical derangement, which, after coffee, the guests at breakfast
 of modern days love to contemplate through the vapor that escapes from
 their mouths, and ascends in long and fanciful wreaths to the ceiling.
 
at quarter to ten, valet entered; composed, with little groom
 named john, and who only spoke english, all albert’s establishment,
 although the cook of the hotel was always at his service, and on great
 occasions the count’s _chasseur_ also. this valet, whose name was
 germain, and who enjoyed the entire confidence of his young master,
 held in one hand number of papers, and in the other packet of
 letters, which gave to albert. albert glanced carelessly at the
 different missives, selected two written in small and delicate hand,
 and enclosed in scented envelopes, opened them and perused their
 contents with some attention.
 
“how did these letters come?” said he.
 
“one by the post, madame danglars’ footman left the other.”
 
“let madame danglars know that i accept the place she offers in her
 box. wait; then, during the day, tell rosa that when i leave the opera
 i will sup with her as she wishes. take her six bottles of different
 wine—cyprus, sherry, and malaga, and barrel of ostend oysters; get
 them at borel’s, and be sure you say they are for me.”
 
“at what o’clock, sir, do you breakfast?”
 
20227m
 


“what time is it now?”
 
“a quarter to ten.”
 
“very well, at half past ten. debray will, perhaps, be obliged to go to
 the minister—and besides” (albert looked at his tablets), “it is the
 hour i told the count, 21st may, at half past ten; and though i do not
 much rely upon his promise, i wish to be punctual. is the countess up
 yet?”
 
“if you wish, i will inquire.”
 
“yes, ask her for one of her _liqueur_ cellarets, mine is incomplete;
 and tell her i shall have the honor of seeing her about three o’clock,
 and that i request permission to introduce someone to her.”
 
the valet left the room. albert threw himself on the divan, tore off
 the cover of two or three of the papers, looked at the theatre
 announcements, made face seeing they gave an opera, and not ballet;
 hunted vainly amongst the advertisements for new tooth-powder of
 which had heard, and threw down, one after the other, the three
 leading papers of paris, muttering,
 
“these papers become more and more stupid every day.”
 
moment after, carriage stopped before the door, and the servant
 announced m. lucien debray. tall young man, with light hair, clear
 gray eyes, and thin and compressed lips, dressed in blue coat with
 beautifully carved gold buttons, white neckcloth, and tortoiseshell
 eye-glass suspended by silken thread, and which, by an effort of the
 superciliary and zygomatic muscles, fixed in his eye, entered, with
 half-official air, without smiling or speaking.
 
“good-morning, lucien, good-morning,” said albert; “your punctuality
 really alarms me. what do i say? punctuality! you, whom i expected
 last, you arrive at five minutes to ten, when the time fixed was
 half-past! has the ministry resigned?”
 
“no, my dear fellow,” returned the young man, seating himself on the
 divan; “reassure yourself; we are tottering always, but we never fall,
 and i begin to believe that we shall pass into state of immobility,
 and then the affairs of the peninsula will completely consolidate us.”
 
“ah, true; you drive don carlos out of spain.”
 
“no, no, my dear fellow, do not confound our plans. we take him to the
 other side of the french frontier, and offer him hospitality at
 bourges.”
 
“at bourges?”
 
“yes, has not much to complain of; bourges is the capital of charles
 vii. do you not know that all paris knew it yesterday, and the day
 before it had already transpired on the bourse, and m. danglars (i do
 not know by what means that man contrives to obtain intelligence as
 soon as we do) made million!”
 
“and you another order, for i see you have blue ribbon at your
 button-hole.”
 
“yes; they sent the order of charles iii.,” returned debray
 carelessly.
 
“come, do not affect indifference, but confess you were pleased to have
 it.”
 
“oh, it is very well as finish to the toilet. it looks very neat on a
 black coat buttoned up.”
 
“and makes you resemble the prince of wales or the duke of reichstadt.”
 
“it is for that reason you see so early.”
 
“because you have the order of charles iii., and you wish to announce
 the good news to me?”
 
“no, because i passed the night writing letters,—five-and-twenty
 despatches. i returned home at daybreak, and strove to sleep; but my
 head ached and i got up to have ride for an hour. at the bois de
 boulogne, _ennui_ and hunger attacked at once,—two enemies who
 rarely accompany each other, and who are yet leagued against me, sort
 of carlo-republican alliance. i then recollected you gave breakfast
 this morning, and here i am. i am hungry, feed me; i am bored, amuse
 me.”
 
“it is my duty as your host,” returned albert, ringing the bell, while
 lucien turned over, with his gold-mounted cane, the papers that lay on
 the table. “germain, glass of sherry and biscuit. in the meantime,
 my dear lucien, here are cigars—contraband, of course—try them, and
 persuade the minister to sell us such instead of poisoning us with
 cabbage leaves.”
 
“_peste!_ i will do nothing of the kind; the moment they come from
 government you would find them execrable. besides, that does not
 concern the home but the financial department. address yourself to m.
 humann, section of the indirect contributions, corridor a., no. 26.”
 
“on my word,” said albert, “you astonish by the extent of your
 knowledge. take cigar.”
 
“really, my dear albert,” replied lucien, lighting manilla at a
 rose-colored taper that burnt in beautifully enamelled stand—“how
 happy you are to have nothing to do. you do not know your own good
 fortune!”
 
“and what would you do, my dear diplomatist,” replied morcerf, with a
 slight degree of irony in his voice, “if you did nothing? what? private
 secretary to minister, plunged at once into european cabals and
 parisian intrigues; having kings, and, better still, queens, to
 protect, parties to unite, elections to direct; making more use of your
 cabinet with your pen and your telegraph than napoleon did of his
 battle-fields with his sword and his victories; possessing
 five-and-twenty thousand francs year, besides your place; horse,
 for which château-renaud offered you four hundred louis, and which you
 would not part with; tailor who never disappoints you; with the
 opera, the jockey-club, and other diversions, can you not amuse
 yourself? well, i will amuse you.”
 
“how?”
 
“by introducing to you new acquaintance.”
 
“a man or woman?”
 
“a man.”
 
“i know so many men already.”
 
“but you do not know this man.”
 
“where does come from—the end of the world?”
 
“farther still, perhaps.”
 
“the deuce! i hope does not bring our breakfast with him.”
 
“oh, no; our breakfast comes from my father’s kitchen. are you hungry?”
 
“humiliating as such confession is, i am. but i dined at m. de
 villefort’s, and lawyers always give you very bad dinners. you would
 think they felt some remorse; did you ever remark that?”
 
“ah, depreciate other persons’ dinners; you ministers give such
 splendid ones.”
 
“yes; but we do not invite people of fashion. if we were not forced to
 entertain parcel of country boobies because they think and vote with
 us, we should never dream of dining at home, i assure you.”
 
“well, take another glass of sherry and another biscuit.”
 
“willingly. your spanish wine is excellent. you see we were quite right
 to pacify that country.”
 
“yes; but don carlos?”
 
“well, don carlos will drink bordeaux, and in ten years we will marry
 his to the little queen.”
 
“you will then obtain the golden fleece, if you are still in the
 ministry.”
 
“i think, albert, you have adopted the system of feeding on smoke
 this morning.”
 
“well, you must allow it is the best thing for the stomach; but i hear
 beauchamp in the next room; you can dispute together, and that will
 pass away the time.”
 
“about what?”
 
“about the papers.”
 
“my dear friend,” said lucien with an air of sovereign contempt, “do i
 ever read the papers?”
 
“then you will dispute the more.”
 
“m. beauchamp,” announced the servant. “come in, come in,” said albert,
 rising and advancing to meet the young man. “here is debray, who
 detests you without reading you, so says.”
 
“he is quite right,” returned beauchamp; “for i criticise him without
 knowing what does. good-day, commander!”
 
“ah, you know that already,” said the private secretary, smiling and
 shaking hands with him.
 
“_pardieu!_”
 
“and what do they say of it in the world?”
 
“in which world? we have so many worlds in the year of grace 1838.”
 
“in the entire political world, of which you are one of the leaders.”
 
“they say that it is quite fair, and that sowing so much red, you ought
 to reap little blue.”
 
“come, come, that is not bad!” said lucien. “why do you not join our
 party, my dear beauchamp? with your talents you would make your fortune
 in three or four years.”
 
“i only await one thing before following your advice; that is, a
 minister who will hold office for six months. my dear albert, one word,
 for i must give poor lucien respite. do we breakfast or dine? i must
 go to the chamber, for our life is not an idle one.”
 
“you only breakfast; i await two persons, and the instant they arrive
 we shall sit down to table.”
 


chapter 40. the breakfast
 
and what sort of persons do you expect to breakfast?” said beauchamp.
 
“a gentleman, and diplomatist.”
 
“then we shall have to wait two hours for the gentleman, and three for
 the diplomatist. i shall come back to dessert; keep some
 strawberries, coffee, and cigars. i shall take cutlet on my way to
 the chamber.”
 
“do not do anything of the sort; for were the gentleman montmorency,
 and the diplomatist metternich, we will breakfast at eleven; in the
 meantime, follow debray’s example, and take glass of sherry and a
 biscuit.”
 
“be it so; i will stay; i must do something to distract my thoughts.”
 
“you are like debray, and yet it seems to that when the minister is
 out of spirits, the opposition ought to be joyous.”
 
“ah, you do not know with what i am threatened. i shall hear this
 morning that m. danglars make speech at the chamber of deputies, and
 at his wife’s this evening i shall hear the tragedy of peer of
 france. the devil take the constitutional government, and since we had
 our choice, as they say, at least, how could we choose that?”
 
“i understand; you must lay in stock of hilarity.”
 
“do not run down m. danglars’ speeches,” said debray; “he votes for
 you, for belongs to the opposition.”
 
“_pardieu_, that is exactly the worst of all. i am waiting until you
 send him to speak at the luxembourg, to laugh at my ease.”
 
“my dear friend,” said albert to beauchamp, “it is plain that the
 affairs of spain are settled, for you are most desperately out of humor
 this morning. recollect that parisian gossip has spoken of marriage
 between myself and mlle. eugénie danglars; i cannot in conscience,
 therefore, let you run down the speeches of man who will one day say
 to me, ‘vicomte, you know i give my daughter two millions.’”
 
“ah, this marriage will never take place,” said beauchamp. “the king
 has made him baron, and can make him peer, but cannot make him a
 gentleman, and the count of morcerf is too aristocratic to consent, for
 the paltry sum of two million francs, to _mésalliance_. the viscount
 of morcerf can only wed marchioness.”
 
“but two million francs make nice little sum,” replied morcerf.
 
“it is the social capital of theatre on the boulevard, or railroad
 from the jardin des plantes to râpée.”
 
“never mind what says, morcerf,” said debray, “do you marry her. you
 marry money-bag label, it is true; well, but what does that matter?
 it is better to have blazon less and figure more on it. you have
 seven martlets on your arms; give three to your wife, and you will
 still have four; that is one more than m. guise had, who so nearly
 became king of france, and whose cousin was emperor of germany.”
 
“on my word, i think you are right, lucien,” said albert absently.
 
“to be sure; besides, every millionaire is as noble as bastard—that
 is, can be.”
 
“do not say that, debray,” returned beauchamp, laughing, “for here is
 château-renaud, who, to cure you of your mania for paradoxes, will pass
 the sword of renaud montauban, his ancestor, through your body.”
 
“he will sully it then,” returned lucien; “for i am low—very low.”
 
“oh, heavens,” cried beauchamp, “the minister quotes béranger, what
 shall we come to next?”
 
“m. château-renaud—m. maximilian morrel,” said the servant,
 announcing two fresh guests.
 
“now, then, to breakfast,” said beauchamp; “for, if i remember, you
 told you only expected two persons, albert.”
 
“morrel,” muttered albert—“morrel—who is he?”
 
but before had finished, m. château-renaud, handsome young man
 of thirty, gentleman all over,—that is, with the figure of guiche and
 the wit of mortemart,—took albert’s hand.
 
“my dear albert,” said he, “let introduce to you m. maximilian
 morrel, captain of spahis, my friend; and what is more—however the man
 speaks for himself—my preserver. salute my hero, viscount.”
 
and stepped on one side to give place to young man of refined and
 dignified bearing, with large and open brow, piercing eyes, and black
 moustache, whom our readers have already seen at marseilles, under
 circumstances sufficiently dramatic not to be forgotten. rich
 uniform, half french, half oriental, set off his graceful and stalwart
 figure, and his broad chest was decorated with the order of the legion
 of honor. the young officer bowed with easy and elegant politeness.
 
“monsieur,” said albert with affectionate courtesy, “the count of
 château-renaud knew how much pleasure this introduction would give me;
 you are his friend, be ours also.”
 
“well said,” interrupted château-renaud; “and pray that, if you should
 ever be in similar predicament, may do as much for you as did
 for me.”
 
“what has done?” asked albert.
 
“oh, nothing worth speaking of,” said morrel; “m. château-renaud
 exaggerates.”
 
“not worth speaking of?” cried château-renaud; “life is not worth
 speaking of!—that is rather too philosophical, on my word, morrel. it
 is very well for you, who risk your life every day, but for me, who
 only did so once——”
 
“we gather from all this, baron, that captain morrel saved your life.”
 
“exactly so.”
 
“on what occasion?” asked beauchamp.
 
“beauchamp, my good fellow, you know i am starving,” said debray: “do
 not set him off on some long story.”
 
“well, i do not prevent your sitting down to table,” replied beauchamp,
 “château-renaud can tell us while we eat our breakfast.”
 
“gentlemen,” said morcerf, “it is only quarter past ten, and i expect
 someone else.”
 
“ah, true, diplomatist!” observed debray.
 
“diplomat or not, i don’t know; i only know that charged himself on
 my account with mission, which terminated so entirely to my
 satisfaction, that had i been king, i should have instantly created him
 knight of all my orders, even had i been able to offer him the golden
 fleece and the garter.”
 
“well, since we are not to sit down to table,” said debray, “take a
 glass of sherry, and tell us all about it.”
 
“you all know that i had the fancy of going to africa.”
 
“it is road your ancestors have traced for you,” said albert
 gallantly.
 
“yes? but i doubt that your object was like theirs—to rescue the holy
 sepulchre.”
 
“you are quite right, beauchamp,” observed the young aristocrat. “it
 was only to fight as an amateur. i cannot bear duelling ever since two
 seconds, whom i had chosen to arrange an affair, forced to break the
 arm of one of my best friends, one whom you all know—poor franz
 d’Épinay.”
 
“ah, true,” said debray, “you did fight some time ago; about what?”
 
20235m
 


“the devil take me, if i remember,” returned château-renaud. “but i
 recollect perfectly one thing, that, being unwilling to let such
 talents as mine sleep, i wished to try upon the arabs the new pistols
 that had been given to me. in consequence i embarked for oran, and went
 from thence to constantine, where i arrived just in time to witness the
 raising of the siege. i retreated with the rest, for eight-and-forty
 hours. i endured the rain during the day, and the cold during the night
 tolerably well, but the third morning my horse died of cold. poor
 brute—accustomed to be covered up and to have stove in the stable,
 the arabian finds himself unable to bear ten degrees of cold in
 arabia.”
 
“that’s why you want to purchase my english horse,” said debray, “you
 think will bear the cold better.”
 
“you are mistaken, for i have made vow never to return to africa.”
 
“you were very much frightened, then?” asked beauchamp.
 
“well, yes, and i had good reason to be so,” replied château-renaud. “i
 was retreating on foot, for my horse was dead. six arabs came up, full
 gallop, to cut off my head. i shot two with my double-barrelled gun,
 and two more with my pistols, but i was then disarmed, and two were
 still left; one seized by the hair (that is why i now wear it so
 short, for one knows what may happen), the other swung yataghan,
 and i already felt the cold steel on my neck, when this gentleman whom
 you see here charged them, shot the one who held by the hair, and
 cleft the skull of the other with his sabre. had assigned himself
 the task of saving man’s life that day; chance caused that man to be
 myself. when i am rich i will order statue of chance from klagmann or
 marochetti.”
 
“yes,” said morrel, smiling, “it was the 5th of september, the
 anniversary of the day on which my father was miraculously preserved;
 therefore, as far as it lies in my power, i endeavor to celebrate it by
 some——”
 
20237m
 


“heroic action,” interrupted château-renaud. “i was chosen. but that is
 not all—after rescuing from the sword, rescued from the cold,
 not by sharing his cloak with me, like st. martin, but by giving the
 whole; then from hunger by sharing with me—guess what?”
 
“a strasbourg pie?” asked beauchamp.
 
“no, his horse; of which we each of us ate slice with hearty
 appetite. it was very hard.”
 
“the horse?” said morcerf, laughing.
 
“no, the sacrifice,” returned château-renaud; “ask debray if would
 sacrifice his english steed for stranger?”
 
“not for stranger,” said debray, “but for friend i might, perhaps.”
 
“i divined that you would become mine, count,” replied morrel;
 “besides, as i had the honor to tell you, heroism or not, sacrifice or
 not, that day i owed an offering to bad fortune in recompense for the
 favors good fortune had on other days granted to us.”
 
“the history to which m. morrel alludes,” continued château-renaud, “is
 an admirable one, which will tell you some day when you are better
 acquainted with him; today let us fill our stomachs, and not our
 memories. what time do you breakfast, albert?”
 
“at half-past ten.”
 
“precisely?” asked debray, taking out his watch.
 
“oh, you will give five minutes’ grace,” replied morcerf, “for i
 also expect preserver.”
 
“of whom?”
 
“of myself,” cried morcerf; “_parbleu!_ do you think i cannot be saved
 as well as anyone else, and that there are only arabs who cut off
 heads? our breakfast is philanthropic one, and we shall have at
 table—at least, i hope so—two benefactors of humanity.”
 
“what shall we do?” said debray; “we have only one monthyon prize.”
 
“well, it will be given to someone who has done nothing to deserve it,”
 said beauchamp; “that is the way the academy mostly escapes from the
 dilemma.”
 
“and where does come from?” asked debray. “you have already answered
 the question once, but so vaguely that i venture to put it second
 time.”
 
“really,” said albert, “i do not know; when i invited him three months
 ago, was then at rome, but since that time who knows where may
 have gone?”
 
“and you think him capable of being exact?” demanded debray.
 
“i think him capable of everything.”
 
“well, with the five minutes’ grace, we have only ten left.”
 
“i will profit by them to tell you something about my guest.”
 
“i beg pardon,” interrupted beauchamp; “are there any materials for an
 article in what you are going to tell us?”
 
“yes, and for most curious one.”
 
“go on, then, for i see i shall not get to the chamber this morning,
 and i must make up for it.”
 
“i was at rome during the last carnival.”
 
“we know that,” said beauchamp.
 
“yes, but what you do not know is that i was carried off by bandits.”
 
“there are bandits,” cried debray.
 
“yes there are, and most hideous, or rather most admirable ones, for i
 found them ugly enough to frighten me.”
 
“come, my dear albert,” said debray, “confess that your cook is
 behindhand, that the oysters have not arrived from ostend or marennes,
 and that, like madame maintenon, you are going to replace the dish
 by story. say so at once; we are sufficiently well-bred to excuse
 you, and to listen to your history, fabulous as it promises to be.”
 
“and i say to you, fabulous as it may seem, i tell it as true one
 from beginning to end. the brigands had carried off, and conducted
 to gloomy spot, called the catacombs of saint sebastian.”
 
“i know it,” said château-renaud; “i narrowly escaped catching fever
 there.”
 
“and i did more than that,” replied morcerf, “for i caught one. i was
 informed that i was prisoner until i paid the sum of 4,000 roman
 crowns—about 24,000 francs. unfortunately, i had not above 1,500. i was
 at the end of my journey and of my credit. i wrote to franz—and were he
 here would confirm every word—i wrote then to franz that if did
 not come with the four thousand crowns before six, at ten minutes past
 i should have gone to join the blessed saints and glorious martyrs in
 whose company i had the honor of being; and signor luigi vampa, such
 was the name of the chief of these bandits, would have scrupulously
 kept his word.”
 
“but franz did come with the four thousand crowns,” said
 château-renaud. “a man whose name is franz d’Épinay or albert de
 morcerf has not much difficulty in procuring them.”
 
“no, arrived accompanied simply by the guest i am going to present
 to you.”
 
“ah, this gentleman is hercules killing cacus, perseus freeing
 andromeda.”
 
“no, is man about my own size.”
 
“armed to the teeth?”
 
“he had not even knitting-needle.”
 
“but paid your ransom?”
 
“he said two words to the chief and i was free.”
 
“and they apologized to him for having carried you off?” said
 beauchamp.
 
“just so.”
 
“why, is second ariosto.”
 
“no, his name is the count of monte cristo.”
 
“there is count of monte cristo” said debray.
 
“i do not think so,” added château-renaud, with the air of man who
 knows the whole of the european nobility perfectly.
 
“does anyone know anything of count of monte cristo?”
 
“he comes possibly from the holy land, and one of his ancestors
 possessed calvary, as the mortemarts did the dead sea.”
 
“i think i can assist your researches,” said maximilian. “monte cristo
 is little island i have often heard spoken of by the old sailors my
 father employed—a grain of sand in the centre of the mediterranean, an
 atom in the infinite.”
 
“precisely!” cried albert. “well, of whom i speak is the lord and
 master of this grain of sand, of this atom; has purchased the title
 of count somewhere in tuscany.”
 
“he is rich, then?”
 
“i believe so.”
 
“but that ought to be visible.”
 
“that is what deceives you, debray.”
 
“i do not understand you.”
 
“have you read the _arabian nights_?”
 
“what question!”
 
“well, do you know if the persons you see there are rich or poor, if
 their sacks of wheat are not rubies or diamonds? they seem like poor
 fishermen, and suddenly they open some mysterious cavern filled with
 the wealth of the indies.”
 
“which means?”
 
“which means that my count of monte cristo is one of those fishermen.
 has even name taken from the book, since calls himself sinbad
 the sailor, and has cave filled with gold.”
 
“and you have seen this cavern, morcerf?” asked beauchamp.
 
“no, but franz has; for heaven’s sake, not word of this before him.
 franz went in with his eyes blindfolded, and was waited on by mutes and
 by women to whom cleopatra was painted strumpet. only is not quite
 sure about the women, for they did not come in until after had taken
 hashish, so that what took for women might have been simply row of
 statues.”
 
the two young men looked at morcerf as if to say,—“are you mad, or are
 you laughing at us?”
 
“and i also,” said morrel thoughtfully, “have heard something like this
 from an old sailor named penelon.”
 
“ah,” cried albert, “it is very lucky that m. morrel comes to aid me;
 you are vexed, are you not, that thus gives clew to the
 labyrinth?”
 
“my dear albert,” said debray, “what you tell us is so extraordinary.”
 
“ah, because your ambassadors and your consuls do not tell you of
 them—they have time. they are too much taken up with interfering in
 the affairs of their countrymen who travel.”
 
“now you get angry, and attack our poor agents. how will you have them
 protect you? the chamber cuts down their salaries every day, so that
 now they have scarcely any. will you be ambassador, albert? i will send
 you to constantinople.”
 
“no, lest on the first demonstration i make in favor of mehemet ali,
 the sultan send the bowstring, and make my secretaries strangle me.”
 
“you say very true,” responded debray.
 
“yes,” said albert, “but this has nothing to do with the existence of
 the count of monte cristo.”
 
“_pardieu!_ everyone exists.”
 
“doubtless, but not in the same way; everyone has not black slaves, a
 princely retinue, an arsenal of weapons that would do credit to an
 arabian fortress, horses that cost six thousand francs apiece, and
 greek mistresses.”
 
“have you seen the greek mistress?”
 
“i have both seen and heard her. i saw her at the theatre, and heard
 her one morning when i breakfasted with the count.”
 
“he eats, then?”
 
“yes; but so little, it can hardly be called eating.”
 
“he must be vampire.”
 
“laugh, if you will; the countess g——, who knew lord ruthven, declared
 that the count was vampire.”
 
“ah, capital,” said beauchamp. “for man not connected with
 newspapers, here is the pendant to the famous sea-serpent of the
 _constitutionnel_.”
 
“wild eyes, the iris of which contracts or dilates at pleasure,” said
 debray; “facial angle strongly developed, magnificent forehead, livid
 complexion, black beard, sharp and white teeth, politeness
 unexceptionable.”
 
“just so, lucien,” returned morcerf; “you have described him feature
 for feature. yes, keen and cutting politeness. this man has often made
 shudder; and one day when we were viewing an execution, i thought i
 should faint, more from hearing the cold and calm manner in which he
 spoke of every description of torture, than from the sight of the
 executioner and the culprit.”
 
“did not conduct you to the ruins of the colosseum and suck your
 blood?” asked beauchamp.
 
“or, having delivered you, make you sign flaming parchment,
 surrendering your soul to him as esau did his birth-right?”
 
“rail on, rail on at your ease, gentlemen,” said morcerf, somewhat
 piqued. “when i look at you parisians, idlers on the boulevard gand
 or the bois boulogne, and think of this man, it seems to we are
 not of the same race.”
 
“i am highly flattered,” returned beauchamp.
 
“at the same time,” added château-renaud, “your count of monte cristo
 is very fine fellow, always excepting his little arrangements with
 the italian banditti.”
 
“there are italian banditti,” said debray.
 
“no vampire,” cried beauchamp.
 
“no count of monte cristo” added debray. “there is half-past ten
 striking, albert.”
 
20243m
 


“confess you have dreamed this, and let us sit down to breakfast,”
 continued beauchamp.
 
but the sound of the clock had not died away when germain announced,
 “his excellency the count of monte cristo.” the involuntary start
 everyone gave proved how much morcerf’s narrative had impressed them,
 and albert himself could not wholly refrain from manifesting sudden
 emotion. had not heard carriage stop in the street, or steps in
 the antechamber; the door had itself opened noiselessly. the count
 appeared, dressed with the greatest simplicity, but the most fastidious
 dandy could have found nothing to cavil at in his toilet. every article
 of dress—hat, coat, gloves, and boots—was from the first makers. he
 seemed scarcely five-and-thirty. but what struck everybody was his
 extreme resemblance to the portrait debray had drawn. the count
 advanced, smiling, into the centre of the room, and approached albert,
 who hastened towards him holding out his hand in ceremonial manner.
 
“punctuality,” said monte cristo, “is the politeness of kings,
 according to one of your sovereigns, i think; but it is not the same
 with travellers. however, i hope you will excuse the two or three
 seconds i am behindhand; five hundred leagues are not to be
 accomplished without some trouble, and especially in france, where, it
 seems, it is forbidden to beat the postilions.”
 
“my dear count,” replied albert, “i was announcing your visit to some
 of my friends, whom i had invited in consequence of the promise you did
 the honor to make, and whom i now present to you. they are the count
 of château-renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and
 whose ancestors had place at the round table; m. lucien debray,
 private secretary to the minister of the interior; m. beauchamp, an
 editor of paper, and the terror of the french government, but of
 whom, in spite of his national celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in
 italy, since his paper is prohibited there; and m. maximilian morrel,
 captain of spahis.”
 
at this name the count, who had hitherto saluted everyone with
 courtesy, but at the same time with coldness and formality, stepped a
 pace forward, and slight tinge of red colored his pale cheeks.
 
“you wear the uniform of the new french conquerors, monsieur,” said he;
 “it is handsome uniform.”
 
one could have said what caused the count’s voice to vibrate so
 deeply, and what made his eye flash, which was in general so clear,
 lustrous, and limpid when pleased.
 
“you have never seen our africans, count?” said albert.
 
“never,” replied the count, who was by this time perfectly master of
 himself again.
 
“well, beneath this uniform beats one of the bravest and noblest hearts
 in the whole army.”
 
“oh, m. morcerf,” interrupted morrel.
 
“let go on, captain. and we have just heard,” continued albert, “of
 new deed of his, and so heroic one, that, although i have seen him
 today for the first time, i request you to allow to introduce him as
 my friend.”
 
at these words it was still possible to observe in monte cristo the
 concentrated look, changing color, and slight trembling of the eyelid
 that show emotion.
 
“ah, you have noble heart,” said the count; “so much the better.”
 
this exclamation, which corresponded to the count’s own thought rather
 than to what albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially
 morrel, who looked at monte cristo with wonder. but, at the same time,
 the intonation was so soft that, however strange the speech might seem,
 it was impossible to be offended at it.
 
20245m
 


“why should doubt it?” said beauchamp to château-renaud.
 
“in reality,” replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic glance and
 his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at once all that was
 penetrable in monte cristo, “albert has not deceived us, for the count
 is most singular being. what say you, morrel!”
 
“_ma foi_, has an open look about him that pleases me, in spite of
 the singular remark has made about me.”
 
“gentlemen,” said albert, “germain informs that breakfast is ready.
 my dear count, allow to show you the way.” they passed silently into
 the breakfast-room, and everyone took his place.
 
“gentlemen,” said the count, seating himself, “permit to make a
 confession which must form my excuse for any improprieties i may
 commit. i am stranger, and stranger to such degree, that this is
 the first time i have ever been at paris. the french way of living is
 utterly unknown to me, and up to the present time i have followed the
 eastern customs, which are entirely in contrast to the parisian. i beg
 you, therefore, to excuse if you find anything in too turkish, too
 italian, or too arabian. now, then, let us breakfast.”
 
“with what an air says all this,” muttered beauchamp; “decidedly he
 is great man.”
 
“a great man in his own country,” added debray.
 
“a great man in every country, m. debray,” said château-renaud.
 
the count was, it may be remembered, most temperate guest. albert
 remarked this, expressing his fears lest, at the outset, the parisian
 mode of life should displease the traveller in the most essential
 point.
 
“my dear count,” said he, “i fear one thing, and that is, that the fare
 of the rue du helder is not so much to your taste as that of the piazza
 di spagna. i ought to have consulted you on the point, and have had
 some dishes prepared expressly.”
 
“did you know better,” returned the count, smiling, “you would not
 give one thought of such thing for traveller like myself, who has
 successively lived on macaroni at naples, polenta at milan, olla
 podrida at valencia, pilau at constantinople, curry in india, and
 swallows’ nests in china. i eat everywhere, and of everything, only i
 eat but little; and today, that you reproach with my want of
 appetite, is my day of appetite, for i have not eaten since yesterday
 morning.”
 
“what,” cried all the guests, “you have not eaten for four-and-twenty
 hours?”
 
“no,” replied the count; “i was forced to go out of my road to obtain
 some information near nîmes, so that i was somewhat late, and therefore
 i did not choose to stop.”
 
“and you ate in your carriage?” asked morcerf.
 
“no, i slept, as i generally do when i am weary without having the
 courage to amuse myself, or when i am hungry without feeling inclined
 to eat.”
 
“but you can sleep when you please, monsieur?” said morrel.
 
“yes.”
 
“you have recipe for it?”
 
“an infallible one.”
 
“that would be invaluable to us in africa, who have not always any food
 to eat, and rarely anything to drink.”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo; “but, unfortunately, recipe excellent for a
 man like myself would be very dangerous applied to an army, which might
 not awake when it was needed.”
 
“may we inquire what is this recipe?” asked debray.
 
“oh, yes,” returned monte cristo; “i make secret of it. it is a
 mixture of excellent opium, which i fetched myself from canton in order
 to have it pure, and the best hashish which grows in the east—that is,
 between the tigris and the euphrates. these two ingredients are mixed
 in equal proportions, and formed into pills. ten minutes after one is
 taken, the effect is produced. ask baron franz d’Épinay; i think he
 tasted them one day.”
 
“yes,” replied morcerf, “he said something about it to me.”
 
“but,” said beauchamp, who, as became journalist, was very
 incredulous, “you always carry this drug about you?”
 
“always.”
 
“would it be an indiscretion to ask to see those precious pills?”
 continued beauchamp, hoping to take him at disadvantage.
 
“no, monsieur,” returned the count; and drew from his pocket a
 marvellous casket, formed out of single emerald and closed by a
 golden lid which unscrewed and gave passage to small greenish colored
 pellet about the size of pea. this ball had an acrid and penetrating
 odor. there were four or five more in the emerald, which would contain
 about dozen. the casket passed around the table, but it was more to
 examine the admirable emerald than to see the pills that it passed from
 hand to hand.
 
“and is it your cook who prepares these pills?” asked beauchamp.
 
“oh, no, monsieur,” replied monte cristo; “i do not thus betray my
 enjoyments to the vulgar. i am tolerable chemist, and prepare my
 pills myself.”
 
“this is magnificent emerald, and the largest i have ever seen,” said
 château-renaud, “although my mother has some remarkable family jewels.”
 
“i had three similar ones,” returned monte cristo. “i gave one to the
 sultan, who mounted it in his sabre; another to our holy father the
 pope, who had it set in his tiara, opposite to one nearly as large,
 though not so fine, given by the emperor napoleon to his predecessor,
 pius vii. i kept the third for myself, and i had it hollowed out, which
 reduced its value, but rendered it more commodious for the purpose i
 intended.”
 
everyone looked at monte cristo with astonishment; spoke with so
 much simplicity that it was evident spoke the truth, or that was
 mad. however, the sight of the emerald made them naturally incline to
 the former belief.
 
“and what did these two sovereigns give you in exchange for these
 magnificent presents?” asked debray.
 
“the sultan, the liberty of woman,” replied the count; “the pope, the
 life of man; so that once in my life i have been as powerful as if
 heaven had brought into the world on the steps of throne.”
 
“and it was peppino you saved, was it not?” cried morcerf; “it was for
 him that you obtained pardon?”
 
“perhaps,” returned the count, smiling.
 
“my dear count, you have idea what pleasure it gives to hear you
 speak thus,” said morcerf. “i had announced you beforehand to my
 friends as an enchanter of the _arabian nights_, wizard of the middle
 ages; but the parisians are so subtle in paradoxes that they mistake
 for caprices of the imagination the most incontestable truths, when
 these truths do not form part of their daily existence. for example,
 here is debray who reads, and beauchamp who prints, every day, ‘a
 member of the jockey club has been stopped and robbed on the
 boulevard;’ ‘four persons have been assassinated in the rue st. denis’
 or ‘the faubourg st. germain;’ ‘ten, fifteen, or twenty thieves, have
 been arrested in _café_ on the boulevard du temple, or in the thermes
 julien,’—and yet these same men deny the existence of the bandits in
 the maremma, the campagna di romana, or the pontine marshes. tell them
 yourself that i was taken by bandits, and that without your generous
 intercession i should now have been sleeping in the catacombs of st.
 sebastian, instead of receiving them in my humble abode in the rue du
 helder.”
 
“ah,” said monte cristo “you promised never to mention that
 circumstance.”
 
“it was not i who made that promise,” cried morcerf; “it must have been
 someone else whom you have rescued in the same manner, and whom you
 have forgotten. pray speak of it, for i shall not only, i trust, relate
 the little i do know, but also great deal i do not know.”
 
“it seems to me,” returned the count, smiling, “that you played a
 sufficiently important part to know as well as myself what happened.”
 
20249m
 


“well, you promise me, if i tell all i know, to relate, in your turn,
 all that i do not know?”
 
“that is but fair,” replied monte cristo.
 
“well,” said morcerf, “for three days i believed myself the object of
 the attentions of masque, whom i took for descendant of tullia or
 poppæa, while i was simply the object of the attentions of a
 _contadina_, and i say _contadina_ to avoid saying peasant girl. what i
 know is, that, like fool, greater fool than of whom i spoke just
 now, i mistook for this peasant girl young bandit of fifteen or
 sixteen, with beardless chin and slim waist, and who, just as i was
 about to imprint chaste salute on his lips, placed pistol to my
 head, and, aided by seven or eight others, led, or rather dragged me,
 to the catacombs of st. sebastian, where i found highly educated
 brigand chief perusing cæsar’s _commentaries_, and who deigned to leave
 off reading to inform me, that unless the next morning, before six
 o’clock, four thousand piastres were paid into his account at his
 banker’s, at quarter past six i should have ceased to exist. the
 letter is still to be seen, for it is in franz d’Épinay’s possession,
 signed by me, and with postscript of m. luigi vampa. this is all i
 know, but i know not, count, how you contrived to inspire so much
 respect in the bandits of rome who ordinarily have so little respect
 for anything. i assure you, franz and i were lost in admiration.”
 
“nothing more simple,” returned the count. “i had known the famous
 vampa for more than ten years. when was quite child, and only a
 shepherd, i gave him few gold pieces for showing my way, and he,
 in order to repay me, gave poniard, the hilt of which had
 carved with his own hand, and which you may have seen in my collection
 of arms. in after years, whether had forgotten this interchange of
 presents, which ought to have cemented our friendship, or whether he
 did not recollect me, sought to take me, but, on the contrary, it
 was i who captured him and dozen of his band. i might have handed him
 over to roman justice, which is somewhat expeditious, and which would
 have been particularly so with him; but i did nothing of the sort—i
 suffered him and his band to depart.”
 
“with the condition that they should more,” said beauchamp,
 laughing. “i see they kept their promise.”
 
“no, monsieur,” returned monte cristo “upon the simple condition that
 they should respect myself and my friends. perhaps what i am about to
 say may seem strange to you, who are socialists, and vaunt humanity and
 your duty to your neighbor, but i never seek to protect society which
 does not protect me, and which i will even say, generally occupies
 itself about only to injure me; and thus by giving them low place
 in my esteem, and preserving neutrality towards them, it is society
 and my neighbor who are indebted to me.”
 
“bravo,” cried château-renaud; “you are the first man i ever met
 sufficiently courageous to preach egotism. bravo, count, bravo!”
 
“it is frank, at least,” said morrel. “but i am sure that the count
 does not regret having once deviated from the principles has so
 boldly avowed.”
 
“how have i deviated from those principles, monsieur?” asked monte
 cristo, who could not help looking at morrel with so much intensity,
 that two or three times the young man had been unable to sustain that
 clear and piercing glance.
 
“why, it seems to me,” replied morrel, “that in delivering m. de
 morcerf, whom you did not know, you did good to your neighbor and to
 society.”
 
“of which is the brightest ornament,” said beauchamp, drinking off a
 glass of champagne.
 
“my dear count,” cried morcerf, “you are at fault—you, one of the most
 formidable logicians i know—and you must see it clearly proved that
 instead of being an egotist, you are philanthropist. ah, you call
 yourself oriental, levantine, maltese, indian, chinese; your family
 name is monte cristo; sinbad the sailor is your baptismal appellation,
 and yet the first day you set foot in paris you instinctively display
 the greatest virtue, or rather the chief defect, of us eccentric
 parisians,—that is, you assume the vices you have not, and conceal the
 virtues you possess.”
 
“my dear vicomte,” returned monte cristo, “i do not see, in all i have
 done, anything that merits, either from you or these gentlemen, the
 pretended eulogies i have received. you were stranger to me, for i
 knew you from the time i gave up two rooms to you, invited you to
 breakfast with me, lent you one of my carriages, witnessed the carnival
 in your company, and saw with you from window in the piazza del
 popolo the execution that affected you so much that you nearly fainted.
 i will appeal to any of these gentlemen, could i leave my guest in the
 hands of hideous bandit, as you term him? besides, you know, i had
 the idea that you could introduce into some of the paris salons when
 i came to france. you might some time ago have looked upon this
 resolution as vague project, but today you see it was reality, and
 you must submit to it under penalty of breaking your word.”
 
“i will keep it,” returned morcerf; “but i fear that you will be much
 disappointed, accustomed as you are to picturesque events and fantastic
 horizons. amongst us you will not meet with any of those episodes with
 which your adventurous existence has so familiarized you; our
 chimborazo is mortmartre, our himalaya is mount valérien, our great
 desert is the plain of grenelle, where they are now boring an artesian
 well to water the caravans. we have plenty of thieves, though not so
 many as is said; but these thieves stand in far more dread of a
 policeman than lord. france is so prosaic, and paris so civilized a
 city, that you will not find in its eighty-five departments—i say
 eighty-five, because i do not include corsica—you will not find, then,
 in these eighty-five departments single hill on which there is not a
 telegraph, or grotto in which the commissary of police has not put up
 gaslamp. there is but one service i can render you, and for that i
 place myself entirely at your orders, that is, to present, or make my
 friends present, you everywhere; besides, you have need of anyone to
 introduce you—with your name, and your fortune, and your talent” (monte
 cristo bowed with somewhat ironical smile) “you can present yourself
 everywhere, and be well received. i can be useful in one way only—if
 knowledge of parisian habits, of the means of rendering yourself
 comfortable, or of the bazaars, can assist, you may depend upon to
 find you fitting dwelling here. i do not dare offer to share my
 apartments with you, as i shared yours at rome—i, who do not profess
 egotism, but am yet egotist _par excellence_; for, except myself, these
 rooms would not hold shadow more, unless that shadow were feminine.”
 
“ah,” said the count, “that is most conjugal reservation; i recollect
 that at rome you said something of projected marriage. may i
 congratulate you?”
 
“the affair is still in projection.”
 
“and who says in ‘projection,’ means already decided,” said debray.
 
“no,” replied morcerf, “my father is most anxious about it; and i hope,
 ere long, to introduce you, if not to my wife, at least to my
 betrothed—mademoiselle eugénie danglars.”
 
“eugénie danglars,” said monte cristo; “tell me, is not her father
 baron danglars?”
 
“yes,” returned morcerf, “a baron of new creation.”
 
“what matter,” said monte cristo “if has rendered the state services
 which merit this distinction?”
 
“enormous ones,” answered beauchamp. “although in reality liberal, he
 negotiated loan of six millions for charles x., in 1829, who made him
 baron and chevalier of the legion of honor; so that wears the
 ribbon, not, as you would think, in his waistcoat-pocket, but at his
 button-hole.”
 
“ah,” interrupted morcerf, laughing, “beauchamp, beauchamp, keep that
 for the _corsaire_ or the _charivari_, but spare my future
 father-in-law before me.” then, turning to monte cristo, “you just now
 spoke his name as if you knew the baron?”
 
“i do not know him,” returned monte cristo; “but i shall probably soon
 make his acquaintance, for i have credit opened with him by the house
 of richard & blount, of london, arstein & eskeles of vienna, and
 thomson & french at rome.” as pronounced the two last names, the
 count glanced at maximilian morrel. if the stranger expected to produce
 an effect on morrel, was not mistaken—maximilian started as if he
 had been electrified.
 
“thomson & french,” said he; “do you know this house, monsieur?”
 
20253m
 


“they are my bankers in the capital of the christian world,” returned
 the count quietly. “can my influence with them be of any service to
 you?”
 
“oh, count, you could assist perhaps in researches which have been,
 up to the present, fruitless. this house, in past years, did ours a
 great service, and has, i know not for what reason, always denied
 having rendered us this service.”
 
“i shall be at your orders,” said monte cristo bowing.
 
“but,” continued morcerf, “_à propos_ of danglars,—we have strangely
 wandered from the subject. we were speaking of suitable habitation
 for the count of monte cristo. come, gentlemen, let us all propose some
 place. where shall we lodge this new guest in our great capital?”
 
“faubourg saint-germain,” said château-renaud. “the count will find
 there charming hotel, with court and garden.”
 
“bah! château-renaud,” returned debray, “you only know your dull and
 gloomy faubourg saint-germain; do not pay any attention to him,
 count—live in the chaussée d’antin, that’s the real centre of paris.”
 
“boulevard l’opéra,” said beauchamp; “the second floor—a house with
 balcony. the count will have his cushions of silver cloth brought
 there, and as smokes his chibouque, see all paris pass before him.”
 
“you have idea, then, morrel?” asked château-renaud; “you do not
 propose anything.”
 
“oh, yes,” returned the young man, smiling; “on the contrary, i have
 one, but i expected the count would be tempted by one of the brilliant
 proposals made him, yet as has not replied to any of them, i will
 venture to offer him suite of apartments in charming hotel, in the
 pompadour style, that my sister has inhabited for year, in the rue
 meslay.”
 
“you have sister?” asked the count.
 
“yes, monsieur, most excellent sister.”
 
“married?”
 
“nearly nine years.”
 
“happy?” asked the count again.
 
“as happy as it is permitted to human creature to be,” replied
 maximilian. “she married the man she loved, who remained faithful to us
 in our fallen fortunes—emmanuel herbaut.”
 
monte cristo smiled imperceptibly.
 
“i live there during my leave of absence,” continued maximilian; “and i
 shall be, together with my brother-in-law emmanuel, at the disposition
 of the count, whenever thinks fit to honor us.”
 
“one minute,” cried albert, without giving monte cristo the time to
 reply. “take care, you are going to immure traveller, sinbad the
 sailor, man who comes to see paris; you are going to make patriarch
 of him.”
 
20255m
 


“oh, no,” said morrel; “my sister is five-and-twenty, my brother-in-law
 is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy. besides, the count will be
 in his own house, and only see them when thinks fit to do so.”
 
“thanks, monsieur,” said monte cristo; “i shall content myself with
 being presented to your sister and her husband, if you will do the
 honor to introduce me; but i cannot accept the offer of anyone of these
 gentlemen, since my habitation is already prepared.”
 
“what,” cried morcerf; “you are, then, going to hotel—that will be
 very dull for you.”
 
“was i so badly lodged at rome?” said monte cristo smiling.
 
“_parbleu!_ at rome you spent fifty thousand piastres in furnishing
 your apartments, but i presume that you are not disposed to spend a
 similar sum every day.”
 
“it is not that which deterred me,” replied monte cristo; “but as i
 determined to have house to myself, i sent on my valet chambre,
 and ought by this time to have bought the house and furnished it.”
 
“but you have, then, valet chambre who knows paris?” said
 beauchamp.
 
“it is the first time has ever been in paris. is black, and
 cannot speak,” returned monte cristo.
 
“it is ali!” cried albert, in the midst of the general surprise.
 
“yes, ali himself, my nubian mute, whom you saw, i think, at rome.”
 
“certainly,” said morcerf; “i recollect him perfectly. but how could
 you charge nubian to purchase house, and mute to furnish it?—he
 will do everything wrong.”
 
“undeceive yourself, monsieur,” replied monte cristo; “i am quite sure,
 that, on the contrary, will choose everything as i wish. knows my
 tastes, my caprices, my wants. has been here week, with the
 instinct of hound, hunting by himself. will arrange everything for
 me. knew, that i should arrive today at ten o’clock; was waiting
 for at nine at the barrière fontainebleau. gave this paper;
 it contains the number of my new abode; read it yourself,” and monte
 cristo passed paper to albert.
 
“ah, that is really original,” said beauchamp.
 
“and very princely,” added château-renaud.
 
“what, do you not know your house?” asked debray.
 
“no,” said monte cristo; “i told you i did not wish to be behind my
 time; i dressed myself in the carriage, and descended at the viscount’s
 door.” the young men looked at each other; they did not know if it was
 comedy monte cristo was playing, but every word uttered had such
 an air of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what said
 was false—besides, why should tell falsehood?
 
“we must content ourselves, then,” said beauchamp, “with rendering the
 count all the little services in our power. i, in my quality of
 journalist, open all the theatres to him.”
 
“thanks, monsieur,” returned monte cristo, “my steward has orders to
 take box at each theatre.”
 
“is your steward also nubian?” asked debray.
 
“no, is countryman of yours, if corsican is countryman of
 anyone’s. but you know him, m. morcerf.”
 
“is it that excellent m. bertuccio, who understands hiring windows so
 well?”
 
“yes, you saw him the day i had the honor of receiving you; has been
 soldier, smuggler—in fact, everything. i would not be quite sure
 that has not been mixed up with the police for some trifle—a stab
 with knife, for instance.”
 
“and you have chosen this honest citizen for your steward,” said
 debray. “of how much does rob you every year?”
 
“on my word,” replied the count, “not more than another. i am sure he
 answers my purpose, knows impossibility, and so i keep him.”
 
“then,” continued château-renaud, “since you have an establishment, a
 steward, and hotel in the champs-Élysées, you only want mistress.”
 albert smiled. thought of the fair greek had seen in the count’s
 box at the argentina and valle theatres.
 
“i have something better than that,” said monte cristo; “i have a
 slave. you procure your mistresses from the opera, the vaudeville, or
 the variétés; i purchased mine at constantinople; it cost more, but
 i have nothing to fear.”
 
“but you forget,” replied debray, laughing, “that we are franks by name
 and franks by nature, as king charles said, and that the moment she
 puts her foot in france your slave becomes free.”
 
“who will tell her?”
 
“the first person who sees her.”
 
“she only speaks romaic.”
 
“that is different.”
 
“but at least we shall see her,” said beauchamp, “or do you keep
 eunuchs as well as mutes?”
 
“oh, no,” replied monte cristo; “i do not carry brutalism so far.
 everyone who surrounds is free to quit me, and when they leave me
 will longer have any need of or anyone else; it is for that
 reason, perhaps, that they do not quit me.”
 
they had long since passed to dessert and cigars.
 
“my dear albert,” said debray, rising, “it is half-past two. your guest
 is charming, but you leave the best company to go into the worst
 sometimes. i must return to the minister’s. i will tell him of the
 count, and we shall soon know who is.”
 
“take care,” returned albert; “no one has been able to accomplish
 that.”
 
“oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true they are almost
 always spent beforehand, but, matter, we shall still have fifty
 thousand francs to spend for this purpose.”
 
“and when you know, will you tell me?”
 
“i promise you. _au revoir_, albert. gentlemen, good morning.”
 
as left the room, debray called out loudly, “my carriage.”
 
“bravo,” said beauchamp to albert; “i shall not go to the chamber, but
 i have something better to offer my readers than speech of m.
 danglars.”
 
“for heaven’s sake, beauchamp,” returned morcerf, “do not deprive of
 the merit of introducing him everywhere. is not peculiar?”
 
“he is more than that,” replied château-renaud; “he is one of the most
 extraordinary men i ever saw in my life. are you coming, morrel?”
 
“directly i have given my card to the count, who has promised to pay us
 visit at rue meslay, no. 14.”
 
“be sure i shall not fail to do so,” returned the count, bowing.
 
and maximilian morrel left the room with the baron château-renaud,
 leaving monte cristo alone with morcerf.
 


chapter 41. the presentation
 
when albert found himself alone with monte cristo, “my dear count,”
 said he, “allow to commence my services as _cicerone_ by showing you
 specimen of bachelor’s apartment. you, who are accustomed to the
 palaces of italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square
 feet young man who is not the worst lodged in paris can live. as we
 pass from one room to another, i will open the windows to let you
 breathe.”
 
monte cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the
 ground floor. albert led him first to his _atelier_, which was, as we
 have said, his favorite apartment. monte cristo quickly appreciated all
 that albert had collected here—old cabinets, japanese porcelain,
 oriental stuffs, venetian glass, arms from all parts of the
 world—everything was familiar to him; and at the first glance he
 recognized their date, their country, and their origin.
 
morcerf had expected should be the guide; on the contrary, it was he
 who, under the count’s guidance, followed course of archæology,
 mineralogy, and natural history.
 
they descended to the first floor; albert led his guest into the salon.
 the salon was filled with the works of modern artists; there were
 landscapes by dupré, with their long reeds and tall trees, their lowing
 oxen and marvellous skies; delacroix’s arabian cavaliers, with their
 long white burnouses, their shining belts, their damasked arms, their
 horses, who tore each other with their teeth while their riders
 contended fiercely with their maces; _aquarelles_ of boulanger,
 representing notre dame paris with that vigor that makes the artist
 the rival of the poet; there were paintings by diaz, who makes his
 flowers more beautiful than flowers, his suns more brilliant than the
 sun; designs by decamp, as vividly colored as those of salvator rosa,
 but more poetic; _pastels_ by giraud and müller, representing children
 like angels and women with the features of virgin; sketches torn from
 the album of dauzats’ “travels in the east,” that had been made in a
 few seconds on the saddle of camel, or beneath the dome of a
 mosque—in word, all that modern art can give in exchange and as
 recompense for the art lost and gone with ages long since past.
 
albert expected to have something new this time to show to the
 traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter, without seeking for
 the signatures, many of which, indeed, were only initials, named
 instantly the author of every picture in such manner that it was easy
 to see that each name was not only known to him, but that each style
 associated with it had been appreciated and studied by him. from the
 salon they passed into the bedchamber; it was model of taste and
 simple elegance. single portrait, signed by léopold robert, shone in
 its carved and gilded frame. this portrait attracted the count of monte
 cristo’s attention, for made three rapid steps in the chamber, and
 stopped suddenly before it.
 
it was the portrait of young woman of five or six-and-twenty, with a
 dark complexion, and light and lustrous eyes, veiled beneath long
 lashes. she wore the picturesque costume of the catalan fisherwomen, a
 red and black bodice, and golden pins in her hair. she was looking at
 the sea, and her form was outlined on the blue ocean and sky. the light
 was so faint in the room that albert did not perceive the pallor that
 spread itself over the count’s visage, or the nervous heaving of his
 chest and shoulders. silence prevailed for an instant, during which
 monte cristo gazed intently on the picture.
 
“you have there most charming mistress, viscount,” said the count in
 perfectly calm tone; “and this costume—a ball costume,
 doubtless—becomes her admirably.”
 
“ah, monsieur,” returned albert, “i would never forgive you this
 mistake if you had seen another picture beside this. you do not know my
 mother; she it is whom you see here. she had her portrait painted thus
 six or eight years ago. this costume is fancy one, it appears, and
 the resemblance is so great that i think i still see my mother the same
 as she was in 1830. the countess had this portrait painted during the
 count’s absence. she doubtless intended giving him an agreeable
 surprise; but, strange to say, this portrait seemed to displease my
 father, and the value of the picture, which is, as you see, one of the
 best works of léopold robert, could not overcome his dislike to it. it
 is true, between ourselves, that m. morcerf is one of the most
 assiduous peers at the luxembourg, general renowned for theory, but a
 most mediocre amateur of art. it is different with my mother, who
 paints exceedingly well, and who, unwilling to part with so valuable a
 picture, gave it to to put here, where it would be less likely to
 displease m. morcerf, whose portrait, by gros, i will also show you.
 excuse my talking of family matters, but as i shall have the honor of
 introducing you to the count, i tell you this to prevent you making any
 allusions to this picture. the picture seems to have malign
 influence, for my mother rarely comes here without looking at it, and
 still more rarely does she look at it without weeping. this
 disagreement is the only one that has ever taken place between the
 count and countess, who are still as much united, although married more
 than twenty years, as on the first day of their wedding.”
 
20261m
 


monte cristo glanced rapidly at albert, as if to seek hidden meaning
 in his words, but it was evident the young man uttered them in the
 simplicity of his heart.
 
“now,” said albert, “that you have seen all my treasures, allow to
 offer them to you, unworthy as they are. consider yourself as in your
 own house, and to put yourself still more at your ease, pray accompany
 to the apartments of m. morcerf, whom i wrote from rome an
 account of the services you rendered me, and to whom i announced your
 promised visit, and i may say that both the count and countess
 anxiously desire to thank you in person. you are somewhat _blasé_ i
 know, and family scenes have not much effect on sinbad the sailor, who
 has seen so many others. however, accept what i propose to you as an
 initiation into parisian life—a life of politeness, visiting, and
 introductions.”
 
monte cristo bowed without making any answer; accepted the offer
 without enthusiasm and without regret, as one of those conventions of
 society which every gentleman looks upon as duty. albert summoned his
 servant, and ordered him to acquaint m. and madame morcerf of the
 arrival of the count of monte cristo. albert followed him with the
 count. when they arrived at the antechamber, above the door was visible
 shield, which, by its rich ornaments and its harmony with the rest of
 the furniture, indicated the importance the owner attached to this
 blazon. monte cristo stopped and examined it attentively.
 
“azure seven merlets, or, placed bender,” said he. “these are,
 doubtless, your family arms? except the knowledge of blazons, that
 enables to decipher them, i am very ignorant of heraldry—i, count
 of fresh creation, fabricated in tuscany by the aid of commandery
 of st. stephen, and who would not have taken the trouble had i not been
 told that when you travel much it is necessary. besides, you must have
 something on the panels of your carriage, to escape being searched by
 the custom-house officers. excuse my putting such question to you.”
 
“it is not indiscreet,” returned morcerf, with the simplicity of
 conviction. “you have guessed rightly. these are our arms, that is,
 those of my father, but they are, as you see, joined to another shield,
 which has gules, silver tower, which are my mother’s. by her side i
 am spanish, but the family of morcerf is french, and, i have heard, one
 of the oldest of the south of france.”
 
“yes,” replied monte cristo “these blazons prove that. almost all the
 armed pilgrims that went to the holy land took for their arms either a
 cross, in honor of their mission, or birds of passage, in sign of the
 long voyage they were about to undertake, and which they hoped to
 accomplish on the wings of faith. one of your ancestors had joined the
 crusades, and supposing it to be only that of st. louis, that makes you
 mount to the thirteenth century, which is tolerably ancient.”
 
“it is possible,” said morcerf; “my father has in his study a
 genealogical tree which will tell you all that, and on which i made
 commentaries that would have greatly edified d’hozier and jaucourt. at
 present i longer think of it, and yet i must tell you that we are
 beginning to occupy ourselves greatly with these things under our
 popular government.”
 
“well, then, your government would do well to choose from the past
 something better than the things that i have noticed on your monuments,
 and which have heraldic meaning whatever. as for you, viscount,”
 continued monte cristo to morcerf, “you are more fortunate than the
 government, for your arms are really beautiful, and speak to the
 imagination. yes, you are at once from provence and spain; that
 explains, if the portrait you showed be like, the dark hue i so much
 admired on the visage of the noble catalan.”
 
it would have required the penetration of Œdipus or the sphinx to have
 divined the irony the count concealed beneath these words, apparently
 uttered with the greatest politeness. morcerf thanked him with smile,
 and pushed open the door above which were his arms, and which, as we
 have said, opened into the salon. in the most conspicuous part of the
 salon was another portrait. it was that of man, from five to
 eight-and-thirty, in the uniform of general officer, wearing the
 double epaulet of heavy bullion, that indicates superior rank, the
 ribbon of the legion of honor around his neck, which showed was a
 commander, and on the right breast, the star of grand officer of the
 order of the saviour, and on the left that of the grand cross of
 charles iii., which proved that the person represented by the picture
 had served in the wars of greece and spain, or, what was just the same
 thing as regarded decorations, had fulfilled some diplomatic mission in
 the two countries.
 
monte cristo was engaged in examining this portrait with less care
 than had bestowed upon the other, when another door opened, and he
 found himself opposite to the count of morcerf in person.
 
was man of forty to forty-five years, but seemed at least
 fifty, and his black moustache and eyebrows contrasted strangely with
 his almost white hair, which was cut short, in the military fashion. he
 was dressed in plain clothes, and wore at his button-hole the ribbons
 of the different orders to which belonged.
 
entered with tolerably dignified step, and some little haste.
 monte cristo saw him advance towards him without making single step.
 it seemed as if his feet were rooted to the ground, and his eyes on the
 count of morcerf.
 
“father,” said the young man, “i have the honor of presenting to you
 the count of monte cristo, the generous friend whom i had the good
 fortune to meet in the critical situation of which i have told you.”
 
“you are most welcome, monsieur,” said the count of morcerf, saluting
 monte cristo with smile, “and monsieur has rendered our house, in
 preserving its only heir, service which insures him our eternal
 gratitude.”
 
as said these words, the count of morcerf pointed to chair, while
 seated himself in another opposite the window.
 
monte cristo, in taking the seat morcerf offered him, placed himself in
 such manner as to remain concealed in the shadow of the large velvet
 curtains, and read on the careworn and livid features of the count a
 whole history of secret griefs written in each wrinkle time had planted
 there.
 
“the countess,” said morcerf, “was at her toilet when she was informed
 of the visit she was about to receive. she will, however, be in the
 salon in ten minutes.”
 
“it is great honor to me,” returned monte cristo, “to be thus, on the
 first day of my arrival in paris, brought in contact with man whose
 merit equals his reputation, and to whom fortune has for once been
 equitable, but has she not still on the plains of mitidja, or in the
 mountains of atlas, marshal’s staff to offer you?”
 
“oh,” replied morcerf, reddening slightly, “i have left the service,
 monsieur. made peer at the restoration, i served through the first
 campaign under the orders of marshal bourmont. i could, therefore,
 expect higher rank, and who knows what might have happened had the
 elder branch remained on the throne? but the revolution of july was, it
 seems, sufficiently glorious to allow itself to be ungrateful, and it
 was so for all services that did not date from the imperial period. i
 tendered my resignation, for when you have gained your epaulets on the
 battle-field, you do not know how to manœuvre on the slippery grounds
 of the salons. i have hung up my sword, and cast myself into politics.
 i have devoted myself to industry; i study the useful arts. during the
 twenty years i served, i often wished to do so, but i had not the
 time.”
 
“these are the ideas that render your nation superior to any other,”
 returned monte cristo. “a gentleman of high birth, possessor of an
 ample fortune, you have consented to gain your promotion as an obscure
 soldier, step by step—this is uncommon; then become general, peer of
 france, commander of the legion of honor, you consent to again commence
 second apprenticeship, without any other hope or any other desire
 than that of one day becoming useful to your fellow-creatures; this,
 indeed, is praiseworthy,—nay, more, it is sublime.”
 
20265m
 


albert looked on and listened with astonishment; was not used to see
 monte cristo give vent to such bursts of enthusiasm.
 
“alas,” continued the stranger, doubtless to dispel the slight cloud
 that covered morcerf’s brow, “we do not act thus in italy; we grow
 according to our race and our species, and we pursue the same lines,
 and often the same uselessness, all our lives.”
 
“but, monsieur,” said the count of morcerf, “for man of your merit,
 italy is not country, and france opens her arms to receive you;
 respond to her call. france will not, perhaps, be always ungrateful.
 she treats her children ill, but she always welcomes strangers.”
 
“ah, father,” said albert with smile, “it is evident you do not know
 the count of monte cristo; despises all honors, and contents himself
 with those written on his passport.”
 
“that is the most just remark,” replied the stranger, “i ever heard
 made concerning myself.”
 
“you have been free to choose your career,” observed the count of
 morcerf, with sigh; “and you have chosen the path strewed with
 flowers.”
 
“precisely, monsieur,” replied monte cristo with one of those smiles
 that painter could never represent or physiologist analyze.
 
“if i did not fear to fatigue you,” said the general, evidently charmed
 with the count’s manners, “i would have taken you to the chamber; there
 is debate very curious to those who are strangers to our modern
 senators.”
 
“i shall be most grateful, monsieur, if you will, at some future time,
 renew your offer, but i have been flattered with the hope of being
 introduced to the countess, and i will therefore wait.”
 
“ah, here is my mother,” cried the viscount.
 
monte cristo, turned round hastily, and saw madame morcerf at the
 entrance of the salon, at the door opposite to that by which her
 husband had entered, pale and motionless; when monte cristo turned
 round, she let fall her arm, which for some unknown reason had been
 resting on the gilded door-post. she had been there some moments, and
 had heard the last words of the visitor. the latter rose and bowed to
 the countess, who inclined herself without speaking.
 
“ah! good heavens, madame,” said the count, “are you ill, or is it the
 heat of the room that affects you?”
 
“are you ill, mother?” cried the viscount, springing towards her.
 
she thanked them both with smile.
 
“no,” returned she, “but i feel some emotion on seeing, for the first
 time, the man without whose intervention we should have been in tears
 and desolation. monsieur,” continued the countess, advancing with the
 majesty of queen, “i owe to you the life of my son, and for this i
 bless you. now, i thank you for the pleasure you give in thus
 affording the opportunity of thanking you as i have blessed you,
 from the bottom of my heart.”
 
the count bowed again, but lower than before; was even paler than
 mercédès.
 
“madame,” said he, “the count and yourself recompense too generously a
 simple action. to save man, to spare father’s feelings, or a
 mother’s sensibility, is not to do good action, but simple deed of
 humanity.”
 
at these words, uttered with the most exquisite sweetness and
 politeness, madame morcerf replied:
 
“it is very fortunate for my son, monsieur, that found such a
 friend, and i thank god that things are thus.”
 
and mercédès raised her fine eyes to heaven with so fervent an
 expression of gratitude, that the count fancied saw tears in them.
 m. morcerf approached her.
 
“madame,” said he. “i have already made my excuses to the count for
 quitting him, and i pray you to do so also. the sitting commences at
 two; it is now three, and i am to speak.”
 
“go, then, and monsieur and i will strive our best to forget your
 absence,” replied the countess, with the same tone of deep feeling.
 “monsieur,” continued she, turning to monte cristo, “will you do us the
 honor of passing the rest of the day with us?”
 
“believe me, madame, i feel most grateful for your kindness, but i got
 out of my travelling carriage at your door this morning, and i am
 ignorant how i am installed in paris, which i scarcely know; this is
 but trifling inquietude, i know, but one that may be appreciated.”
 
“we shall have the pleasure another time,” said the countess; “you
 promise that?”
 
monte cristo inclined himself without answering, but the gesture might
 pass for assent.
 
“i will not detain you, monsieur,” continued the countess; “i would not
 have our gratitude become indiscreet or importunate.”
 
“my dear count,” said albert, “i will endeavor to return your
 politeness at rome, and place my coupé at your disposal until your own
 be ready.”
 
“a thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount,” returned the count of
 monte cristo “but i suppose that m. bertuccio has suitably employed the
 four hours and half i have given him, and that i shall find a
 carriage of some sort ready at the door.”
 
albert was used to the count’s manner of proceeding; knew that, like
 nero, was in search of the impossible, and nothing astonished him,
 but wishing to judge with his own eyes how far the count’s orders had
 been executed, accompanied him to the door of the house. monte
 cristo was not deceived. as soon as appeared in the count of
 morcerf’s antechamber, footman, the same who at rome had brought the
 count’s card to the two young men, and announced his visit, sprang into
 the vestibule, and when arrived at the door the illustrious
 traveller found his carriage awaiting him. it was _coupé_ of koller’s
 building, and with horses and harness for which drake had, to the
 knowledge of all the lions of paris, refused on the previous day seven
 hundred guineas.
 
“monsieur,” said the count to albert, “i do not ask you to accompany me
 to my house, as i can only show you habitation fitted up in hurry,
 and i have, as you know, reputation to keep up as regards not being
 taken by surprise. give me, therefore, one more day before i invite
 you; i shall then be certain not to fail in my hospitality.”
 
“if you ask for day, count, i know what to anticipate; it will not
 be house i shall see, but palace. you have decidedly some genius at
 your control.”
 
“_ma foi_, spread that idea,” replied the count of monte cristo,
 putting his foot on the velvet-lined steps of his splendid carriage,
 “and that will be worth something to among the ladies.”
 
as spoke, sprang into the vehicle, the door was closed, but not
 so rapidly that monte cristo failed to perceive the almost
 imperceptible movement which stirred the curtains of the apartment in
 which had left madame morcerf.
 
when albert returned to his mother, found her in the boudoir
 reclining in large velvet armchair, the whole room so obscure that
 only the shining spangle, fastened here and there to the drapery, and
 the angles of the gilded frames of the pictures, showed with some
 degree of brightness in the gloom. albert could not see the face of the
 countess, as it was covered with thin veil she had put on her head,
 and which fell over her features in misty folds, but it seemed to him
 as though her voice had altered. could distinguish amid the perfumes
 of the roses and heliotropes in the flower-stands, the sharp and
 fragrant odor of volatile salts, and noticed in one of the chased
 cups on the mantle-piece the countess’s smelling-bottle, taken from its
 shagreen case, and exclaimed in tone of uneasiness, as entered:
 
“my dear mother, have you been ill during my absence?”
 
“no, no, albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, and
 orange-flowers throw out at first, before one is used to them, such
 violent perfumes.”
 
“then, my dear mother,” said albert, putting his hand to the bell,
 “they must be taken into the antechamber. you are really ill, and just
 now were so pale as you came into the room——”
 
“was i pale, albert?”
 
“yes; pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but which did not the
 less alarm my father and myself.”
 
“did your father speak of it?” inquired mercédès eagerly.
 
“no, madame; but do you not remember that spoke of the fact to you?”
 
20269m
 


“yes, i do remember,” replied the countess.
 
servant entered, summoned by albert’s ring of the bell.
 
“take these flowers into the anteroom or dressing-room,” said the
 viscount; “they make the countess ill.”
 
the footman obeyed his orders. long pause ensued, which lasted until
 all the flowers were removed.
 
“what is this name of monte cristo?” inquired the countess, when the
 servant had taken away the last vase of flowers, “is it family name,
 or the name of the estate, or simple title?”
 
“i believe, mother, it is merely title. the count purchased an island
 in the tuscan archipelago, and, as told you today, has founded a
 commandery. you know the same thing was done for saint stephen of
 florence, saint george constantinian of parma, and even for the order
 of malta. except this, has pretension to nobility, and calls
 himself chance count, although the general opinion at rome is that
 the count is man of very high distinction.”
 
“his manners are admirable,” said the countess, “at least, as far as i
 could judge in the few minutes remained here.”
 
“they are perfect mother, so perfect, that they surpass by far all i
 have known in the leading aristocracy of the three proudest nobilities
 of europe—the english, the spanish, and the german.”
 
the countess paused moment; then, after slight hesitation, she
 resumed.
 
“you have seen, my dear albert—i ask the question as mother—you have
 seen m. monte cristo in his house, you are quicksighted, have much
 knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at your age, do you
 think the count is really what appears to be?”
 
“what does appear to be?”
 
“why, you have just said,—a man of high distinction.”
 
“i told you, my dear mother, was esteemed such.”
 
“but what is your own opinion, albert?”
 
“i must tell you that i have not come to any decided opinion respecting
 him, but i think him maltese.”
 
“i do not ask you of his origin but what is.”
 
“ah! what is; that is quite another thing. i have seen so many
 remarkable things in him, that if you would have really say what i
 think, i shall reply that i really do look upon him as one of byron’s
 heroes, whom misery has marked with fatal brand; some manfred, some
 lara, some werner, one of those wrecks, as it were, of some ancient
 family, who, disinherited of their patrimony, have achieved one by the
 force of their adventurous genius, which has placed them above the laws
 of society.”
 
“you say——”
 
“i say that monte cristo is an island in the midst of the
 mediterranean, without inhabitants or garrison, the resort of smugglers
 of all nations, and pirates of every flag. who knows whether or not
 these industrious worthies do not pay to their feudal lord some dues
 for his protection?”
 
“that is possible,” said the countess, reflecting.
 
“never mind,” continued the young man, “smuggler or not, you must
 agree, mother dear, as you have seen him, that the count of monte
 cristo is remarkable man, who will have the greatest success in the
 salons of paris. why, this very morning, in my rooms, made his
 _entrée_ amongst us by striking every man of us with amazement, not
 even excepting château-renaud.”
 
“and what do you suppose is the count’s age?” inquired mercédès,
 evidently attaching great importance to this question.
 
“thirty-five or thirty-six, mother.”
 
“so young,—it is impossible,” said mercédès, replying at the same time
 to what albert said as well as to her own private reflection.
 
“it is the truth, however. three or four times has said to me, and
 certainly without the slightest premeditation, ‘at such period i was
 five years old, at another ten years old, at another twelve,’ and i,
 induced by curiosity, which kept alive to these details, have
 compared the dates, and never found him inaccurate. the age of this
 singular man, who is of age, is then, i am certain, thirty-five.
 besides, mother, remark how vivid his eye, how raven-black his hair,
 and his brow, though so pale, is free from wrinkles,—he is not only
 vigorous, but also young.”
 
the countess bent her head, as if beneath heavy wave of bitter
 thoughts.
 
“and has this man displayed friendship for you, albert?” she asked
 with nervous shudder.
 
“i am inclined to think so.”
 
“and—do—you—like—him?”
 
“why, pleases in spite of franz d’Épinay, who tries to convince
 that is being returned from the other world.”
 
the countess shuddered.
 
“albert,” she said, in voice which was altered by emotion, “i have
 always put you on your guard against new acquaintances. now you are a
 man, and are able to give advice; yet i repeat to you, albert, be
 prudent.”
 
“why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make your advice
 turn to account, that i should know beforehand what i have to distrust.
 the count never plays, only drinks pure water tinged with little
 sherry, and is so rich that cannot, without intending to laugh at
 me, try to borrow money. what, then, have i to fear from him?”
 
“you are right,” said the countess, “and my fears are weakness,
 especially when directed against man who has saved your life. how did
 your father receive him, albert? it is necessary that we should be more
 than complaisant to the count. m. morcerf is sometimes occupied, his
 business makes him reflective, and might, without intending it——”
 
“nothing could be in better taste than my father’s demeanor, madame,”
 said albert; “nay, more, seemed greatly flattered at two or three
 compliments which the count very skilfully and agreeably paid him with
 as much ease as if had known him these thirty years. each of these
 little tickling arrows must have pleased my father,” added albert with
 laugh. “and thus they parted the best possible friends, and m. de
 morcerf even wished to take him to the chamber to hear the speakers.”
 
the countess made reply. she fell into so deep reverie that her
 eyes gradually closed. the young man, standing up before her, gazed
 upon her with that filial affection which is so tender and endearing
 with children whose mothers are still young and handsome. then, after
 seeing her eyes closed, and hearing her breathe gently, believed she
 had dropped asleep, and left the apartment on tiptoe, closing the door
 after him with the utmost precaution.
 
“this devil of fellow,” muttered, shaking his head; “i said at the
 time would create sensation here, and i measure his effect by an
 infallible thermometer. my mother has noticed him, and must
 therefore, perforce, be remarkable.”
 
went down to the stables, not without some slight annoyance, when he
 remembered that the count of monte cristo had laid his hands on a
 “turnout” which sent his bays down to second place in the opinion of
 connoisseurs.
 
“most decidedly,” said he, “men are not equal, and i must beg my father
 to develop this theorem in the chamber of peers.”
 


chapter 42. monsieur bertuccio
 
meanwhile the count had arrived at his house; it had taken him six
 minutes to perform the distance, but these six minutes were sufficient
 to induce twenty young men who knew the price of the equipage they had
 been unable to purchase themselves, to put their horses in gallop in
 order to see the rich foreigner who could afford to give 20,000 francs
 apiece for his horses.
 
the house ali had chosen, and which was to serve as town residence to
 monte cristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend the
 champs-Élysées. thick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre,
 and masked portion of the front; around this shrubbery two alleys,
 like two arms, extended right and left, and formed carriage-drive
 from the iron gates to double portico, on every step of which stood a
 porcelain vase, filled with flowers. this house, isolated from the
 rest, had, besides the main entrance, another in the rue ponthieu.
 even before the coachman had hailed the _concierge_, the massy gates
 rolled on their hinges—they had seen the count coming, and at paris, as
 everywhere else, was served with the rapidity of lightning. the
 coachman entered and traversed the half-circle without slackening his
 speed, and the gates were closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on
 the gravel. the carriage stopped at the left side of the portico, two
 men presented themselves at the carriage-window; the one was ali, who,
 smiling with an expression of the most sincere joy, seemed amply repaid
 by mere look from monte cristo. the other bowed respectfully, and
 offered his arm to assist the count in descending.
 
“thanks, m. bertuccio,” said the count, springing lightly up the three
 steps of the portico; “and the notary?”
 
“he is in the small salon, excellency,” returned bertuccio.
 
“and the cards i ordered to be engraved as soon as you knew the number
 of the house?”
 
“your excellency, it is done already. i have been myself to the best
 engraver of the palais royal, who did the plate in my presence. the
 first card struck off was taken, according to your orders, to the baron
 danglars, rue chaussée d’antin, no. 7; the others are on the
 mantle-piece of your excellency’s bedroom.”
 
“good; what o’clock is it?”
 
“four o’clock.”
 
monte cristo gave his hat, cane, and gloves to the same french footman
 who had called his carriage at the count of morcerf’s, and then he
 passed into the small salon, preceded by bertuccio, who showed him the
 way.
 
“these are but indifferent marbles in this antechamber,” said monte
 cristo. “i trust all this will soon be taken away.”
 
bertuccio bowed. as the steward had said, the notary awaited him in the
 small salon. was simple-looking lawyer’s clerk, elevated to the
 extraordinary dignity of provincial scrivener.
 
“you are the notary empowered to sell the country house that i wish to
 purchase, monsieur?” asked monte cristo.
 
“yes, count,” returned the notary.
 
“is the deed of sale ready?”
 
“yes, count.”
 
“have you brought it?”
 
“here it is.”
 
“very well; and where is this house that i purchase?” asked the count
 carelessly, addressing himself half to bertuccio, half to the notary.
 the steward made gesture that signified, “i do not know.” the notary
 looked at the count with astonishment.
 
“what!” said he, “does not the count know where the house purchases
 is situated?”
 
“no,” returned the count.
 
“the count does not know?”
 
“how should i know? i have arrived from cadiz this morning. i have
 never before been at paris, and it is the first time i have ever even
 set my foot in france.”
 
“ah, that is different; the house you purchase is at auteuil.”
 
at these words bertuccio turned pale.
 
“and where is auteuil?” asked the count.
 
“close by here, monsieur,” replied the notary—“a little beyond passy; a
 charming situation, in the heart of the bois boulogne.”
 
“so near as that?” said the count; “but that is not in the country.
 what made you choose house at the gates of paris, m. bertuccio?”
 
“i,” cried the steward with strange expression. “his excellency did
 not charge to purchase this house. if his excellency will
 recollect—if will think——”
 
“ah, true,” observed monte cristo; “i recollect now. i read the
 advertisement in one of the papers, and was tempted by the false title,
 ‘a country house.’”
 
“it is not yet too late,” cried bertuccio, eagerly; “and if your
 excellency will intrust with the commission, i will find you a
 better at enghien, at fontenay-aux-roses, or at bellevue.”
 
“oh, no,” returned monte cristo negligently; “since i have this, i will
 keep it.”
 
“and you are quite right,” said the notary, who feared to lose his fee.
 “it is charming place, well supplied with spring-water and fine
 trees; comfortable habitation, although abandoned for long time,
 without reckoning the furniture, which, although old, is yet valuable,
 now that old things are so much sought after. i suppose the count has
 the tastes of the day?”
 
“to be sure,” returned monte cristo; “it is very convenient, then?”
 
“it is more—it is magnificent.”
 
“_peste!_ let us not lose such an opportunity,” returned monte cristo.
 “the deed, if you please, mr. notary.”
 
and signed it rapidly, after having first run his eye over that part
 of the deed in which were specified the situation of the house and the
 names of the proprietors.
 
“bertuccio,” said he, “give fifty-five thousand francs to monsieur.”
 
the steward left the room with faltering step, and returned with a
 bundle of bank-notes, which the notary counted like man who never
 gives receipt for money until after is sure it is all there.
 
“and now,” demanded the count, “are all the forms complied with?”
 
“all, sir.”
 
“have you the keys?”
 
“they are in the hands of the concierge, who takes care of the house,
 but here is the order i have given him to install the count in his new
 possessions.”
 
“very well;” and monte cristo made sign with his hand to the notary,
 which said, “i have further need of you; you may go.”
 
“but,” observed the honest notary, “the count is, i think, mistaken; it
 is only fifty thousand francs, everything included.”
 
“and your fee?”
 
“is included in this sum.”
 
“but have you not come from auteuil here?”
 
“yes, certainly.”
 
“well, then, it is but fair that you should be paid for your loss of
 time and trouble,” said the count; and made gesture of polite
 dismissal.
 
the notary left the room backwards, and bowing down to the ground; it
 was the first time had ever met similar client.
 
“see this gentleman out,” said the count to bertuccio. and the steward
 followed the notary out of the room.
 
scarcely was the count alone, when drew from his pocket book
 closed with lock, and opened it with key which wore round his
 neck, and which never left him. after having sought for few minutes,
 stopped at leaf which had several notes, and compared them with
 the deed of sale, which lay on the table, and recalling his
 _souvenirs_—
 
“‘auteuil, rue fontaine, no. 28;’ it is indeed the same,” said
 he; “and now, am i to rely upon an avowal extorted by religious or
 physical terror? however, in an hour i shall know all. bertuccio!”
 cried he, striking light hammer with pliant handle on small gong.
 “bertuccio!”
 
the steward appeared at the door.
 
“monsieur bertuccio,” said the count, “did you never tell that you
 had travelled in france?”
 
“in some parts of france—yes, excellency.”
 
“you know the environs of paris, then?”
 
“no, excellency, no,” returned the steward, with sort of nervous
 trembling, which monte cristo, connoisseur in all emotions, rightly
 attributed to great disquietude.
 
“it is unfortunate,” returned he, “that you have never visited the
 environs, for i wish to see my new property this evening, and had you
 gone with me, you could have given some useful information.”
 
“to auteuil!” cried bertuccio, whose copper complexion became livid—“i
 go to auteuil?”
 
“well, what is there surprising in that? when i live at auteuil, you
 must come there, as you belong to my service.”
 
bertuccio hung down his head before the imperious look of his master,
 and remained motionless, without making any answer.
 
“why, what has happened to you?—are you going to make ring second
 time for the carriage?” asked monte cristo, in the same tone that louis
 xiv. pronounced the famous, “i have been almost obliged to wait.”
 bertuccio made but one bound to the antechamber, and cried in hoarse
 voice:
 
“his excellency’s horses!”
 
monte cristo wrote two or three notes, and, as sealed the last, the
 steward appeared.
 
“your excellency’s carriage is at the door,” said he.
 
“well, take your hat and gloves,” returned monte cristo.
 
“am i to accompany you, your excellency?” cried bertuccio.
 
“certainly, you must give the orders, for i intend residing at the
 house.”
 
20277m
 


it was unexampled for servant of the count’s to dare to dispute an
 order of his, so the steward, without saying word, followed his
 master, who got into the carriage, and signed to him to follow, which
 did, taking his place respectfully on the front seat.
 


chapter 43. the house at auteuil
 
monte cristo noticed, as they descended the staircase, that bertuccio
 signed himself in the corsican manner; that is, had formed the sign of
 the cross in the air with his thumb, and as seated himself in the
 carriage, muttered short prayer. anyone but man of exhaustless
 thirst for knowledge would have had pity on seeing the steward’s
 extraordinary repugnance for the count’s projected drive without the
 walls; but the count was too curious to let bertuccio off from this
 little journey. in twenty minutes they were at auteuil; the steward’s
 emotion had continued to augment as they entered the village.
 bertuccio, crouched in the corner of the carriage, began to examine
 with feverish anxiety every house they passed.
 
“tell them to stop at rue fontaine, no. 28,” said the count,
 fixing his eyes on the steward, to whom gave this order.
 
bertuccio’s forehead was covered with perspiration; however, obeyed,
 and, leaning out of the window, cried to the coachman,—“rue la
 fontaine, no. 28.” no. 28 was situated at the extremity of the village;
 during the drive night had set in, and darkness gave the surroundings
 the artificial appearance of scene on the stage. the carriage
 stopped, the footman sprang off the box and opened the door.
 
“well,” said the count, “you do not get out, m. bertuccio—you are going
 to stay in the carriage, then? what are you thinking of this evening?”
 
bertuccio sprang out, and offered his shoulder to the count, who, this
 time, leaned upon it as descended the three steps of the carriage.
 
“knock,” said the count, “and announce me.”
 
bertuccio knocked, the door opened, and the concierge appeared.
 
“what is it?” asked he.
 
“it is your new master, my good fellow,” said the footman. and held
 out to the concierge the notary’s order.
 
“the house is sold, then?” demanded the concierge; “and this gentleman
 is coming to live here?”
 
“yes, my friend,” returned the count; “and i will endeavor to give you
 cause to regret your old master.”
 
“oh, monsieur,” said the concierge, “i shall not have much cause to
 regret him, for came here but seldom; it is five years since was
 here last, and did well to sell the house, for it did not bring him
 in anything at all.”
 
“what was the name of your old master?” said monte cristo.
 
“the marquis of saint-méran. ah, i am sure has not sold the house
 for what gave for it.”
 
“the marquis of saint-méran!” returned the count. “the name is not
 unknown to me; the marquis of saint-méran!” and appeared to
 meditate.
 
“an old gentleman,” continued the concierge, “a staunch follower of the
 bourbons; had an only daughter, who married m. villefort, who had
 been the king’s attorney at nîmes, and afterwards at versailles.”
 
monte cristo glanced at bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall
 against which leaned to prevent himself from falling.
 
“and is not this daughter dead?” demanded monte cristo; “i fancy i have
 heard so.”
 
“yes, monsieur, one-and-twenty years ago; and since then we have not
 seen the poor marquis three times.”
 
“thanks, thanks,” said monte cristo, judging from the steward’s utter
 prostration that could not stretch the cord further without danger
 of breaking it. “give light.”
 
“shall i accompany you, monsieur?”
 
“no, it is unnecessary; bertuccio will show light.”
 
and monte cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two gold
 pieces, which produced torrent of thanks and blessings from the
 concierge.
 
“ah, monsieur,” said he, after having vainly searched on the
 mantle-piece and the shelves, “i have not got any candles.”
 
“take one of the carriage-lamps, bertuccio,” said the count, “and show
 the apartments.”
 
the steward obeyed in silence, but it was easy to see, from the manner
 in which the hand that held the light trembled, how much it cost him to
 obey. they went over tolerably large ground floor; first floor
 consisted of salon, bathroom, and two bedrooms; near one of the
 bedrooms they came to winding staircase that led down to the garden.
 
“ah, here is private staircase,” said the count; “that is convenient.
 light me, m. bertuccio, and go first; we will see where it leads to.”
 
“monsieur,” replied bertuccio, “it leads to the garden.”
 
“and, pray, how do you know that?”
 
“it ought to do so, at least.”
 
“well, let us be sure of that.”
 
bertuccio sighed, and went on first; the stairs did, indeed, lead to
 the garden. at the outer door the steward paused.
 
“go on, monsieur bertuccio,” said the count.
 
but who was addressed stood there, stupefied, bewildered, stunned;
 his haggard eyes glanced around, as if in search of the traces of some
 terrible event, and with his clenched hands seemed striving to shut
 out horrible recollections.
 
“well!” insisted the count.
 
“no, no,” cried bertuccio, setting down the lantern at the angle of the
 interior wall. “no, monsieur, it is impossible; i can go farther.”
 
“what does this mean?” demanded the irresistible voice of monte cristo.
 
“why, you must see, your excellency,” cried the steward, “that this is
 not natural; that, having house to purchase, you purchase it exactly
 at auteuil, and that, purchasing it at auteuil, this house should be
 no. 28, rue fontaine. oh, why did i not tell you all? i am sure
 you would not have forced to come. i hoped your house would have
 been some other one than this; as if there was not another house at
 auteuil than that of the assassination!”
 
“what, what!” cried monte cristo, stopping suddenly, “what words do you
 utter? devil of man, corsican that you are—always mysteries or
 superstitions. come, take the lantern, and let us visit the garden; you
 are not afraid of ghosts with me, i hope?”
 
bertuccio raised the lantern, and obeyed. the door, as it opened,
 disclosed gloomy sky, in which the moon strove vainly to struggle
 through of clouds that covered her with billows of vapor which
 she illumined for an instant, only to sink into obscurity. the steward
 wished to turn to the left.
 
“no, no, monsieur,” said monte cristo. “what is the use of following
 the alleys? here is beautiful lawn; let us go on straight forwards.”
 
bertuccio wiped the perspiration from his brow, but obeyed; however, he
 continued to take the left hand. monte cristo, on the contrary, took
 the right hand; arrived near clump of trees, stopped. the steward
 could not restrain himself.
 
“move, monsieur—move away, i entreat you; you are exactly in the spot!”
 
“what spot?”
 
“where fell.”
 
20281m
 


“my dear monsieur bertuccio,” said monte cristo, laughing, “control
 yourself; we are not at sartène or at corte. this is not corsican
 _maquis_ but an english garden; badly kept, i own, but still you must
 not calumniate it for that.”
 
“monsieur, i implore you do not stay there!”
 
“i think you are going mad, bertuccio,” said the count coldly. “if that
 is the case, i warn you, i shall have you put in lunatic asylum.”
 
“alas! excellency,” returned bertuccio, joining his hands, and shaking
 his head in manner that would have excited the count’s laughter, had
 not thoughts of superior interest occupied him, and rendered him
 attentive to the least revelation of this timorous conscience. “alas!
 excellency, the evil has arrived!”
 
“m. bertuccio,” said the count, “i am very glad to tell you, that while
 you gesticulate, you wring your hands and roll your eyes like man
 possessed by devil who will not leave him; and i have always
 observed, that the devil most obstinate to be expelled is secret. i
 knew you were corsican. i knew you were gloomy, and always brooding
 over some old history of the vendetta; and i overlooked that in italy,
 because in italy those things are thought nothing of. but in france
 they are considered in very bad taste; there are gendarmes who occupy
 themselves with such affairs, judges who condemn, and scaffolds which
 avenge.”
 
bertuccio clasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, did
 not let fall the lantern, the light showed his pale and altered
 countenance. monte cristo examined him with the same look that, at
 rome, had bent upon the execution of andrea, and then, in tone
 that made shudder pass through the veins of the poor steward—
 
“the abbé busoni, then told an untruth,” said he, “when, after his
 journey in france, in 1829, sent you to me, with letter of
 recommendation, in which enumerated all your valuable qualities.
 well, i shall write to the abbé; i shall hold him responsible for his
 _protégé’s_ misconduct, and i shall soon know all about this
 assassination. only i warn you, that when i reside in country, i
 conform to all its code, and i have wish to put myself within the
 compass of the french laws for your sake.”
 
“oh, do not do that, excellency; i have always served you faithfully,”
 cried bertuccio, in despair. “i have always been an honest man, and, as
 far as lay in my power, i have done good.”
 
“i do not deny it,” returned the count; “but why are you thus agitated.
 it is bad sign; quiet conscience does not occasion such paleness in
 the cheeks, and such fever in the hands of man.”
 
“but, your excellency,” replied bertuccio hesitatingly, “did not the
 abbé busoni, who heard my confession in the prison at nîmes, tell you
 that i had heavy burden upon my conscience?”
 
“yes; but as said you would make an excellent steward, i concluded
 you had stolen—that was all.”
 
“oh, your excellency!” returned bertuccio in deep contempt.
 
“or, as you are corsican, that you had been unable to resist the
 desire of making ‘stiff,’ as you call it.”
 
“yes, my good master,” cried bertuccio, casting himself at the count’s
 feet, “it was simply vengeance—nothing else.”
 
“i understand that, but i do not understand what it is that galvanizes
 you in this manner.”
 
“but, monsieur, it is very natural,” returned bertuccio, “since it was
 in this house that my vengeance was accomplished.”
 
“what! my house?”
 
“oh, your excellency, it was not yours, then.”
 
“whose, then? the marquis saint-méran, i think, the concierge said.
 what had you to revenge on the marquis saint-méran?”
 
“oh, it was not on him, monsieur; it was on another.”
 
“this is strange,” returned monte cristo, seeming to yield to his
 reflections, “that you should find yourself without any preparation in
 house where the event happened that causes you so much remorse.”
 
“monsieur,” said the steward, “it is fatality, i am sure. first, you
 purchase house at auteuil—this house is the one where i have
 committed an assassination; you descend to the garden by the same
 staircase by which descended; you stop at the spot where received
 the blow; and two paces farther is the grave in which had just
 buried his child. this is not chance, for chance, in this case, is too
 much like providence.”
 
“well, amiable corsican, let us suppose it is providence. i always
 suppose anything people please, and, besides, you must concede
 something to diseased minds. come, collect yourself, and tell all.”
 
“i have related it but once, and that was to the abbé busoni. such
 things,” continued bertuccio, shaking his head, “are only related under
 the seal of confession.”
 
“then,” said the count, “i refer you to your confessor. turn chartreux
 or trappist, and relate your secrets, but, as for me, i do not like
 anyone who is alarmed by such phantasms, and i do not choose that my
 servants should be afraid to walk in the garden of an evening. i
 confess i am not very desirous of visit from the commissary of
 police, for, in italy, justice is only paid when silent—in france she
 is paid only when she speaks. _peste!_ i thought you somewhat corsican,
 great deal smuggler, and an excellent steward; but i see you have
 other strings to your bow. you are longer in my service, monsieur
 bertuccio.”
 
“oh, your excellency, your excellency!” cried the steward, struck with
 terror at this threat, “if that is the only reason i cannot remain in
 your service, i will tell all, for if i quit you, it will only be to go
 to the scaffold.”
 
“that is different,” replied monte cristo; “but if you intend to tell
 an untruth, reflect it were better not to speak at all.”
 
“no, monsieur, i swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, i will tell
 you all, for the abbé busoni himself only knew part of my secret;
 but, i pray you, go away from that plane-tree. the moon is just
 bursting through the clouds, and there, standing where you do, and
 wrapped in that cloak that conceals your figure, you remind of m. de
 villefort.”
 
“what!” cried monte cristo, “it was m. villefort?”
 
“your excellency knows him?”
 
“the former royal attorney at nîmes?”
 
“yes.”
 
“who married the marquis of saint-méran’s daughter?”
 
“yes.”
 
“who enjoyed the reputation of being the most severe, the most upright,
 the most rigid magistrate on the bench?”
 
“well, monsieur,” said bertuccio, “this man with this spotless
 reputation——”
 
“well?”
 
“was villain.”
 
“bah,” replied monte cristo, “impossible!”
 
“it is as i tell you.”
 
“ah, really,” said monte cristo. “have you proof of this?”
 
“i had it.”
 
“and you have lost it; how stupid!”
 
“yes; but by careful search it might be recovered.”
 
“really,” returned the count, “relate it to me, for it begins to
 interest me.”
 
and the count, humming an air from _lucia_, went to sit down on a
 bench, while bertuccio followed him, collecting his thoughts. bertuccio
 remained standing before him.
 
20285m
 



chapter 44. the vendetta
 
at what point shall i begin my story, your excellency?” asked
 bertuccio.
 
“where you please,” returned monte cristo, “since i know nothing at all
 of it.”
 
“i thought the abbé busoni had told your excellency.”
 
“some particulars, doubtless, but that is seven or eight years ago, and
 i have forgotten them.”
 
“then i can speak without fear of tiring your excellency.”
 
“go on, m. bertuccio; you will supply the want of the evening papers.”
 
“the story begins in 1815.”
 
“ah,” said monte cristo, “1815 is not yesterday.”
 
“no, monsieur, and yet i recollect all things as clearly as if they had
 happened but then. i had brother, an elder brother, who was in the
 service of the emperor; had become lieutenant in regiment composed
 entirely of corsicans. this brother was my only friend; we became
 orphans—i at five, at eighteen. brought up as if i had been
 his son, and in 1814 married. when the emperor returned from the
 island of elba, my brother instantly joined the army, was slightly
 wounded at waterloo, and retired with the army beyond the loire.”
 
“but that is the history of the hundred days, m. bertuccio,” said the
 count; “unless i am mistaken, it has been already written.”
 
“excuse me, excellency, but these details are necessary, and you
 promised to be patient.”
 
“go on; i will keep my word.”
 
“one day we received letter. i should tell you that we lived in the
 little village of rogliano, at the extremity of cap corse. this letter
 was from my brother. told us that the army was disbanded, and that
 should return by châteauroux, clermont-ferrand, puy, and nîmes;
 and, if i had any money, prayed to leave it for him at nîmes,
 with an innkeeper with whom i had dealings.”
 
“in the smuggling line?” said monte cristo.
 
“eh, your excellency? everyone must live.”
 
“certainly; go on.”
 
“i loved my brother tenderly, as i told your excellency, and i resolved
 not to send the money, but to take it to him myself. i possessed a
 thousand francs. i left five hundred with assunta, my sister-in-law,
 and with the other five hundred i set off for nîmes. it was easy to do
 so, and as i had my boat and lading to take in at sea, everything
 favored my project. but, after we had taken in our cargo, the wind
 became contrary, so that we were four or five days without being able
 to enter the rhône. at last, however, we succeeded, and worked up to
 arles. i left the boat between bellegarde and beaucaire, and took the
 road to nîmes.”
 
“we are getting to the story now?”
 
“yes, your excellency; excuse me, but, as you will see, i only tell you
 what is absolutely necessary. just at this time the famous massacres
 took place in the south of france. three brigands, called trestaillon,
 truphemy, and graffan, publicly assassinated everybody whom they
 suspected of bonapartism. you have doubtless heard of these massacres,
 your excellency?”
 
“vaguely; i was far from france at that period. go on.”
 
“as i entered nîmes, i literally waded in blood; at every step you
 encountered dead bodies and bands of murderers, who killed, plundered,
 and burned. at the sight of this slaughter and devastation i became
 terrified, not for myself—for i, simple corsican fisherman, had
 nothing to fear; on the contrary, that time was most favorable for us
 smugglers—but for my brother, soldier of the empire, returning from
 the army of the loire, with his uniform and his epaulets, there was
 everything to apprehend. i hastened to the innkeeper. my misgivings had
 been but too true. my brother had arrived the previous evening at
 nîmes, and, at the very door of the house where was about to demand
 hospitality, had been assassinated. i did all in my power to
 discover the murderers, but one durst tell their names, so much
 were they dreaded. i then thought of that french justice of which i had
 heard so much, and which feared nothing, and i went to the king’s
 attorney.”
 
“and this king’s attorney was named villefort?” asked monte cristo
 carelessly.
 
“yes, your excellency; came from marseilles, where had been
 deputy procureur. his zeal had procured him advancement, and was
 said to be one of the first who had informed the government of the
 departure from the island of elba.”
 
“then,” said monte cristo “you went to him?”
 
“‘monsieur,’ i said, ‘my brother was assassinated yesterday in the
 streets of nîmes, i know not by whom, but it is your duty to find out.
 you are the representative of justice here, and it is for justice to
 avenge those she has been unable to protect.’
 
“‘who was your brother?’ asked he.
 
“‘a lieutenant in the corsican battalion.’
 
“‘a soldier of the usurper, then?’
 
“‘a soldier of the french army.’
 
“‘well,’ replied he, ‘he has smitten with the sword, and has
 perished by the sword.’
 
“‘you are mistaken, monsieur,’ i replied; ‘he has perished by the
 poniard.’
 
“‘what do you want to do?’ asked the magistrate.
 
“‘i have already told you—avenge him.’
 
“‘on whom?’
 
“‘on his murderers.’
 
“‘how should i know who they are?’
 
“‘order them to be sought for.’
 
“‘why, your brother has been involved in quarrel, and killed in a
 duel. all these old soldiers commit excesses which were tolerated in
 the time of the emperor, but which are not suffered now, for the people
 here do not like soldiers of such disorderly conduct.’
 
“‘monsieur,’ i replied, ‘it is not for myself that i entreat your
 interference—i should grieve for him or avenge him, but my poor brother
 had wife, and were anything to happen to me, the poor creature would
 perish from want, for my brother’s pay alone kept her. pray, try and
 obtain small government pension for her.’
 
“‘every revolution has its catastrophes,’ returned m. villefort;
 ‘your brother has been the victim of this. it is misfortune, and
 government owes nothing to his family. if we are to judge by all the
 vengeance that the followers of the usurper exercised on the partisans
 of the king, when, in their turn, they were in power, your brother
 would be today, in all probability, condemned to death. what has
 happened is quite natural, and in conformity with the law of
 reprisals.’
 
“‘what,’ cried i, ‘do you, magistrate, speak thus to me?’
 
“‘all these corsicans are mad, on my honor,’ replied m. villefort;
 ‘they fancy that their countryman is still emperor. you have mistaken
 the time, you should have told this two months ago, it is too late
 now. go now, at once, or i shall have you put out.’
 
“i looked at him an instant to see if there was anything to hope from
 further entreaty. but was man of stone. i approached him, and said
 in low voice, ‘well, since you know the corsicans so well, you know
 that they always keep their word. you think that it was good deed to
 kill my brother, who was bonapartist, because you are royalist.
 well, i, who am bonapartist also, declare one thing to you, which is,
 that i will kill you. from this moment i declare the vendetta against
 you, so protect yourself as well as you can, for the next time we meet
 your last hour has come.’ and before had recovered from his
 surprise, i opened the door and left the room.”
 
“well, well,” said monte cristo, “such an innocent looking person as
 you are to do those things, m. bertuccio, and to king’s attorney at
 that! but did know what was meant by the terrible word ‘vendetta’?”
 
“he knew so well, that from that moment shut himself in his house,
 and never went out unattended, seeking high and low. fortunately, i
 was so well concealed that could not find me. then became
 alarmed, and dared not stay any longer at nîmes, so solicited a
 change of residence, and, as was in reality very influential, was
 nominated to versailles. but, as you know, corsican who has sworn to
 avenge himself cares not for distance, so his carriage, fast as it
 went, was never above half day’s journey before me, who followed him
 on foot. the most important thing was, not to kill him only—for i had
 an opportunity of doing so hundred times—but to kill him without
 being discovered—at least, without being arrested. i longer belonged
 to myself, for i had my sister-in-law to protect and provide for.
 
“for three months i watched m. villefort, for three months took
 not step out-of-doors without my following him. at length i
 discovered that went mysteriously to auteuil. i followed him
 thither, and i saw him enter the house where we now are, only, instead
 of entering by the great door that looks into the street, came on
 horseback, or in his carriage, left the one or the other at the little
 inn, and entered by the gate you see there.”
 
monte cristo made sign with his head to show that could discern in
 the darkness the door to which bertuccio alluded.
 
“as i had nothing more to do at versailles, i went to auteuil, and
 gained all the information i could. if i wished to surprise him, it was
 evident this was the spot to lie in wait for him. the house belonged,
 as the concierge informed your excellency, to m. saint-méran,
 villefort’s father-in-law. m. saint-méran lived at marseilles, so
 that this country house was useless to him, and it was reported to be
 let to young widow, known only by the name of ‘the baroness.’
 
“one evening, as i was looking over the wall, i saw young and
 handsome woman who was walking alone in that garden, which was not
 overlooked by any windows, and i guessed that she was awaiting m. de
 villefort. when she was sufficiently near for to distinguish her
 features, i saw she was from eighteen to nineteen, tall and very fair.
 as she had loose muslin dress on and as nothing concealed her figure,
 i saw she would ere long become mother. few moments after, the
 little door was opened and man entered. the young woman hastened to
 meet him. they threw themselves into each other’s arms, embraced
 tenderly, and returned together to the house. the man was m. de
 villefort; i fully believed that when went out in the night would
 be forced to traverse the whole of the garden alone.”
 
20291m
 


“and,” asked the count, “did you ever know the name of this woman?”
 
“no, excellency,” returned bertuccio; “you will see that i had time
 to learn it.”
 
“go on.”
 
“that evening,” continued bertuccio, “i could have killed the
 procureur, but as i was not sufficiently acquainted with the
 neighborhood, i was fearful of not killing him on the spot, and that if
 his cries were overheard i might be taken; so i put it off until the
 next occasion, and in order that nothing should escape me, i took a
 chamber looking into the street bordered by the wall of the garden.
 three days after, about seven o’clock in the evening, i saw servant
 on horseback leave the house at full gallop, and take the road to
 sèvres. i concluded that was going to versailles, and i was not
 deceived. three hours later, the man returned covered with dust, his
 errand was performed, and two minutes after, another man on foot,
 muffled in mantle, opened the little door of the garden, which he
 closed after him. i descended rapidly; although i had not seen
 villefort’s face, i recognized him by the beating of my heart. i
 crossed the street, and stopped at post placed at the angle of the
 wall, and by means of which i had once before looked into the garden.
 
“this time i did not content myself with looking, but i took my knife
 out of my pocket, felt that the point was sharp, and sprang over the
 wall. my first care was to run to the door; had left the key in it,
 taking the simple precaution of turning it twice in the lock. nothing,
 then, preventing my escape by this means, i examined the grounds. the
 garden was long and narrow; stretch of smooth turf extended down the
 middle, and at the corners were clumps of trees with thick and massy
 foliage, that made background for the shrubs and flowers. in order to
 go from the door to the house, or from the house to the door, m. de
 villefort would be obliged to pass by one of these clumps of trees.
 
20293m
 


“it was the end of september; the wind blew violently. the faint
 glimpses of the pale moon, hidden momentarily by masses of dark clouds
 that were sweeping across the sky, whitened the gravel walks that led
 to the house, but were unable to pierce the obscurity of the thick
 shrubberies, in which man could conceal himself without any fear of
 discovery. i hid myself in the one nearest to the path villefort must
 take, and scarcely was i there when, amidst the gusts of wind, i
 fancied i heard groans; but you know, or rather you do not know, your
 excellency, that who is about to commit an assassination fancies
 that hears low cries perpetually ringing in his ears. two hours
 passed thus, during which i imagined i heard moans repeatedly. midnight
 struck. as the last stroke died away, i saw faint light shine through
 the windows of the private staircase by which we have just descended.
 the door opened, and the man in the mantle reappeared.
 
“the terrible moment had come, but i had so long been prepared for it
 that my heart did not fail in the least. i drew my knife from my pocket
 again, opened it, and made ready to strike. the man in the mantle
 advanced towards me, but as drew near i saw that had weapon in
 his hand. i was afraid, not of struggle, but of failure. when he
 was only few paces from me, i saw that what i had taken for weapon
 was only spade. i was still unable to divine for what reason m. de
 villefort had this spade in his hands, when stopped close to the
 thicket where i was, glanced round, and began to dig hole in the
 earth. i then perceived that was hiding something under his mantle,
 which laid on the grass in order to dig more freely. then, i
 confess, curiosity mingled with hatred; i wished to see what villefort
 was going to do there, and i remained motionless, holding my breath.
 then an idea crossed my mind, which was confirmed when i saw the
 procureur lift from under his mantle box, two feet long, and six or
 eight inches deep. i let him place the box in the hole had made,
 then, while stamped with his feet to remove all traces of his
 occupation, i rushed on him and plunged my knife into his breast,
 exclaiming:
 
“‘i am giovanni bertuccio; thy death for my brother’s; thy treasure for
 his widow; thou seest that my vengeance is more complete than i had
 hoped.’
 
“i know not if heard these words; i think did not, for fell
 without cry. i felt his blood gush over my face, but i was
 intoxicated, i was delirious, and the blood refreshed, instead of
 burning me. in second i had disinterred the box; then, that it might
 not be known i had done so, i filled up the hole, threw the spade over
 the wall, and rushed through the door, which i double-locked, carrying
 off the key.”
 
“ah,” said monte cristo “it seems to this was nothing but murder and
 robbery.”
 
“no, your excellency,” returned bertuccio; “it was vendetta followed
 by restitution.”
 
“and was the sum large one?”
 
“it was not money.”
 
“ah, i recollect,” replied the count; “did you not say something of an
 infant?”
 
“yes, excellency; i hastened to the river, sat down on the bank, and
 with my knife forced open the lock of the box. in fine linen cloth
 was wrapped new-born child. its purple visage, and its violet-colored
 hands showed that it had perished from suffocation, but as it was not
 yet cold, i hesitated to throw it into the water that ran at my feet.
 after moment i fancied that i felt slight pulsation of the heart,
 and as i had been assistant at the hospital at bastia, i did what a
 doctor would have done—i inflated the lungs by blowing air into them,
 and at the expiration of quarter of an hour, it began to breathe, and
 cried feebly. in my turn i uttered cry, but cry of joy.
 
“‘god has not cursed then,’ i cried, ‘since permits to save
 the life of human creature, in exchange for the life i have taken
 away.’”
 
20295m
 


“and what did you do with the child?” asked monte cristo. “it was an
 embarrassing load for man seeking to escape.”
 
“i had not for moment the idea of keeping it, but i knew that at
 paris there was an asylum where they receive such creatures. as i
 passed the city gates i declared that i had found the child on the
 road, and i inquired where the asylum was; the box confirmed my
 statement, the linen proved that the infant belonged to wealthy
 parents, the blood with which i was covered might have proceeded from
 the child as well as from anyone else. objection was raised, but
 they pointed out the asylum, which was situated at the upper end of the
 rue d’enfer, and after having taken the precaution of cutting the linen
 in two pieces, so that one of the two letters which marked it was on
 the piece wrapped around the child, while the other remained in my
 possession, i rang the bell, and fled with all speed. fortnight after
 i was at rogliano, and i said to assunta:
 
“‘console thyself, sister; israel is dead, but is avenged.’
 
“she demanded what i meant, and when i had told her all,—‘giovanni,’
 said she, ‘you should have brought this child with you; we would have
 replaced the parents it has lost, have called it benedetto, and then,
 in consequence of this good action, god would have blessed us.’ in
 reply i gave her the half of the linen i had kept in order to reclaim
 him if we became rich.”
 
“what letters were marked on the linen?” said monte cristo.
 
“an h and an n, surmounted by baron’s coronet.”
 
“by heaven, m. bertuccio, you make use of heraldic terms; where did you
 study heraldry?”
 
“in your service, excellency, where everything is learned.”
 
“go on, i am curious to know two things.”
 
“what are they, your excellency?”
 
“what became of this little boy? for i think you told it was boy,
 m. bertuccio.”
 
“no excellency, i do not recollect telling you that.”
 
“i thought you did; i must have been mistaken.”
 
“no, you were not, for it was in reality little boy. but your
 excellency wished to know two things; what was the second?”
 
“the second was the crime of which you were accused when you asked for
 confessor, and the abbé busoni came to visit you at your request in
 the prison at nîmes.”
 
“the story will be very long, excellency.”
 
“what matter? you know i take but little sleep, and i do not suppose
 you are very much inclined for it either.” bertuccio bowed, and resumed
 his story.
 
“partly to drown the recollections of the past that haunted me, partly
 to supply the wants of the poor widow, i eagerly returned to my trade
 of smuggler, which had become more easy since that relaxation of the
 laws which always follows revolution. the southern districts were
 ill-watched in particular, in consequence of the disturbances that were
 perpetually breaking out in avignon, nîmes, or uzès. we profited by
 this respite on the part of the government to make friends everywhere.
 since my brother’s assassination in the streets of nîmes, i had never
 entered the town; the result was that the innkeeper with whom we were
 connected, seeing that we would longer come to him, was forced to
 come to us, and had established branch to his inn, on the road from
 bellegarde to beaucaire, at the sign of the pont du gard. we had thus,
 at aigues-mortes, martigues, or bouc, dozen places where we left our
 goods, and where, in case of necessity, we concealed ourselves from the
 gendarmes and custom-house officers. smuggling is profitable trade,
 when certain degree of vigor and intelligence is employed; as for
 myself, brought up in the mountains, i had double motive for fearing
 the gendarmes and custom-house officers, as my appearance before the
 judges would cause an inquiry, and an inquiry always looks back into
 the past. and in my past life they might find something far more grave
 than the selling of smuggled cigars, or barrels of brandy without a
 permit. so, preferring death to capture, i accomplished the most
 astonishing deeds, and which, more than once, showed that the too
 great care we take of our bodies is the only obstacle to the success of
 those projects which require rapid decision, and vigorous and
 determined execution. in reality, when you have once devoted your life
 to your enterprises, you are longer the equal of other men, or,
 rather, other men are longer your equals, and whosoever has taken
 this resolution, feels his strength and resources doubled.”
 
“philosophy, m. bertuccio,” interrupted the count; “you have done a
 little of everything in your life.”
 
“oh, excellency!”
 
“no, no; but philosophy at half-past ten at night is somewhat late; yet
 i have other observation to make, for what you say is correct, which
 is more than can be said for all philosophy.”
 
“my journeys became more and more extensive and more productive.
 assunta took care of all, and our little fortune increased. one day as
 i was setting off on an expedition, ‘go,’ said she; ‘at your return i
 will give you surprise.’ i questioned her, but in vain; she would
 tell nothing, and i departed. our expedition lasted nearly six
 weeks; we had been to lucca to take in oil, to leghorn for english
 cottons, and we ran our cargo without opposition, and returned home
 full of joy. when i entered the house, the first thing i beheld in the
 middle of assunta’s chamber was cradle that might be called sumptuous
 compared with the rest of the furniture, and in it baby seven or
 eight months old. i uttered cry of joy; the only moments of sadness i
 had known since the assassination of the procureur were caused by the
 recollection that i had abandoned this child. for the assassination
 itself i had never felt any remorse. poor assunta had guessed all. she
 had profited by my absence, and furnished with the half of the linen,
 and having written down the day and hour at which i had deposited the
 child at the asylum, had set off for paris, and had reclaimed it. no
 objection was raised, and the infant was given up to her. ah, i
 confess, your excellency, when i saw this poor creature sleeping
 peacefully in its cradle, i felt my eyes filled with tears. ‘ah,
 assunta,’ cried i, ‘you are an excellent woman, and heaven will bless
 you.’”
 
“this,” said monte cristo, “is less correct than your philosophy,—it is
 only faith.”
 
“alas, your excellency is right,” replied bertuccio, “and god made this
 infant the instrument of our punishment. never did perverse nature
 declare itself more prematurely, and yet it was not owing to any fault
 in his bringing up. was most lovely child, with large blue eyes,
 of that deep color that harmonizes so well with the blond complexion;
 only his hair, which was too light, gave his face most singular
 expression, and added to the vivacity of his look, and the malice of
 his smile.
 
“unfortunately, there is proverb which says that ‘red is either
 altogether good or altogether bad.’ the proverb was but too correct as
 regarded benedetto, and even in his infancy manifested the worst
 disposition. it is true that the indulgence of his foster-mother
 encouraged him. this child, for whom my poor sister would go to the
 town, five or six leagues off, to purchase the earliest fruits and the
 most tempting sweetmeats, preferred to palma grapes or genoese
 preserves, the chestnuts stolen from neighbor’s orchard, or the dried
 apples in his loft, when could eat as well of the nuts and apples
 that grew in my garden.
 
“one day, when benedetto was about five or six, our neighbor wasilio,
 who, according to the custom of the country, never locked up his purse
 or his valuables—for, as your excellency knows, there are thieves in
 corsica—complained that had lost louis out of his purse; we
 thought must have made mistake in counting his money, but he
 persisted in the accuracy of his statement. one day, benedetto, who had
 been gone from the house since morning, to our great anxiety, did not
 return until late in the evening, dragging monkey after him, which he
 said had found chained to the foot of tree. for more than month
 past, the mischievous child, who knew not what to wish for, had taken
 it into his head to have monkey. boatman, who had passed by
 rogliano, and who had several of these animals, whose tricks had
 greatly diverted him, had, doubtless, suggested this idea to him.
 ‘monkeys are not found in our woods chained to trees,’ said i; ‘confess
 how you obtained this animal.’ benedetto maintained the truth of what
 had said, and accompanied it with details that did more honor to his
 imagination than to his veracity. i became angry; began to laugh, i
 threatened to strike him, and made two steps backwards. ‘you cannot
 beat me,’ said he; ‘you have right, for you are not my father.’
 
20299m
 


“we never knew who had revealed this fatal secret, which we had so
 carefully concealed from him; however, it was this answer, in which the
 child’s whole character revealed itself, that almost terrified me, and
 my arm fell without touching him.
 
“the boy triumphed, and this victory rendered him so audacious, that
 all the money of assunta, whose affection for him seemed to increase as
 became more unworthy of it, was spent in caprices she knew not how
 to contend against, and follies she had not the courage to prevent.
 when i was at rogliano everything went on properly, but sooner was
 my back turned than benedetto became master, and everything went ill.
 when was only eleven, chose his companions from among the young
 men of eighteen or twenty, the worst characters in bastia, or, indeed,
 in corsica, and they had already, for some mischievous pranks, been
 several times threatened with prosecution. i became alarmed, as any
 prosecution might be attended with serious consequences. i was
 compelled, at this period, to leave corsica on an important expedition;
 i reflected for long time, and with the hope of averting some
 impending misfortune, i resolved that benedetto should accompany me.
 
“i hoped that the active and laborious life of smuggler, with the
 severe discipline on board, would have salutary effect on his
 character, which was now well-nigh, if not quite, corrupt. i spoke to
 benedetto alone, and proposed to him to accompany me, endeavoring to
 tempt him by all the promises most likely to dazzle the imagination of
 child of twelve. heard patiently, and when i had finished,
 burst out laughing.
 
“‘are you mad, uncle?’ (he called by this name when was in good
 humor); ‘do you think i am going to change the life i lead for your
 mode of existence—my agreeable indolence for the hard and precarious
 toil you impose on yourself, exposed to the bitter frost at night, and
 the scorching heat by day, compelled to conceal yourself, and when you
 are perceived, receive volley of bullets, all to earn paltry sum?
 why, i have as much money as i want; mother assunta always furnishes me
 when i ask for it! you see that i should be fool to accept your
 offer.’
 
“the arguments, and his audacity, perfectly stupefied me. benedetto
 rejoined his associates, and i saw him from distance point out to
 them as fool.”
 
“sweet child,” murmured monte cristo.
 
“oh, had been my own son,” replied bertuccio, “or even my nephew, i
 would have brought him back to the right road, for the knowledge that
 you are doing your duty gives you strength, but the idea that i was
 striking child whose father i had killed, made it impossible for me
 to punish him. i gave my sister, who constantly defended the
 unfortunate boy, good advice, and as she confessed that she had several
 times missed money to considerable amount, i showed her safe place
 in which to conceal our little treasure for the future. my mind was
 already made up. benedetto could read, write, and cipher perfectly, for
 when the fit seized him, learned more in day than others in a
 week. my intention was to enter him as clerk in some ship, and
 without letting him know anything of my plan, to convey him some
 morning on board; by this means his future treatment would depend upon
 his own conduct. i set off for france, after having fixed upon the
 plan. our cargo was to be landed in the gulf of lyons, and this was a
 difficult thing to do because it was then the year 1829. the most
 perfect tranquillity was restored, and the vigilance of the
 custom-house officers was redoubled, and their strictness was increased
 at this time, in consequence of the fair at beaucaire.
 
20301m
 


“our expedition made favorable beginning. we anchored our
 vessel—which had double hold, where our goods were concealed—amidst a
 number of other vessels that bordered the banks of the rhône from
 beaucaire to arles. on our arrival we began to discharge our cargo in
 the night, and to convey it into the town, by the help of the innkeeper
 with whom we were connected.
 
“whether success rendered us imprudent, or whether we were betrayed, i
 know not; but one evening, about five o’clock, our little cabin-boy
 came breathlessly, to inform us that had seen detachment of
 custom-house officers advancing in our direction. it was not their
 proximity that alarmed us, for detachments were constantly patrolling
 along the banks of the rhône, but the care, according to the boy’s
 account, that they took to avoid being seen. in an instant we were on
 the alert, but it was too late; our vessel was surrounded, and amongst
 the custom-house officers i observed several gendarmes, and, as
 terrified at the sight of their uniforms as i was brave at the sight of
 any other, i sprang into the hold, opened port, and dropped into the
 river, dived, and only rose at intervals to breathe, until i reached a
 ditch that had recently been made from the rhône to the canal that runs
 from beaucaire to aigues-mortes. i was now safe, for i could swim along
 the ditch without being seen, and i reached the canal in safety. i had
 designedly taken this direction. i have already told your excellency of
 an innkeeper from nîmes who had set up little tavern on the road from
 bellegarde to beaucaire.”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo “i perfectly recollect him; i think was
 your colleague.”
 
“precisely,” answered bertuccio; “but had, seven or eight years
 before this period, sold his establishment to tailor at marseilles,
 who, having almost ruined himself in his old trade, wished to make his
 fortune in another. of course, we made the same arrangements with the
 new landlord that we had with the old; and it was of this man that i
 intended to ask shelter.”
 
“what was his name?” inquired the count, who seemed to become somewhat
 interested in bertuccio’s story.
 
“gaspard caderousse; had married woman from the village of
 carconte, and whom we did not know by any other name than that of her
 village. she was suffering from malarial fever, and seemed dying by
 inches. as for her husband, was strapping fellow of forty, or
 five-and-forty, who had more than once, in time of danger, given ample
 proof of his presence of mind and courage.”
 
“and you say,” interrupted monte cristo “that this took place towards
 the year——”
 
“1829, your excellency.”
 
“in what month?”
 
“june.”
 
“the beginning or the end?”
 
“the evening of the 3rd.”
 
20303m
 


“ah,” said monte cristo “the evening of the 3rd of june, 1829. go on.”
 
“it was from caderousse that i intended demanding shelter, and, as we
 never entered by the door that opened onto the road, i resolved not to
 break through the rule, so climbing over the garden-hedge, i crept
 amongst the olive and wild fig trees, and fearing that caderousse might
 have some guest, i entered kind of shed in which i had often passed
 the night, and which was only separated from the inn by partition, in
 which holes had been made in order to enable us to watch an opportunity
 of announcing our presence.
 
“my intention was, if caderousse was alone, to acquaint him with my
 presence, finish the meal the custom-house officers had interrupted,
 and profit by the threatened storm to return to the rhône, and
 ascertain the state of our vessel and its crew. i stepped into the
 shed, and it was fortunate i did so, for at that moment caderousse
 entered with stranger.
 
“i waited patiently, not to overhear what they said, but because i
 could do nothing else; besides, the same thing had occurred often
 before. the man who was with caderousse was evidently stranger to the
 south of france; was one of those merchants who come to sell
 jewellery at the beaucaire fair, and who during the month the fair
 lasts, and during which there is so great an influx of merchants and
 customers from all parts of europe, often have dealings to the amount
 of 100,000 to 150,000 francs. caderousse entered hastily. then, seeing
 that the room was, as usual, empty, and only guarded by the dog, he
 called to his wife, ‘hello, carconte,’ said he, ‘the worthy priest has
 not deceived us; the diamond is real.’
 
“an exclamation of joy was heard, and the staircase creaked beneath a
 feeble step. ‘what do you say?’ asked his wife, pale as death.
 
“‘i say that the diamond is real, and that this gentleman, one of the
 first jewellers of paris, will give us 50,000 francs for it. only, in
 order to satisfy himself that it really belongs to us, wishes you to
 relate to him, as i have done already, the miraculous manner in which
 the diamond came into our possession. in the meantime please to sit
 down, monsieur, and i will fetch you some refreshment.’
 
“the jeweller examined attentively the interior of the inn and the
 apparent poverty of the persons who were about to sell him diamond
 that seemed to have come from the casket of prince.
 
“‘relate your story, madame,’ said he, wishing, doubt, to profit by
 the absence of the husband, so that the latter could not influence the
 wife’s story, to see if the two recitals tallied.
 
“‘oh,’ returned she, ‘it was gift of heaven. my husband was great
 friend, in 1814 or 1815, of sailor named edmond dantès. this poor
 fellow, whom caderousse had forgotten, had not forgotten him, and at
 his death bequeathed this diamond to him.’
 
“‘but how did obtain it?’ asked the jeweller; ‘had it before he
 was imprisoned?’
 
“‘no, monsieur; but it appears that in prison made the acquaintance
 of rich englishman, and as in prison fell sick, and dantès took
 the same care of him as if had been his brother, the englishman,
 when was set free, gave this stone to dantès, who, less fortunate,
 died, and, in his turn, left it to us, and charged the excellent abbé,
 who was here this morning, to deliver it.’
 
“‘the same story,’ muttered the jeweller; ‘and improbable as it seemed
 at first, it may be true. there’s only the price we are not agreed
 about.’
 
“‘how not agreed about?’ said caderousse. ‘i thought we agreed for the
 price i asked.’
 
“‘that is,’ replied the jeweller, ‘i offered 40,000 francs.’
 
‘forty thousand,’ cried carconte; ‘we will not part with it for that
 sum. the abbé told us it was worth 50,000 without the setting.’
 
“‘what was the abbé’s name?’ asked the indefatigable questioner.
 
“‘the abbé busoni,’ said carconte.
 
“‘he was foreigner?’
 
“‘an italian from the neighborhood of mantua, i believe.’
 
“‘let see this diamond again,’ replied the jeweller; ‘the first time
 you are often mistaken as to the value of stone.’
 
“caderousse took from his pocket small case of black shagreen,
 opened, and gave it to the jeweller. at the sight of the diamond, which
 was as large as hazel-nut, carconte’s eyes sparkled with
 cupidity.”
 
“and what did you think of this fine story, eavesdropper?” said monte
 cristo; “did you credit it?”
 
“yes, your excellency. i did not look on caderousse as bad man, and i
 thought him incapable of committing crime, or even theft.”
 
“that did more honor to your heart than to your experience, m.
 bertuccio. had you known this edmond dantès, of whom they spoke?”
 
“no, your excellency, i had never heard of him before, and never but
 once afterwards, and that was from the abbé busoni himself, when i saw
 him in the prison at nîmes.”
 
“go on.”
 
“the jeweller took the ring, and drawing from his pocket pair of
 steel pliers and small set of copper scales, took the stone out of
 its setting, and weighed it carefully.
 
“‘i will give you 45,000,’ said he, ‘but not sou more; besides, as
 that is the exact value of the stone, i brought just that sum with me.’
 
“‘oh, that’s matter,’ replied caderousse, ‘i will go back with you
 to fetch the other 5,000 francs.’
 
“‘no,’ returned the jeweller, giving back the diamond and the ring to
 caderousse, ‘no, it is worth more, and i am sorry i offered so much,
 for the stone has flaw in it, which i had not seen. however, i will
 not go back on my word, and i will give 45,000.’
 
“‘at least, replace the diamond in the ring,’ said carconte sharply.
 
“‘ah, true,’ replied the jeweller, and reset the stone.
 
“‘no matter,’ observed caderousse, replacing the box in his pocket,
 ‘someone else will purchase it.’
 
“‘yes,’ continued the jeweller; ‘but someone else will not be so easy
 as i am, or content himself with the same story. it is not natural that
 man like you should possess such diamond. will inform against
 you. you will have to find the abbé busoni; and abbés who give diamonds
 worth two thousand louis are rare. the law would seize it, and put you
 in prison; if at the end of three or four months you are set at
 liberty, the ring will be lost, or false stone, worth three francs,
 will be given you, instead of diamond worth 50,000 or perhaps 55,000
 francs; from which you must allow that one runs considerable risk in
 purchasing.’
 
“caderousse and his wife looked eagerly at each other.
 
“‘no,’ said caderousse, ‘we are not rich enough to lose 5,000 francs.’
 
“‘as you please, my dear sir,’ said the jeweller; ‘i had, however, as
 you see, brought you the money in bright coin.’ and drew from his
 pocket handful of gold, and held it sparkling before the dazzled eyes
 of the innkeeper, and in the other hand held packet of bank-notes.
 
“there was evidently severe struggle in the mind of caderousse; it
 was plain that the small shagreen case, which turned over and over
 in his hand, did not seem to him commensurate in value to the enormous
 sum which fascinated his gaze. turned towards his wife.
 
“‘what do you think of this?’ asked in low voice.
 
“‘let him have it—let him have it,’ she said. ‘if returns to
 beaucaire without the diamond, will inform against us, and, as he
 says, who knows if we shall ever again see the abbé busoni?—in all
 probability we shall never see him.’
 
“‘well, then, so i will!’ said caderousse; ‘so you may have the diamond
 for 45,000 francs. but my wife wants gold chain, and i want pair of
 silver buckles.’
 
“the jeweller drew from his pocket long flat box, which contained
 several samples of the articles demanded. ‘here,’ said, ‘i am very
 straightforward in my dealings—take your choice.’
 
“the woman selected gold chain worth about five louis, and the
 husband pair of buckles, worth perhaps fifteen francs.
 
“‘i hope you will not complain now?’ said the jeweller.
 
“‘the abbé told it was worth 50,000 francs,’ muttered caderousse.
 
“‘come, come—give it to me! what strange fellow you are,’ said the
 jeweller, taking the diamond from his hand. ‘i give you 45,000
 francs—that is, 2,500 livres of income,—a fortune such as i wish i had
 myself, and you are not satisfied!’
 
“‘and the five-and-forty thousand francs,’ inquired caderousse in a
 hoarse voice, ‘where are they? come—let us see them.’
 
“‘here they are,’ replied the jeweller, and counted out upon the
 table 15,000 francs in gold, and 30,000 francs in bank-notes.
 
“‘wait whilst i light the lamp,’ said carconte; ‘it is growing dark,
 and there may be some mistake.’ in fact, night had come on during this
 conversation, and with night the storm which had been threatening for
 the last half-hour. the thunder growled in the distance; but it was
 apparently not heard by the jeweller, caderousse, or carconte,
 absorbed as they were all three with the demon of gain. i myself felt
 strange kind of fascination at the sight of all this gold and all
 these bank-notes; it seemed to that i was in dream, and, as it
 always happens in dream, i felt myself riveted to the spot.
 caderousse counted and again counted the gold and the notes, then
 handed them to his wife, who counted and counted them again in her
 turn. during this time, the jeweller made the diamond play and sparkle
 in the lamplight, and the gem threw out jets of light which made him
 unmindful of those which—precursors of the storm—began to play in at
 the windows.
 
“‘well,’ inquired the jeweller, ‘is the cash all right?’
 
“‘yes,’ said caderousse. ‘give the pocket-book, carconte, and
 find bag somewhere.’
 
“la carconte went to cupboard, and returned with an old leathern
 pocket-book and bag. from the former she took some greasy letters,
 and put in their place the bank-notes, and from the bag took two or
 three crowns of six livres each, which, in all probability, formed the
 entire fortune of the miserable couple.
 
“‘there,’ said caderousse; ‘and now, although you have wronged us of
 perhaps 10,000 francs, will you have your supper with us? i invite you
 with good-will.’
 
“‘thank you,’ replied the jeweller, ‘it must be getting late, and i
 must return to beaucaire—my wife will be getting uneasy.’ drew out
 his watch, and exclaimed, ‘_morbleu!_ nearly nine o’clock—why, i shall
 not get back to beaucaire before midnight! good-night, my friends. if
 the abbé busoni should by any accident return, think of me.’
 
“‘in another week you will have left beaucaire,’ remarked caderousse,
 ‘for the fair ends in few days.’
 
“‘true, but that makes difference. write to at paris, to m.
 joannes, in the palais royal, arcade pierre, no. 45. i will make the
 journey on purpose to see him, if it is worth while.’
 
“at this moment there was tremendous clap of thunder, accompanied by
 flash of lightning so vivid, that it quite eclipsed the light of the
 lamp.
 
20307m
 


“‘see here,’ exclaimed caderousse. ‘you cannot think of going out in
 such weather as this.’
 
“‘oh, i am not afraid of thunder,’ said the jeweller.
 
“‘and then there are robbers,’ said carconte. ‘the road is never
 very safe during fair time.’
 
“‘oh, as to the robbers,’ said joannes, ‘here is something for them,’
 and drew from his pocket pair of small pistols, loaded to the
 muzzle. ‘here,’ said he, ‘are dogs who bark and bite at the same time,
 they are for the two first who shall have longing for your diamond,
 friend caderousse.’
 
“caderousse and his wife again interchanged meaning look. it seemed
 as though they were both inspired at the same time with some horrible
 thought. ‘well, then, good journey to you,’ said caderousse.
 
“‘thanks,’ replied the jeweller. then took his cane, which had
 placed against an old cupboard, and went out. at the moment when he
 opened the door, such gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearly
 extinguished. ‘oh,’ said he, ‘this is very nice weather, and two
 leagues to go in such storm.’
 
“‘remain,’ said caderousse. ‘you can sleep here.’
 
“‘yes; do stay,’ added carconte in tremulous voice; ‘we will take
 every care of you.’
 
“‘no; i must sleep at beaucaire. so, once more, good-night.’ caderousse
 followed him slowly to the threshold. ‘i can see neither heaven nor
 earth,’ said the jeweller, who was outside the door. ‘do i turn to the
 right, or to the left hand?’
 
“‘to the right,’ said caderousse. ‘you cannot go wrong—the road is
 bordered by trees on both sides.’
 
“‘good—all right,’ said voice almost lost in the distance.
 
“‘close the door,’ said carconte; ‘i do not like open doors when it
 thunders.’
 
“‘particularly when there is money in the house, eh?’ answered
 caderousse, double-locking the door.
 
20311m
 


“he came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out the bag and
 pocket-book, and both began, for the third time, to count their gold
 and bank-notes. i never saw such an expression of cupidity as the
 flickering lamp revealed in those two countenances. the woman,
 especially, was hideous; her usual feverish tremulousness was
 intensified, her countenance had become livid, and her eyes resembled
 burning coals.
 
“‘why,’ she inquired in hoarse voice, ‘did you invite him to sleep
 here tonight?’
 
“‘why?’ said caderousse with shudder; ‘why, that might not have
 the trouble of returning to beaucaire.’
 
“‘ah,’ responded the woman, with an expression impossible to describe;
 ‘i thought it was for something else.’
 
“‘woman, woman—why do you have such ideas?’ cried caderousse; ‘or, if
 you have them, why don’t you keep them to yourself?’
 
“‘well,’ said carconte, after moment’s pause, ‘you are not man.’
 
“‘what do you mean?’ added caderousse.
 
“‘if you had been man, you would not have let him go from here.’
 
“‘woman!’
 
“‘or else should not have reached beaucaire.’
 
“‘woman!’
 
“‘the road takes turn—he is obliged to follow it—while alongside of
 the canal there is shorter road.’
 
“‘woman!—you offend the good god. there—listen!’
 
and at this moment there was tremendous peal of thunder, while the
 livid lightning illumined the room, and the thunder, rolling away in
 the distance, seemed to withdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode.
 ‘mercy!’ said caderousse, crossing himself.
 
20312m
 


“at the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifying silence which
 usually follows clap of thunder, they heard knocking at the door.
 caderousse and his wife started and looked aghast at each other.
 
“‘who’s there?’ cried caderousse, rising, and drawing up in heap the
 gold and notes scattered over the table, and which covered with his
 two hands.
 
“‘it is i,’ shouted voice.
 
“‘and who are you?’
 
“‘eh, _pardieu!_ joannes, the jeweller.’
 
“‘well, and you said i offended the good god,’ said carconte with a
 horrid smile. ‘why, the good god sends him back again.’ caderousse sank
 pale and breathless into his chair.
 
“la carconte, on the contrary, rose, and going with firm step towards
 the door, opened it, saying, as she did so:
 
“‘come in, dear m. joannes.’
 
“‘_ma foi_,’ said the jeweller, drenched with rain, ‘i am not destined
 to return to beaucaire tonight. the shortest follies are best, my dear
 caderousse. you offered hospitality, and i accept it, and have
 returned to sleep beneath your friendly roof.’
 
“caderousse stammered out something, while wiped away the sweat that
 started to his brow. carconte double-locked the door behind the
 jeweller.”
 


chapter 45. the rain of blood
 
as the jeweller returned to the apartment, cast around him a
 scrutinizing glance—but there was nothing to excite suspicion, if it
 did not exist, or to confirm it, if it were already awakened.
 caderousse’s hands still grasped the gold and bank-notes, and la
 carconte called up her sweetest smiles while welcoming the reappearance
 of their guest.
 
“‘well, well,’ said the jeweller, ‘you seem, my good friends, to have
 had some fears respecting the accuracy of your money, by counting it
 over so carefully directly i was gone.’
 
“‘oh, no,’ answered caderousse, ‘that was not my reason, i can assure
 you; but the circumstances by which we have become possessed of this
 wealth are so unexpected, as to make us scarcely credit our good
 fortune, and it is only by placing the actual proof of our riches
 before our eyes that we can persuade ourselves that the whole affair is
 not dream.’
 
“the jeweller smiled. ‘have you any other guests in your house?’
 inquired he.
 
“‘nobody but ourselves,’ replied caderousse; ‘the fact is, we do not
 lodge travellers—indeed, our tavern is so near the town, that nobody
 would think of stopping here.’
 
“‘then i am afraid i shall very much inconvenience you.’
 
“‘inconvenience us? not at all, my dear sir,’ said carconte in her
 most gracious manner. ‘not at all, i assure you.’
 
“‘but where will you manage to stow me?’
 
“‘in the chamber overhead.’
 
“‘surely that is where you yourselves sleep?’
 
“‘never mind that; we have second bed in the adjoining room.’
 
“caderousse stared at his wife with much astonishment.
 
“the jeweller, meanwhile, was humming song as stood warming his
 back at the fire carconte had kindled to dry the wet garments of her
 guest; and this done, she next occupied herself in arranging his
 supper, by spreading napkin at the end of the table, and placing on
 it the slender remains of their dinner, to which she added three or
 four fresh-laid eggs. caderousse had once more parted with his
 treasure—the banknotes were replaced in the pocket-book, the gold put
 back into the bag, and the whole carefully locked in the cupboard. he
 then began pacing the room with pensive and gloomy air, glancing from
 time to time at the jeweller, who stood reeking with the steam from his
 wet clothes, and merely changing his place on the warm hearth, to
 enable the whole of his garments to be dried.
 
“‘there,’ said carconte, as she placed bottle of wine on the
 table, ‘supper is ready whenever you are.’
 
“‘and you?’ asked joannes.
 
“‘i don’t want any supper,’ said caderousse.
 
“‘we dined so very late,’ hastily interposed carconte.
 
“‘then it seems i am to eat alone,’ remarked the jeweller.
 
“‘oh, we shall have the pleasure of waiting upon you,’ answered la
 carconte, with an eager attention she was not accustomed to manifest
 even to guests who paid for what they took.
 
“from time to time caderousse darted on his wife keen, searching
 glances, but rapid as the lightning flash. the storm still continued.
 
“‘there, there,’ said carconte; ‘do you hear that? upon my word, you
 did well to come back.’
 
“‘nevertheless,’ replied the jeweller, ‘if by the time i have finished
 my supper the tempest has at all abated, i shall make another start.’
 
“‘it’s the mistral,’ said caderousse, ‘and it will be sure to last till
 tomorrow morning.’ sighed heavily.
 
“‘well,’ said the jeweller, as placed himself at table, ‘all i can
 say is, so much the worse for those who are abroad.’
 
“‘yes,’ chimed in carconte, ‘they will have wretched night of it.’
 
“the jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, who was
 ordinarily so querulous and indifferent to all who approached her, was
 suddenly transformed into the most smiling and attentive hostess. had
 the unhappy man on whom she lavished her assiduities been previously
 acquainted with her, so sudden an alteration might well have excited
 suspicion in his mind, or at least have greatly astonished him.
 caderousse, meanwhile, continued to pace the room in gloomy silence,
 sedulously avoiding the sight of his guest; but as soon as the stranger
 had completed his repast, the agitated innkeeper went eagerly to the
 door and opened it.
 
“‘i believe the storm is over,’ said he.
 
“but as if to contradict his statement, at that instant violent clap
 of thunder seemed to shake the house to its very foundation, while a
 sudden gust of wind, mingled with rain, extinguished the lamp held
 in his hand.
 
“trembling and awe-struck, caderousse hastily shut the door and
 returned to his guest, while carconte lighted candle by the
 smouldering ashes that glimmered on the hearth.
 
“‘you must be tired,’ said she to the jeweller; ‘i have spread pair
 of white sheets on your bed; go up when you are ready, and sleep well.’
 
“joannes stayed for while to see whether the storm seemed to abate in
 its fury, but brief space of time sufficed to assure him that,
 instead of diminishing, the violence of the rain and thunder
 momentarily increased; resigning himself, therefore, to what seemed
 inevitable, bade his host good-night, and mounted the stairs. he
 passed over my head and i heard the flooring creak beneath his
 footsteps. the quick, eager glance of carconte followed him as he
 ascended, while caderousse, on the contrary, turned his back, and
 seemed most anxiously to avoid even glancing at him.
 
“all these circumstances did not strike as painfully at the time as
 they have since done; in fact, all that had happened (with the
 exception of the story of the diamond, which certainly did wear an air
 of improbability), appeared natural enough, and called for neither
 apprehension nor mistrust; but, worn out as i was with fatigue, and
 fully purposing to proceed onwards directly the tempest abated, i
 determined to obtain few hours’ sleep. overhead i could accurately
 distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after making the best
 arrangements in his power for passing comfortable night, threw
 himself on his bed, and i could hear it creak and groan beneath his
 weight.
 
“insensibly my eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having
 suspicion of anything wrong, i sought not to shake it off. i looked
 into the kitchen once more and saw caderousse sitting by the side of a
 long table upon one of the low wooden stools which in country places
 are frequently used instead of chairs; his back was turned towards me,
 so that i could not see the expression of his countenance—neither
 should i have been able to do so had been placed differently, as his
 head was buried between his two hands. carconte continued to gaze on
 him for some time, then shrugging her shoulders, she took her seat
 immediately opposite to him.
 
“at this moment the expiring embers threw up fresh flame from the
 kindling of piece of wood that lay near, and bright light flashed
 over the room. carconte still kept her eyes fixed on her husband,
 but as made sign of changing his position, she extended her hard,
 bony hand, and touched him on the forehead.
 
20317m
 


“caderousse shuddered. the woman’s lips seemed to move, as though she
 were talking; but because she merely spoke in an undertone, or my
 senses were dulled by sleep, i did not catch word she uttered.
 confused sights and sounds seemed to float before me, and gradually i
 fell into deep, heavy slumber. how long i had been in this
 unconscious state i know not, when i was suddenly aroused by the report
 of pistol, followed by fearful cry. weak and tottering footsteps
 resounded across the chamber above me, and the next instant dull,
 heavy weight seemed to fall powerless on the staircase. i had not yet
 fully recovered consciousness, when again i heard groans, mingled with
 half-stifled cries, as if from persons engaged in deadly struggle. a
 cry more prolonged than the others and ending in series of groans
 effectually roused from my drowsy lethargy. hastily raising myself
 on one arm, i looked around, but all was dark; and it seemed to as
 if the rain must have penetrated through the flooring of the room
 above, for some kind of moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop, upon
 my forehead, and when i passed my hand across my brow, i felt that it
 was wet and clammy.
 
“to the fearful noises that had awakened had succeeded the most
 perfect silence—unbroken, save by the footsteps of man walking about
 in the chamber above. the staircase creaked, descended into the room
 below, approached the fire and lit candle.
 
“the man was caderousse—he was pale and his shirt was all bloody.
 having obtained the light, hurried upstairs again, and once more i
 heard his rapid and uneasy footsteps.
 
“a moment later came down again, holding in his hand the small
 shagreen case, which opened, to assure himself it contained the
 diamond,—seemed to hesitate as to which pocket should put it in,
 then, as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he
 deposited it in his red handkerchief, which carefully rolled round
 his head.
 
“after this took from his cupboard the bank-notes and gold had
 put there, thrust the one into the pocket of his trousers, and the
 other into that of his waistcoat, hastily tied up small bundle of
 linen, and rushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of the
 night.
 
“then all became clear and manifest to me, and i reproached myself with
 what had happened, as though i myself had done the guilty deed. i
 fancied that i still heard faint moans, and imagining that the
 unfortunate jeweller might not be quite dead, i determined to go to his
 relief, by way of atoning in some slight degree, not for the crime i
 had committed, but for that which i had not endeavored to prevent. for
 this purpose i applied all the strength i possessed to force an
 entrance from the cramped spot in which i lay to the adjoining room.
 the poorly fastened boards which alone divided from it yielded to my
 efforts, and i found myself in the house. hastily snatching up the
 lighted candle, i hurried to the staircase; about midway body was
 lying quite across the stairs. it was that of carconte. the pistol i
 had heard had doubtless been fired at her. the shot had frightfully
 lacerated her throat, leaving two gaping wounds from which, as well as
 the mouth, the blood was pouring in floods. she was stone dead. i
 strode past her, and ascended to the sleeping chamber, which presented
 an appearance of the wildest disorder. the furniture had been knocked
 over in the deadly struggle that had taken place there, and the sheets,
 to which the unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were dragged
 across the room. the murdered man lay on the floor, his head leaning
 against the wall, and about him was pool of blood which poured forth
 from three large wounds in his breast; there was fourth gash, in
 which long table knife was plunged up to the handle.
 
“i stumbled over some object; i stooped to examine—it was the second
 pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the powder being wet. i
 approached the jeweller, who was not quite dead, and at the sound of my
 footsteps and the creaking of the floor, opened his eyes, fixed them
 on with an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as though
 trying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell back and expired.
 
“this appalling sight almost bereft of my senses, and finding that i
 could longer be of service to anyone in the house, my only desire
 was to fly. i rushed towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and
 uttering groan of horror.
 
“upon reaching the room below, i found five or six custom-house
 officers, and two or three gendarmes—all heavily armed. they threw
 themselves upon me. i made resistance; i was longer master of my
 senses. when i strove to speak, few inarticulate sounds alone escaped
 my lips.
 
“as i noticed the significant manner in which the whole party pointed
 to my blood-stained garments, i involuntarily surveyed myself, and then
 i discovered that the thick warm drops that had so bedewed as i lay
 beneath the staircase must have been the blood of carconte. i
 pointed to the spot where i had concealed myself.
 
“‘what does mean?’ asked gendarme.
 
“one of the officers went to the place i directed.
 
“‘he means,’ replied the man upon his return, ‘that got in that
 way;’ and showed the hole i had made when i broke through.
 
“then i saw that they took for the assassin. i recovered force and
 energy enough to free myself from the hands of those who held me, while
 i managed to stammer forth:
 
“‘i did not do it! indeed, indeed i did not!’
 
“a couple of gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against my
 breast.
 
“‘stir but step,’ said they, ‘and you are dead man.’
 
“‘why should you threaten with death,’ cried i, ‘when i have already
 declared my innocence?’
 
“‘tush, tush,’ cried the men; ‘keep your innocent stories to tell to
 the judge at nîmes. meanwhile, come along with us; and the best advice
 we can give you is to do so unresistingly.’
 
“alas, resistance was far from my thoughts. i was utterly overpowered
 by surprise and terror; and without word i suffered myself to be
 handcuffed and tied to horse’s tail, and thus they took to nîmes.
 
“i had been tracked by customs-officer, who had lost sight of near
 the tavern; feeling certain that i intended to pass the night there, he
 had returned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear
 the report of the pistol, and to take in the midst of such
 circumstantial proofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my
 innocence utterly futile. one only chance was left me, that of
 beseeching the magistrate before whom i was taken to cause every
 inquiry to be made for the abbé busoni, who had stopped at the inn of
 the pont du gard on that morning.
 
“if caderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond, and
 there existed such person as the abbé busoni, then, indeed, i was
 lost past redemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble chance
 of caderousse himself being apprehended and confessing the whole truth.
 
“two months passed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while i
 must do the magistrate the justice to say that used every means to
 obtain information of the person i declared could exculpate if he
 would. caderousse still evaded all pursuit, and i had resigned myself
 to what seemed my inevitable fate. my trial was to come on at the
 approaching assizes; when, on the 8th of september—that is to say,
 precisely three months and five days after the events which had
 perilled my life—the abbé busoni, whom i never ventured to believe i
 should see, presented himself at the prison doors, saying understood
 one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; added, that having
 learned at marseilles the particulars of my imprisonment, hastened
 to comply with my desire.
 
“you may easily imagine with what eagerness i welcomed him, and how
 minutely i related the whole of what i had seen and heard. i felt some
 degree of nervousness as i entered upon the history of the diamond,
 but, to my inexpressible astonishment, confirmed it in every
 particular, and to my equal surprise, seemed to place entire belief
 in all i said.
 
“and then it was that, won by his mild charity, seeing that was
 acquainted with all the habits and customs of my own country, and
 considering also that pardon for the only crime of which i was really
 guilty might come with double power from lips so benevolent and kind,
 i besought him to receive my confession, under the seal of which i
 recounted the auteuil affair in all its details, as well as every other
 transaction of my life. that which i had done by the impulse of my best
 feelings produced the same effect as though it had been the result of
 calculation. my voluntary confession of the assassination at auteuil
 proved to him that i had not committed that of which i stood accused.
 when quitted me, bade be of good courage, and to rely upon his
 doing all in his power to convince my judges of my innocence.
 
“i had speedy proofs that the excellent abbé was engaged in my behalf,
 for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviated by many trifling
 though acceptable indulgences, and i was told that my trial was to be
 postponed to the assizes following those now being held.
 
“in the interim it pleased providence to cause the apprehension of
 caderousse, who was discovered in some distant country, and brought
 back to france, where made full confession, refusing to make the
 fact of his wife’s having suggested and arranged the murder any excuse
 for his own guilt. the wretched man was sentenced to the galleys for
 life, and i was immediately set at liberty.”
 
“and then it was, i presume,” said monte cristo “that you came to as
 the bearer of letter from the abbé busoni?”
 
“it was, your excellency; the benevolent abbé took an evident interest
 in all that concerned me.
 
“‘your mode of life as smuggler,’ said to one day, ‘will be the
 ruin of you; if you get out, don’t take it up again.’
 
“‘but how,’ inquired i, ‘am i to maintain myself and my poor sister?’
 
“‘a person, whose confessor i am,’ replied he, ‘and who entertains a
 high regard for me, applied to short time since to procure him a
 confidential servant. would you like such post? if so, i will give
 you letter of introduction to him.’
 
“‘oh, father,’ i exclaimed, ‘you are very good.’
 
“‘but you must swear solemnly that i shall never have reason to repent
 my recommendation.’
 
“i extended my hand, and was about to pledge myself by any promise he
 would dictate, but stopped me.
 
“‘it is unnecessary for you to bind yourself by any vow,’ said he; ‘i
 know and admire the corsican nature too well to fear you. here, take
 this,’ continued he, after rapidly writing the few lines i brought to
 your excellency, and upon receipt of which you deigned to receive me
 into your service, and proudly i ask whether your excellency has ever
 had cause to repent having done so?”
 
“no,” replied the count; “i take pleasure in saying that you have
 served faithfully, bertuccio; but you might have shown more
 confidence in me.”
 
“i, your excellency?”
 
“yes; you. how comes it, that having both sister and an adopted son,
 you have never spoken to of either?”
 
20323m
 


“alas, i have still to recount the most distressing period of my life.
 anxious as you may suppose i was to behold and comfort my dear sister,
 i lost time in hastening to corsica, but when i arrived at rogliano
 i found house of mourning, the consequences of scene so horrible
 that the neighbors remember and speak of it to this day. acting by my
 advice, my poor sister had refused to comply with the unreasonable
 demands of benedetto, who was continually tormenting her for money, as
 long as believed there was sou left in her possession. one morning
 threatened her with the severest consequences if she did not supply
 him with what desired, and disappeared and remained away all day,
 leaving the kind-hearted assunta, who loved him as if were her own
 child, to weep over his conduct and bewail his absence. evening came,
 and still, with all the patient solicitude of mother, she watched for
 his return.
 
“as the eleventh hour struck, entered with swaggering air,
 attended by two of the most dissolute and reckless of his boon
 companions. she stretched out her arms to him, but they seized hold of
 her, and one of the three—none other than the accursed benedetto
 exclaimed:
 
“‘put her to torture and she’ll soon tell us where her money is.’
 
“it unfortunately happened that our neighbor, wasilio, was at bastia,
 leaving person in his house but his wife; human creature beside
 could hear or see anything that took place within our dwelling. two
 held poor assunta, who, unable to conceive that any harm was intended
 to her, smiled in the face of those who were soon to become her
 executioners. the third proceeded to barricade the doors and windows,
 then returned, and the three united in stifling the cries of terror
 incited by the sight of these preparations, and then dragged assunta
 feet foremost towards the brazier, expecting to wring from her an
 avowal of where her supposed treasure was secreted. in the struggle her
 clothes caught fire, and they were obliged to let go their hold in
 order to preserve themselves from sharing the same fate. covered with
 flames, assunta rushed wildly to the door, but it was fastened; she
 flew to the windows, but they were also secured; then the neighbors
 heard frightful shrieks; it was assunta calling for help. the cries
 died away in groans, and next morning, as soon as wasilio’s wife could
 muster up courage to venture abroad, she caused the door of our
 dwelling to be opened by the public authorities, when assunta, although
 dreadfully burnt, was found still breathing; every drawer and closet in
 the house had been forced open, and the money stolen. benedetto never
 again appeared at rogliano, neither have i since that day either seen
 or heard anything concerning him.
 
“it was subsequently to these dreadful events that i waited on your
 excellency, to whom it would have been folly to have mentioned
 benedetto, since all trace of him seemed entirely lost; or of my
 sister, since she was dead.”
 
“and in what light did you view the occurrence?” inquired monte cristo.
 
“as punishment for the crime i had committed,” answered bertuccio.
 “oh, those villeforts are an accursed race!”
 
“truly they are,” murmured the count in lugubrious tone.
 
“and now,” resumed bertuccio, “your excellency may, perhaps, be able to
 comprehend that this place, which i revisit for the first time—this
 garden, the actual scene of my crime—must have given rise to
 reflections of very agreeable nature, and produced that gloom and
 depression of spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who
 was pleased to express desire to know the cause. at this instant a
 shudder passes over as i reflect that possibly i am now standing on
 the very grave in which lies m. villefort, by whose hand the ground
 was dug to receive the corpse of his child.”
 
“everything is possible,” said monte cristo, rising from the bench on
 which had been sitting; “even,” added in an inaudible voice,
 “even that the procureur be not dead. the abbé busoni did right to send
 you to me,” went on in his ordinary tone, “and you have done well in
 relating to the whole of your history, as it will prevent my forming
 any erroneous opinions concerning you in future. as for that benedetto,
 who so grossly belied his name, have you never made any effort to trace
 out whither has gone, or what has become of him?”
 
“no; far from wishing to learn whither has betaken himself, i should
 shun the possibility of meeting him as i would wild beast. thank god,
 i have never heard his name mentioned by any person, and i hope and
 believe is dead.”
 
“do not think so, bertuccio,” replied the count; “for the wicked are
 not so easily disposed of, for god seems to have them under his special
 watch-care to make of them instruments of his vengeance.”
 
“so be it,” responded bertuccio, “all i ask of heaven is that i may
 never see him again. and now, your excellency,” added, bowing his
 head, “you know everything—you are my judge on earth, as the almighty
 is in heaven; have you for words of consolation?”
 
“my good friend, i can only repeat the words addressed to you by the
 abbé busoni. villefort merited punishment for what had done to you,
 and, perhaps, to others. benedetto, if still living, will become the
 instrument of divine retribution in some way or other, and then be duly
 punished in his turn. as far as you yourself are concerned, i see but
 one point in which you are really guilty. ask yourself, wherefore,
 after rescuing the infant from its living grave, you did not restore it
 to its mother? there was the crime, bertuccio—that was where you became
 really culpable.”
 
“true, excellency, that was the crime, the real crime, for in that i
 acted like coward. my first duty, directly i had succeeded in
 recalling the babe to life, was to restore it to its mother; but, in
 order to do so, i must have made close and careful inquiry, which
 would, in all probability, have led to my own apprehension; and i clung
 to life, partly on my sister’s account, and partly from that feeling of
 pride inborn in our hearts of desiring to come off untouched and
 victorious in the execution of our vengeance. perhaps, too, the natural
 and instinctive love of life made wish to avoid endangering my own.
 and then, again, i am not as brave and courageous as was my poor
 brother.”
 
bertuccio hid his face in his hands as uttered these words, while
 monte cristo fixed on him look of inscrutable meaning. after brief
 silence, rendered still more solemn by the time and place, the count
 said, in tone of melancholy wholly unlike his usual manner:
 
“in order to bring this conversation to fitting termination (the last
 we shall ever hold upon this subject), i will repeat to you some words
 i have heard from the lips of the abbé busoni. for all evils there are
 two remedies—time and silence. and now leave me, monsieur bertuccio, to
 walk alone here in the garden. the very circumstances which inflict on
 you, as principal in the tragic scene enacted here, such painful
 emotions, are to me, on the contrary, source of something like
 contentment, and serve but to enhance the value of this dwelling in my
 estimation. the chief beauty of trees consists in the deep shadow of
 their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures moving multitude of
 shapes and forms flitting and passing beneath that shade. here i have a
 garden laid out in such way as to afford the fullest scope for the
 imagination, and furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose
 leafy screen visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at will.
 this to me, who expected but to find blank enclosure surrounded by a
 straight wall, is, i assure you, most agreeable surprise. i have no
 fear of ghosts, and i have never heard it said that so much harm had
 been done by the dead during six thousand years as is wrought by the
 living in single day. retire within, bertuccio, and tranquillize your
 mind. should your confessor be less indulgent to you in your dying
 moments than you found the abbé busoni, send for me, if i am still on
 earth, and i will soothe your ears with words that shall effectually
 calm and soothe your parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse the
 ocean called eternity.”
 
bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing heavily. monte
 cristo, left alone, took three or four steps onwards, and murmured:
 
“here, beneath this plane-tree, must have been where the infant’s grave
 was dug. there is the little door opening into the garden. at this
 corner is the private staircase communicating with the sleeping
 apartment. there will be necessity for to make note of these
 particulars, for there, before my eyes, beneath my feet, all around me,
 i have the plan sketched with all the living reality of truth.”
 
after making the tour of the garden second time, the count re-entered
 his carriage, while bertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression
 of his master’s features, took his seat beside the driver without
 uttering word. the carriage proceeded rapidly towards paris.
 
that same evening, upon reaching his abode in the champs-Élysées, the
 count of monte cristo went over the whole building with the air of one
 long acquainted with each nook or corner. nor, although preceding the
 party, did once mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest
 error when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to conduct him
 to place or suite of rooms desired to visit. ali was his principal
 attendant during this nocturnal survey. having given various orders to
 bertuccio relative to the improvements and alterations desired to
 make in the house, the count, drawing out his watch, said to the
 attentive nubian:
 
“it is half-past eleven o’clock; haydée will soon be here. have the
 french attendants been summoned to await her coming?”
 
ali extended his hands towards the apartments destined for the fair
 greek, which were so effectually concealed by means of tapestried
 entrance, that it would have puzzled the most curious to have divined
 their existence. ali, having pointed to the apartments, held up three
 fingers of his right hand, and then, placing it beneath his head, shut
 his eyes, and feigned to sleep.
 
“i understand,” said monte cristo, well acquainted with ali’s
 pantomime; “you mean to tell that three female attendants await
 their new mistress in her sleeping-chamber.”
 
ali, with considerable animation, made sign in the affirmative.
 
“madame will be tired tonight,” continued monte cristo, “and will, no
 doubt, wish to rest. desire the french attendants not to weary her with
 questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire. you will
 also see that the greek servants hold communication with those of
 this country.”
 
bowed. just at that moment voices were heard hailing the concierge.
 the gate opened, carriage rolled down the avenue, and stopped at the
 steps. the count hastily descended, presented himself at the already
 opened carriage door, and held out his hand to young woman,
 completely enveloped in green silk mantle heavily embroidered with
 gold. she raised the hand extended towards her to her lips, and kissed
 it with mixture of love and respect. some few words passed between
 them in that sonorous language in which homer makes his gods converse.
 the young woman spoke with an expression of deep tenderness, while the
 count replied with an air of gentle gravity.
 
preceded by ali, who carried rose-colored flambeau in his hand, the
 young lady, who was other than the lovely greek who had been monte
 cristo’s companion in italy, was conducted to her apartments, while the
 count retired to the pavilion reserved for himself. in another hour
 every light in the house was extinguished, and it might have been
 thought that all its inmates slept.
 


chapter 46. unlimited credit
 
about two o’clock the following day calash, drawn by pair of
 magnificent english horses, stopped at the door of monte cristo and a
 person, dressed in blue coat, with buttons of similar color, a
 white waistcoat, over which was displayed massive gold chain, brown
 trousers, and quantity of black hair descending so low over his
 eyebrows as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial so
 little did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles
 stamped on his features—a person, in word, who, although evidently
 past fifty, desired to be taken for not more than forty, bent forwards
 from the carriage door, on the panels of which were emblazoned the
 armorial bearings of baron, and directed his groom to inquire at the
 porter’s lodge whether the count of monte cristo resided there, and if
 were within.
 
while waiting, the occupant of the carriage surveyed the house, the
 garden as far as could distinguish it, and the livery of servants
 who passed to and fro, with an attention so close as to be somewhat
 impertinent. his glance was keen but showed cunning rather than
 intelligence; his lips were straight, and so thin that, as they closed,
 they were drawn in over the teeth; his cheek-bones were broad and
 projecting, never-failing proof of audacity and craftiness; while the
 flatness of his forehead, and the enlargement of the back of his skull,
 which rose much higher than his large and coarsely shaped ears,
 combined to form physiognomy anything but prepossessing, save in the
 eyes of such as considered that the owner of so splendid an equipage
 must needs be all that was admirable and enviable, more especially when
 they gazed on the enormous diamond that glittered in his shirt, and the
 red ribbon that depended from his button-hole.
 
the groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window of the
 porter’s lodge, saying:
 
“pray, does not the count of monte cristo live here?”
 
“his excellency does reside here,” replied the concierge; “but——” added
 he, glancing an inquiring look at ali. ali returned sign in the
 negative.
 
“but what?” asked the groom.
 
“his excellency does not receive visitors today.”
 
“then here is my master’s card, the baron danglars. you will take it to
 the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the chamber, my
 master came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.”
 
“i never speak to his excellency,” replied the concierge; “the valet de
 chambre will carry your message.”
 
the groom returned to the carriage.
 
“well?” asked danglars.
 
the man, somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke had received, repeated
 what the concierge had said.
 
“bless me,” murmured baron danglars, “this must surely be prince
 instead of count by their styling him ‘excellency,’ and only
 venturing to address him by the medium of his valet chambre.
 however, it does not signify; has letter of credit on me, so i
 must see him when requires his money.”
 
then, throwing himself back in his carriage, danglars called out to his
 coachman, in voice that might be heard across the road, “to the
 chamber of deputies.”
 
apprised in time of the visit paid him, monte cristo had, from behind
 the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed the baron, by means of
 an excellent lorgnette, as danglars himself had scrutinized the house,
 garden, and servants.
 
“that fellow has decidedly bad countenance,” said the count in tone
 of disgust, as shut up his glass into its ivory case. “how comes it
 that all do not retreat in aversion at sight of that flat, receding,
 serpent-like forehead, round, vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked
 nose, like the beak of buzzard? ali,” cried he, striking at the same
 time on the brazen gong. ali appeared. “summon bertuccio,” said the
 count. almost immediately bertuccio entered the apartment.
 
“did your excellency desire to see me?” inquired he.
 
“i did,” replied the count. “you doubt observed the horses standing
 few minutes since at the door?”
 
“certainly, your excellency. i noticed them for their remarkable
 beauty.”
 
“then how comes it,” said monte cristo with frown, “that, when i
 desired you to purchase for the finest pair of horses to be found in
 paris, there is another pair, fully as fine as mine, not in my
 stables?”
 
at the look of displeasure, added to the angry tone in which the count
 spoke, ali turned pale and held down his head.
 
“it is not your fault, my good ali,” said the count in the arabic
 language, and with gentleness none would have thought him capable of
 showing, either in voice or face—“it is not your fault. you do not
 understand the points of english horses.”
 
the countenance of poor ali recovered its serenity.
 
“permit to assure your excellency,” said bertuccio, “that the horses
 you speak of were not to be sold when i purchased yours.”
 
monte cristo shrugged his shoulders. “it seems, sir steward,” said he,
 “that you have yet to learn that all things are to be sold to such as
 care to pay the price.”
 
“his excellency is not, perhaps, aware that m. danglars gave 16,000
 francs for his horses?”
 
“very well. then offer him double that sum; banker never loses an
 opportunity of doubling his capital.”
 
“is your excellency really in earnest?” inquired the steward.
 
monte cristo regarded the person who durst presume to doubt his words
 with the look of one equally surprised and displeased.
 
“i have to pay visit this evening,” replied he. “i desire that these
 horses, with completely new harness, may be at the door with my
 carriage.”
 
bertuccio bowed, and was about to retire; but when reached the door,
 paused, and then said, “at what o’clock does your excellency wish
 the carriage and horses to be ready?”
 
“at five o’clock,” replied the count.
 
“i beg your excellency’s pardon,” interposed the steward in a
 deprecating manner, “for venturing to observe that it is already two
 o’clock.”
 
“i am perfectly aware of that fact,” answered monte cristo calmly.
 then, turning towards ali, said, “let all the horses in my stables
 be led before the windows of your young lady, that she may select those
 she prefers for her carriage. request her also to oblige by saying
 whether it is her pleasure to dine with me; if so, let dinner be served
 in her apartments. now, leave me, and desire my valet chambre to
 come hither.”
 
scarcely had ali disappeared when the valet entered the chamber.
 
“monsieur baptistin,” said the count, “you have been in my service one
 year, the time i generally give myself to judge of the merits or
 demerits of those about me. you suit very well.”
 
baptistin bowed low.
 
“it only remains for to know whether i also suit you?”
 
“oh, your excellency!” exclaimed baptistin eagerly.
 
“listen, if you please, till i have finished speaking,” replied monte
 cristo. “you receive 1,500 francs per annum for your services here—more
 than many brave subaltern, who continually risks his life for his
 country, obtains. you live in manner far superior to many clerks who
 work ten times harder than you do for their money. then, though
 yourself servant, you have other servants to wait upon you, take care
 of your clothes, and see that your linen is duly prepared for you.
 again, you make profit upon each article you purchase for my toilet,
 amounting in the course of year to sum equalling your wages.”
 
“nay, indeed, your excellency.”
 
“i am not condemning you for this, monsieur baptistin; but let your
 profits end here. it would be long indeed ere you would find so
 lucrative post as that you have now the good fortune to fill. i
 neither ill-use nor ill-treat my servants by word or action. an error i
 readily forgive, but wilful negligence or forgetfulness, never. my
 commands are ordinarily short, clear, and precise; and i would rather
 be obliged to repeat my words twice, or even three times, than they
 should be misunderstood. i am rich enough to know whatever i desire to
 know, and i can promise you i am not wanting in curiosity. if, then, i
 should learn that you had taken upon yourself to speak of to anyone
 favorably or unfavorably, to comment on my actions, or watch my
 conduct, that very instant you would quit my service. you may now
 retire. i never caution my servants second time—remember that.”
 
baptistin bowed, and was proceeding towards the door.
 
“i forgot to mention to you,” said the count, “that i lay yearly aside
 certain sum for each servant in my establishment; those whom i am
 compelled to dismiss lose (as matter of course) all participation in
 this money, while their portion goes to the fund accumulating for those
 domestics who remain with me, and among whom it will be divided at my
 death. you have been in my service year, your fund has already begun
 to accumulate—let it continue to do so.”
 
this address, delivered in the presence of ali, who, not understanding
 one word of the language in which it was spoken, stood wholly unmoved,
 produced an effect on m. baptistin only to be conceived by such as have
 occasion to study the character and disposition of french domestics.
 
“i assure your excellency,” said he, “that at least it shall be my
 study to merit your approbation in all things, and i will take m. ali
 as my model.”
 
“by means,” replied the count in the most frigid tones; “ali has
 many faults mixed with most excellent qualities. cannot possibly
 serve you as pattern for your conduct, not being, as you are, paid
 servant, but mere slave—a dog, who, should fail in his duty
 towards me, i should not discharge from my service, but kill.”
 
baptistin opened his eyes with astonishment.
 
“you seem incredulous,” said monte cristo, who repeated to ali in the
 arabic language what had just been saying to baptistin in french.
 
the nubian smiled assentingly to his master’s words, then, kneeling on
 one knee, respectfully kissed the hand of the count. this corroboration
 of the lesson had just received put the finishing stroke to the
 wonder and stupefaction of m. baptistin. the count then motioned the
 valet chambre to retire, and to ali to follow to his study, where
 they conversed long and earnestly together. as the hand of the clock
 pointed to five the count struck thrice upon his gong. when ali was
 wanted one stroke was given, two summoned baptistin, and three
 bertuccio. the steward entered.
 
“my horses,” said monte cristo.
 
“they are at the door harnessed to the carriage as your excellency
 desired. does your excellency wish to accompany him?”
 
“no, the coachman, ali, and baptistin will go.”
 
the count descended to the door of his mansion, and beheld his carriage
 drawn by the very pair of horses had so much admired in the morning
 as the property of danglars. as passed them said:
 
“they are extremely handsome certainly, and you have done well to
 purchase them, although you were somewhat remiss not to have procured
 them sooner.”
 
“indeed, your excellency, i had very considerable difficulty in
 obtaining them, and, as it is, they have cost an enormous price.”
 
“does the sum you gave for them make the animals less beautiful,”
 inquired the count, shrugging his shoulders.
 
“nay, if your excellency is satisfied, it is all that i could wish.
 whither does your excellency desire to be driven?”
 
“to the residence of baron danglars, rue chaussée d’antin.”
 
this conversation had passed as they stood upon the terrace, from which
 flight of stone steps led to the carriage-drive. as bertuccio, with a
 respectful bow, was moving away, the count called him back.
 
“i have another commission for you, m. bertuccio,” said he; “i am
 desirous of having an estate by the seaside in normandy—for instance,
 between havre and boulogne. you see i give you wide range. it will
 be absolutely necessary that the place you may select have small
 harbor, creek, or bay, into which my corvette can enter and remain at
 anchor. she draws only fifteen feet. she must be kept in constant
 readiness to sail immediately i think proper to give the signal. make
 the requisite inquiries for place of this description, and when you
 have met with an eligible spot, visit it, and if it possess the
 advantages desired, purchase it at once in your own name. the corvette
 must now, i think, be on her way to fécamp, must she not?”
 
20333m
 


“certainly, your excellency; i saw her put to the same evening we
 quitted marseilles.”
 
“and the yacht.”
 
“was ordered to remain at martigues.”
 
“’tis well. i wish you to write from time to time to the captains in
 charge of the two vessels so as to keep them on the alert.”
 
“and the steamboat?”
 
“she is at châlons?”
 
“yes.”
 
“the same orders for her as for the two sailing vessels.”
 
“very good.”
 
“when you have purchased the estate i desire, i want constant relays of
 horses at ten leagues apart along the northern and southern road.”
 
“your excellency may depend upon me.”
 
the count made gesture of satisfaction, descended the terrace steps,
 and sprang into his carriage, which was whirled along swiftly to the
 banker’s house.
 
danglars was engaged at that moment, presiding over railroad
 committee. but the meeting was nearly concluded when the name of his
 visitor was announced. as the count’s title sounded on his ear rose,
 and addressing his colleagues, who were members of one or the other
 chamber, said:
 
“gentlemen, pardon for leaving you so abruptly; but most
 ridiculous circumstance has occurred, which is this,—thomson & french,
 the roman bankers, have sent to certain person calling himself the
 count of monte cristo, and have given him an unlimited credit with me.
 i confess this is the drollest thing i have ever met with in the course
 of my extensive foreign transactions, and you may readily suppose it
 has greatly roused my curiosity. i took the trouble this morning to
 call on the pretended count—if were real count wouldn’t be so
 rich. but, would you believe it, ‘he was not receiving.’ so the master
 of monte cristo gives himself airs befitting great millionaire or a
 capricious beauty. i made inquiries, and found that the house in the
 champs-Élysées is his own property, and certainly it was very decently
 kept up. but,” pursued danglars with one of his sinister smiles, “an
 order for unlimited credit calls for something like caution on the part
 of the banker to whom that order is given. i am very anxious to see
 this man. i suspect hoax is intended, but the instigators of it
 little knew whom they had to deal with. ‘they laugh best who laugh
 last!’”
 
having delivered himself of this pompous address, uttered with degree
 of energy that left the baron almost out of breath, bowed to the
 assembled party and withdrew to his drawing-room, whose sumptuous
 furnishings of white and gold had caused great sensation in the
 chaussée d’antin. it was to this apartment had desired his guest to
 be shown, with the purpose of overwhelming him at the sight of so much
 luxury. found the count standing before some copies of albano and
 fattore that had been passed off to the banker as originals; but which,
 mere copies as they were, seemed to feel their degradation in being
 brought into juxtaposition with the gaudy colors that covered the
 ceiling.
 
the count turned round as heard the entrance of danglars into the
 room. with slight inclination of the head, danglars signed to the
 count to be seated, pointing significantly to gilded armchair,
 covered with white satin embroidered with gold. the count sat down.
 
20335m
 


“i have the honor, i presume, of addressing m. monte cristo.”
 
the count bowed.
 
“and i of speaking to baron danglars, chevalier of the legion of honor,
 and member of the chamber of deputies?”
 
monte cristo repeated all the titles had read on the baron’s card.
 
danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips.
 
“you will, i trust, excuse me, monsieur, for not calling you by your
 title when i first addressed you,” said, “but you are aware that we
 are living under popular form of government, and that i am myself a
 representative of the liberties of the people.”
 
“so much so,” replied monte cristo, “that while you call yourself baron
 you are not willing to call anybody else count.”
 
“upon my word, monsieur,” said danglars with affected carelessness, “i
 attach sort of value to such empty distinctions; but the fact is, i
 was made baron, and also chevalier of the legion of honor, in return
 for services rendered, but——”
 
“but you have discarded your titles after the example set you by
 messrs. montmorency and lafayette? that was noble example to
 follow, monsieur.”
 
“why,” replied danglars, “not entirely so; with the servants,—you
 understand.”
 
“i see; to your domestics you are ‘my lord,’ the journalists style you
 ‘monsieur,’ while your constituents call you ‘citizen.’ these are
 distinctions very suitable under constitutional government. i
 understand perfectly.”
 
again danglars bit his lips; saw that was match for monte
 cristo in an argument of this sort, and therefore hastened to turn
 to subjects more congenial.
 
“permit to inform you, count,” said he, bowing, “that i have
 received letter of advice from thomson & french, of rome.”
 
“i am glad to hear it, baron,—for i must claim the privilege of
 addressing you after the manner of your servants. i have acquired the
 bad habit of calling persons by their titles from living in country
 where barons are still barons by right of birth. but as regards the
 letter of advice, i am charmed to find that it has reached you; that
 will spare the troublesome and disagreeable task of coming to you
 for money myself. you have received regular letter of advice?”
 
“yes,” said danglars, “but i confess i didn’t quite comprehend its
 meaning.”
 
“indeed?”
 
“and for that reason i did myself the honor of calling upon you, in
 order to beg for an explanation.”
 
“go on, monsieur. here i am, ready to give you any explanation you
 desire.”
 
“why,” said danglars, “in the letter—i believe i have it about me”—here
 felt in his breast-pocket—“yes, here it is. well, this letter gives
 the count of monte cristo unlimited credit on our house.”
 
“well, baron, what is there difficult to understand about that?”
 
“merely the term _unlimited_—nothing else, certainly.”
 
“is not that word known in france? the people who wrote are
 anglo-germans, you know.”
 
“oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothing to be said;
 but as regards the competency of the document, i certainly have
 doubts.”
 
“is it possible?” asked the count, assuming all air and tone of the
 utmost simplicity and candor. “is it possible that thomson & french are
 not looked upon as safe and solvent bankers? pray tell what you
 think, baron, for i feel uneasy, i can assure you, having some
 considerable property in their hands.”
 
“thomson & french are perfectly solvent,” replied danglars, with an
 almost mocking smile; “but the word _unlimited_, in financial affairs,
 is so extremely vague.”
 
“is, in fact, unlimited,” said monte cristo.
 
“precisely what i was about to say,” cried danglars. “now what is vague
 is doubtful; and it was wise man who said, ‘when in doubt, keep
 out.’”
 
“meaning to say,” rejoined monte cristo, “that however thomson & french
 may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly, the baron
 danglars is not disposed to follow their example.”
 
“not at all.”
 
“plainly enough; messrs. thomson & french set bounds to their
 engagements while those of m. danglars have their limits; is wise
 man, according to his own showing.”
 
“monsieur,” replied the banker, drawing himself up with haughty air,
 “the extent of my resources has never yet been questioned.”
 
“it seems, then, reserved for me,” said monte cristo coldly, “to be the
 first to do so.”
 
“by what right, sir?”
 
“by right of the objections you have raised, and the explanations you
 have demanded, which certainly must have some motive.”
 
once more danglars bit his lips. it was the second time had been
 worsted, and this time on his own ground. his forced politeness sat
 awkwardly upon him, and approached almost to impertinence. monte cristo
 on the contrary, preserved graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a
 certain degree of simplicity could assume at pleasure, and thus
 possessed the advantage.
 
“well, sir,” resumed danglars, after brief silence, “i will endeavor
 to make myself understood, by requesting you to inform for what sum
 you propose to draw upon me?”
 
“why, truly,” replied monte cristo, determined not to lose an inch of
 the ground had gained, “my reason for desiring an ‘unlimited’ credit
 was precisely because i did not know how much money i might need.”
 
the banker thought the time had come for him to take the upper hand. so
 throwing himself back in his armchair, said, with an arrogant and
 purse-proud air:
 
“let beg of you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will then
 be convinced that the resources of the house of danglars, however
 limited, are still equal to meeting the largest demands; and were you
 even to require million——”
 
“i beg your pardon,” interposed monte cristo.
 
“i said million,” replied danglars, with the confidence of ignorance.
 
“but could i do with million?” retorted the count. “my dear sir, if a
 trifle like that could suffice me, i should never have given myself the
 trouble of opening an account. million? excuse my smiling when you
 speak of sum i am in the habit of carrying in my pocket-book or
 dressing-case.”
 
and with these words monte cristo took from his pocket small case
 containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on the
 treasury for 500,000 francs each, payable at sight to the bearer. man
 like danglars was wholly inaccessible to any gentler method of
 correction. the effect of the present revelation was stunning; he
 trembled and was on the verge of apoplexy. the pupils of his eyes, as
 gazed at monte cristo dilated horribly.
 
“come, come,” said monte cristo, “confess honestly that you have not
 perfect confidence in thomson & french. i understand, and foreseeing
 that such might be the case, i took, in spite of my ignorance of
 affairs, certain precautions. see, here are two similar letters to that
 you have yourself received; one from the house of arstein & eskeles of
 vienna, to baron rothschild, the other drawn by baring of london, upon
 m. lafitte. now, sir, you have but to say the word, and i will spare
 you all uneasiness by presenting my letter of credit to one or other of
 these two firms.”
 
the blow had struck home, and danglars was entirely vanquished; with a
 trembling hand took the two letters from the count, who held them
 carelessly between finger and thumb, and proceeded to scrutinize the
 signatures, with minuteness that the count might have regarded as
 insulting, had it not suited his present purpose to mislead the banker.
 
“oh, sir,” said danglars, after had convinced himself of the
 authenticity of the documents held, and rising as if to salute the
 power of gold personified in the man before him,—“three letters of
 unlimited credit! i can be longer mistrustful, but you must pardon
 me, my dear count, for confessing to some degree of astonishment.”
 
“nay,” answered monte cristo, with the most gentlemanly air, “’tis not
 for such trifling sums as these that your banking house is to be
 incommoded. then, you can let have some money, can you not?”
 
“whatever you say, my dear count; i am at your orders.”
 
“why,” replied monte cristo, “since we mutually understand each
 other—for such i presume is the case?” danglars bowed assentingly. “you
 are quite sure that not lurking doubt or suspicion lingers in your
 mind?”
 
“oh, my dear count,” exclaimed danglars, “i never for an instant
 entertained such feeling towards you.”
 
“no, you merely wished to be convinced, nothing more; but now that we
 have come to so clear an understanding, and that all distrust and
 suspicion are laid at rest, we may as well fix sum as the probable
 expenditure of the first year, suppose we say six millions to——”
 
“six millions!” gasped danglars—“so be it.”
 
“then, if i should require more,” continued monte cristo in careless
 manner, “why, of course, i should draw upon you; but my present
 intention is not to remain in france more than year, and during that
 period i scarcely think i shall exceed the sum i mentioned. however, we
 shall see. be kind enough, then, to send 500,000 francs tomorrow. i
 shall be at home till midday, or if not, i will leave receipt with my
 steward.”
 
“the money you desire shall be at your house by ten o’clock tomorrow
 morning, my dear count,” replied danglars. “how would you like to have
 it? in gold, silver, or notes?”
 
“half in gold, and the other half in bank-notes, if you please,” said
 the count, rising from his seat.
 
“i must confess to you, count,” said danglars, “that i have hitherto
 imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all the great fortunes of
 europe, and still wealth such as yours has been wholly unknown to me.
 may i presume to ask whether you have long possessed it?”
 
“it has been in the family very long while,” returned monte cristo,
 “a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for certain
 period of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled the
 capital. the period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these
 riches occurred only short time ago, and they have only been employed
 by within the last few years. your ignorance on the subject,
 therefore, is easily accounted for. however, you will be better
 informed as to and my possessions ere long.”
 
and the count, while pronouncing these latter words, accompanied them
 with one of those ghastly smiles that used to strike terror into poor
 franz d’Épinay.
 
“with your tastes, and means of gratifying them,” continued danglars,
 “you will exhibit splendor that must effectually put us poor
 miserable millionaires quite in the shade. if i mistake not you are an
 admirer of paintings, at least i judged so from the attention you
 appeared to be bestowing on mine when i entered the room. if you will
 permit me, i shall be happy to show you my picture gallery, composed
 entirely of works by the ancient masters—warranted as such. not a
 modern picture among them. i cannot endure the modern school of
 painting.”
 
“you are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this one great
 fault—that they have not yet had time to become old.”
 
“or will you allow to show you several fine statues by thorwaldsen,
 bartoloni, and canova?—all foreign artists, for, as you may perceive, i
 think but very indifferently of our french sculptors.”
 
“you have right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they are your
 compatriots.”
 
“but all this may come later, when we shall be better known to each
 other. for the present, i will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable
 to you) to introducing you to the baroness danglars—excuse my
 impatience, my dear count, but client like you is almost like a
 member of the family.”
 
monte cristo bowed, in sign that accepted the proffered honor;
 danglars rang and was answered by servant in showy livery.
 
“is the baroness at home?” inquired danglars.
 
“yes, my lord,” answered the man.
 
“and alone?”
 
“no, my lord, madame has visitors.”
 
“have you any objection to meet any persons who may be with madame, or
 do you desire to preserve strict _incognito_?”
 
“no, indeed,” replied monte cristo with smile, “i do not arrogate to
 myself the right of so doing.”
 
“and who is with madame?—m. debray?” inquired danglars, with an air of
 indulgence and good-nature that made monte cristo smile, acquainted as
 was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.
 
“yes, my lord,” replied the servant, “m. debray is with madame.”
 
danglars nodded his head; then, turning to monte cristo, said, “m.
 lucien debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the
 minister of the interior. as for my wife, i must tell you, she lowered
 herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient
 families in france. her maiden name was servières, and her first
 husband was colonel the marquis of nargonne.”
 
“i have not the honor of knowing madame danglars; but i have already
 met m. lucien debray.”
 
“ah, indeed?” said danglars; “and where was that?”
 
“at the house of m. morcerf.”
 
“ah! you are acquainted with the young viscount, are you?”
 
“we were together good deal during the carnival at rome.”
 
“true, true,” cried danglars. “let see; have i not heard talk of
 some strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in ruins, and of his
 having had miraculous escape? i forget how, but i know used to
 amuse my wife and daughter by telling them about it after his return
 from italy.”
 
“her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen,” said the servant,
 who had gone to inquire the pleasure of his mistress.
 
“with your permission,” said danglars, bowing, “i will precede you, to
 show you the way.”
 
“by all means,” replied monte cristo; “i follow you.”
 


chapter 47. the dappled grays
 
the baron, followed by the count, traversed long series of
 apartments, in which the prevailing characteristics were heavy
 magnificence and the gaudiness of ostentatious wealth, until reached
 the boudoir of madame danglars—a small octagonal-shaped room, hung with
 pink satin, covered with white indian muslin. the chairs were of
 ancient workmanship and materials; over the doors were painted sketches
 of shepherds and shepherdesses, after the style and manner of boucher;
 and at each side pretty medallions in crayons, harmonizing well with
 the furnishings of this charming apartment, the only one throughout the
 great mansion in which any distinctive taste prevailed. the truth was,
 it had been entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out
 by m. danglars and his architect, who had been selected to aid the
 baron in the great work of improvement solely because was the most
 fashionable and celebrated decorator of the day. the decorations of the
 boudoir had then been left entirely to madame danglars and lucien
 debray. m. danglars, however, while possessing great admiration for
 the antique, as it was understood during the time of the directory,
 entertained the most sovereign contempt for the simple elegance of his
 wife’s favorite sitting-room, where, by the way, was never permitted
 to intrude, unless, indeed, excused his own appearance by ushering
 in some more agreeable visitor than himself; and even then had
 rather the air and manner of person who was himself introduced, than
 that of being the presenter of another, his reception being cordial or
 frigid, in proportion as the person who accompanied him chanced to
 please or displease the baroness.
 
madame danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was still
 strikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, most elaborate
 piece of cabinet and inlaid work, while lucien debray, standing before
 small work-table, was turning over the pages of an album.
 
lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate
 many particulars respecting him to madame danglars. it will be
 remembered that monte cristo had made lively impression on the minds
 of all the party assembled at the breakfast given by albert morcerf;
 and although debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings,
 had never been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in
 his mind by the impressive look and manner of the count, consequently
 the description given by lucien to the baroness bore the highly-colored
 tinge of his own heated imagination. already excited by the wonderful
 stories related of the count by morcerf, it is wonder that madame
 danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
 circumstances detailed by debray. this posing at the piano and over the
 album was only little ruse adopted by way of precaution. most
 gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on m. danglars; the
 count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received formal though
 graceful courtesy, while lucien exchanged with the count sort of
 distant recognition, and with danglars free and easy nod.
 
“baroness,” said danglars, “give leave to present to you the count
 of monte cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to by my
 correspondents at rome. i need but mention one fact to make all the
 ladies in paris court his notice, and that is, that has come to take
 up his abode in paris for year, during which brief period proposes
 to spend six millions of money. that means balls, dinners, and lawn
 parties without end, in all of which i trust the count will remember
 us, as may depend upon it we shall him, in our own humble
 entertainments.”
 
in spite of the gross flattery and coarseness of this address, madame
 danglars could not forbear gazing with considerable interest on man
 capable of expending six millions in twelve months, and who had
 selected paris for the scene of his princely extravagance.
 
“and when did you arrive here?” inquired she.
 
“yesterday morning, madame.”
 
“coming, as usual, i presume, from the extreme end of the globe? pardon
 me—at least, such i have heard is your custom.”
 
“nay, madame. this time i have merely come from cadiz.”
 
“you have selected most unfavorable moment for your first visit.
 paris is horrible place in summer. balls, parties, and _fêtes_ are
 over; the italian opera is in london; the french opera everywhere
 except in paris. as for the théatre français, you know, of course, that
 it is nowhere. the only amusements left us are the indifferent races at
 the champ-de-mars and satory. do you propose entering any horses at
 either of these races, count?”
 
“i shall do whatever they do at paris, madame, if i have the good
 fortune to find someone who will initiate into the prevalent ideas
 of amusement.”
 
“are you fond of horses, count?”
 
“i have passed considerable part of my life in the east, madame, and
 you are doubtless aware that the orientals value only two things—the
 fine breeding of their horses and the beauty of their women.”
 
“nay, count,” said the baroness, “it would have been somewhat more
 gallant to have placed the ladies first.”
 
“you see, madame, how rightly i spoke when i said i required a
 preceptor to guide in all my sayings and doings here.”
 
at this instant the favorite attendant of madame danglars entered the
 boudoir; approaching her mistress, she spoke some words in an
 undertone. madame danglars turned very pale, then exclaimed:
 
“i cannot believe it; the thing is impossible.”
 
“i assure you, madame,” replied the woman, “it is as i have said.”
 
turning impatiently towards her husband, madame danglars demanded, “is
 this true?”
 
“is what true, madame?” inquired danglars, visibly agitated.
 
“what my maid tells me.”
 
“but what does she tell you?”
 
“that when my coachman was about to harness the horses to my carriage,
 discovered that they had been removed from the stables without his
 knowledge. i desire to know what is the meaning of this?”
 
“be kind enough, madame, to listen to me,” said danglars.
 
“oh, yes; i will listen, monsieur, for i am most curious to hear what
 explanation you will give. these two gentlemen shall decide between us;
 but, first, i will state the case to them. gentlemen,” continued the
 baroness, “among the ten horses in the stables of baron danglars, are
 two that belong exclusively to me—a pair of the handsomest and most
 spirited creatures to be found in paris. but to you, at least, m.
 debray, i need not give further description, because to you my
 beautiful pair of dappled grays were well known. well, i had promised
 madame villefort the loan of my carriage to drive tomorrow to the
 bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables
 they are gone—positively gone. doubt m. danglars has sacrificed them
 to the selfish consideration of gaining some thousands of paltry
 francs. oh, what detestable crew they are, these mercenary
 speculators!”
 
“madame,” replied danglars, “the horses were not sufficiently quiet for
 you; they were scarcely four years old, and they made extremely
 uneasy on your account.”
 
“nonsense,” retorted the baroness; “you could not have entertained any
 alarm on the subject, because you are perfectly well aware that i have
 had for month in my service the very best coachman in paris. but,
 perhaps, you have disposed of the coachman as well as the horses?”
 
“my dear love, pray do not say any more about them, and i promise you
 another pair exactly like them in appearance, only more quiet and
 steady.”
 
the baroness shrugged her shoulders with an air of ineffable contempt,
 while her husband, affecting not to observe this unconjugal gesture,
 turned towards monte cristo and said,—“upon my word, count, i am quite
 sorry not to have met you sooner. you are setting up an establishment,
 of course?”
 
“why, yes,” replied the count.
 
“i should have liked to have made you the offer of these horses. i have
 almost given them away, as it is; but, as i before said, i was anxious
 to get rid of them upon any terms. they were only fit for young man.”
 
“i am much obliged by your kind intentions towards me,” said monte
 cristo; “but this morning i purchased very excellent pair of
 carriage-horses, and i do not think they were dear. there they are.
 come, m. debray, you are connoisseur, i believe, let have your
 opinion upon them.”
 
as debray walked towards the window, danglars approached his wife.
 
“i could not tell you before others,” said in low tone, “the
 reason of my parting with the horses; but most enormous price was
 offered this morning for them. some madman or fool, bent upon
 ruining himself as fast as can, actually sent his steward to to
 purchase them at any cost; and the fact is, i have gained 16,000 francs
 by the sale of them. come, don’t look so angry, and you shall have
 4,000 francs of the money to do what you like with, and eugénie shall
 have 2,000. there, what do you think now of the affair? wasn’t i right
 to part with the horses?”
 
madame danglars surveyed her husband with look of withering contempt.
 
“great heavens?” suddenly exclaimed debray.
 
“what is it?” asked the baroness.
 
“i cannot be mistaken; there are your horses! the very animals we were
 speaking of, harnessed to the count’s carriage!”
 
“my dappled grays?” demanded the baroness, springing to the window.
 “’tis indeed they!” said she.
 
danglars looked absolutely stupefied.
 
“how very singular,” cried monte cristo with well-feigned astonishment.
 
“i cannot believe it,” murmured the banker. madame danglars whispered a
 few words in the ear of debray, who approached monte cristo, saying,
 “the baroness wishes to know what you paid her husband for the horses.”
 
“i scarcely know,” replied the count; “it was little surprise
 prepared for by my steward, and cost me—well, somewhere about 30,000
 francs.”
 
debray conveyed the count’s reply to the baroness. poor danglars looked
 so crest-fallen and discomfited that monte cristo assumed pitying air
 towards him.
 
“see,” said the count, “how very ungrateful women are. your kind
 attention, in providing for the safety of the baroness by disposing of
 the horses, does not seem to have made the least impression on her. but
 so it is; woman will often, from mere wilfulness, prefer that which
 is dangerous to that which is safe. therefore, in my opinion, my dear
 baron, the best and easiest way is to leave them to their fancies, and
 allow them to act as they please, and then, if any mischief follows,
 why, at least, they have one to blame but themselves.”
 
danglars made reply; was occupied in anticipations of the coming
 scene between himself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that
 of olympic jove, predicted storm. debray, who perceived the gathering
 clouds, and felt desire to witness the explosion of madame danglars’
 rage, suddenly recollected an appointment, which compelled him to take
 his leave; while monte cristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to
 destroy the advantages hoped to obtain, made farewell bow and
 departed, leaving danglars to endure the angry reproaches of his wife.
 
20347m
 


“excellent,” murmured monte cristo to himself, as came away. “all
 has gone according to my wishes. the domestic peace of this family is
 henceforth in my hands. now, then, to play another master-stroke, by
 which i shall gain the heart of both husband and wife—delightful!
 still,” added he, “amid all this, i have not yet been presented to
 mademoiselle eugénie danglars, whose acquaintance i should have been
 glad to make. but,” went on with his peculiar smile, “i am here in
 paris, and have plenty of time before me—by and by will do for that.”
 
with these reflections entered his carriage and returned home. two
 hours afterwards, madame danglars received most flattering epistle
 from the count, in which entreated her to receive back her favorite
 “dappled grays,” protesting that could not endure the idea of making
 his entry into the parisian world of fashion with the knowledge that
 his splendid equipage had been obtained at the price of lovely
 woman’s regrets. the horses were sent back wearing the same harness she
 had seen on them in the morning; only, by the count’s orders, in the
 centre of each rosette that adorned either side of their heads, had
 been fastened large diamond.
 
to danglars monte cristo also wrote, requesting him to excuse the
 whimsical gift of capricious millionaire, and to beg the baroness to
 pardon the eastern fashion adopted in the return of the horses.
 
during the evening, monte cristo quitted paris for auteuil, accompanied
 by ali. the following day, about three o’clock, single blow struck on
 the gong summoned ali to the presence of the count.
 
“ali,” observed his master, as the nubian entered the chamber, “you
 have frequently explained to how more than commonly skilful you are
 in throwing the lasso, have you not?”
 
ali drew himself up proudly, and then returned sign in the
 affirmative.
 
“i thought i did not mistake. with your lasso you could stop an ox?”
 
again ali repeated his affirmative gesture.
 
“or tiger?”
 
ali bowed his head in token of assent.
 
“a lion even?”
 
ali sprung forwards, imitating the action of one throwing the lasso,
 then of strangled lion.
 
“i understand,” said monte cristo; “you wish to tell you have hunted
 the lion?”
 
ali smiled with triumphant pride as signified that had indeed
 both chased and captured many lions.
 
“but do you believe you could arrest the progress of two horses rushing
 forwards with ungovernable fury?”
 
the nubian smiled.
 
“it is well,” said monte cristo. “then listen to me. ere long a
 carriage will dash past here, drawn by the pair of dappled gray horses
 you saw with yesterday; now, at the risk of your own life, you must
 manage to stop those horses before my door.”
 
ali descended to the street, and marked straight line on the pavement
 immediately at the entrance of the house, and then pointed out the line
 had traced to the count, who was watching him. the count patted him
 gently on the shoulder, his usual mode of praising ali, who, pleased
 and gratified with the commission assigned him, walked calmly towards a
 projecting stone forming the angle of the street and house, and,
 seating himself thereon, began to smoke his chibouque, while monte
 cristo re-entered his dwelling, perfectly assured of the success of his
 plan.
 
still, as five o’clock approached, and the carriage was momentarily
 expected by the count, the indication of more than common impatience
 and uneasiness might be observed in his manner. stationed himself in
 room commanding view of the street, pacing the chamber with
 restless steps, stopping merely to listen from time to time for the
 sound of approaching wheels, then to cast an anxious glance on ali; but
 the regularity with which the nubian puffed forth the smoke of his
 chibouque proved that at least was wholly absorbed in the enjoyment
 of his favorite occupation.
 
suddenly distant sound of rapidly advancing wheels was heard, and
 almost immediately carriage appeared, drawn by pair of wild,
 ungovernable horses, while the terrified coachman strove in vain to
 restrain their furious speed.
 
in the vehicle was young woman and child of about seven or eight
 clasped in each other’s arms. terror seemed to have deprived them even
 of the power of uttering cry. the carriage creaked and rattled as it
 flew over the rough stones, and the slightest obstacle under the wheels
 would have caused disaster; but it kept on in the middle of the road,
 and those who saw it pass uttered cries of terror.
 
ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso from his pocket,
 threw it so skilfully as to catch the forelegs of the near horse in its
 triple fold, and suffered himself to be dragged on for few steps by
 the violence of the shock, then the animal fell over on the pole, which
 snapped, and therefore prevented the other horse from pursuing its way.
 gladly availing himself of this opportunity, the coachman leaped from
 his box; but ali had promptly seized the nostrils of the second horse,
 and held them in his iron grasp, till the beast, snorting with pain,
 sunk beside his companion.
 
all this was achieved in much less time than is occupied in the
 recital. the brief space had, however, been sufficient for man,
 followed by number of servants, to rush from the house before which
 the accident had occurred, and, as the coachman opened the door of the
 carriage, to take from it lady who was convulsively grasping the
 cushions with one hand, while with the other she pressed to her bosom
 the young boy, who had lost consciousness. monte cristo carried them
 both to the salon, and deposited them on sofa.
 
“compose yourself, madame,” said he; “all danger is over.” the woman
 looked up at these words, and, with glance far more expressive than
 any entreaties could have been, pointed to her child, who still
 continued insensible. “i understand the nature of your alarms, madame,”
 said the count, carefully examining the child, “but i assure you there
 is not the slightest occasion for uneasiness; your little charge has
 not received the least injury; his insensibility is merely the effects
 of terror, and will soon pass.”
 
“are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize my fears? see how
 deadly pale is! my child, my darling edward; speak to your
 mother—open your dear eyes and look on once again! oh, sir, in pity
 send for physician; my whole fortune shall not be thought too much
 for the recovery of my boy.”
 
with calm smile and gentle wave of the hand, monte cristo signed to
 the distracted mother to lay aside her apprehensions; then, opening a
 casket that stood near, drew forth phial of bohemian glass
 incrusted with gold, containing liquid of the color of blood, of
 which let fall single drop on the child’s lips. scarcely had it
 reached them, ere the boy, though still pale as marble, opened his
 eyes, and eagerly gazed around him. at this, the delight of the mother
 was almost frantic.
 
“where am i?” exclaimed she; “and to whom am i indebted for so happy a
 termination to my late dreadful alarm?”
 
“madame,” answered the count, “you are under the roof of one who
 esteems himself most fortunate in having been able to save you from a
 further continuance of your sufferings.”
 
“my wretched curiosity has brought all this about,” pursued the lady.
 “all paris rung with the praises of madame danglars’ beautiful horses,
 and i had the folly to desire to know whether they really merited the
 high praise given to them.”
 
“is it possible,” exclaimed the count with well-feigned astonishment,
 “that these horses belong to the baroness?”
 
“they do, indeed. may i inquire if you are acquainted with madame
 danglars?”
 
20351m
 


“i have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from the danger
 that threatened you is redoubled by the consciousness that i have been
 the unwilling and the unintentional cause of all the peril you have
 incurred. i yesterday purchased these horses of the baron; but as the
 baroness evidently regretted parting with them, i ventured to send them
 back to her, with request that she would gratify by accepting them
 from my hands.”
 
“you are, then, doubtless, the count of monte cristo, of whom hermine
 has talked to so much?”
 
“you have rightly guessed, madame,” replied the count.
 
“and i am madame héloïse villefort.”
 
the count bowed with the air of person who hears name for the first
 time.
 
“how grateful will m. villefort be for all your goodness; how
 thankfully will acknowledge that to you alone owes the existence
 of his wife and child! most certainly, but for the prompt assistance of
 your intrepid servant, this dear child and myself must both have
 perished.”
 
“indeed, i still shudder at the fearful danger you were placed in.”
 
“i trust you will allow to recompense worthily the devotion of your
 man.”
 
“i beseech you, madame,” replied monte cristo “not to spoil ali, either
 by too great praise or rewards. i cannot allow him to acquire the habit
 of expecting to be recompensed for every trifling service may
 render. ali is my slave, and in saving your life was but discharging
 his duty to me.”
 
“nay,” interposed madame villefort, on whom the authoritative style
 adopted by the count made deep impression, “nay, but consider that to
 preserve my life has risked his own.”
 
“his life, madame, belongs not to him; it is mine, in return for my
 having myself saved him from death.”
 
madame villefort made further reply; her mind was utterly
 absorbed in the contemplation of the person who, from the first instant
 she saw him, had made so powerful an impression on her.
 
during the evident preoccupation of madame villefort, monte cristo
 scrutinized the features and appearance of the boy she kept folded in
 her arms, lavishing on him the most tender endearments. the child was
 small for his age, and unnaturally pale. mass of straight black hair,
 defying all attempts to train or curl it, fell over his projecting
 forehead, and hung down to his shoulders, giving increased vivacity to
 eyes already sparkling with youthful love of mischief and fondness
 for every forbidden enjoyment. his mouth was large, and the lips, which
 had not yet regained their color, were particularly thin; in fact, the
 deep and crafty look, giving predominant expression to the child’s
 face, belonged rather to boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so
 young. his first movement was to free himself by violent push from
 the encircling arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the casket
 from whence the count had taken the phial of elixir; then, without
 asking permission of anyone, proceeded, in all the wilfulness of a
 spoiled child unaccustomed to restrain either whims or caprices, to
 pull the corks out of all the bottles.
 
“touch nothing, my little friend,” cried the count eagerly; “some of
 those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, but even to inhale.”
 
madame villefort became very pale, and, seizing her son’s arm, drew
 him anxiously toward her; but, once satisfied of his safety, she also
 cast brief but expressive glance on the casket, which was not lost
 upon the count. at this moment ali entered. at sight of him madame de
 villefort uttered an expression of pleasure, and, holding the child
 still closer towards her, she said:
 
“edward, dearest, do you see that good man? has shown very great
 courage and resolution, for exposed his own life to stop the horses
 that were running away with us, and would certainly have dashed the
 carriage to pieces. thank him, then, my child, in your very best
 manner; for, had not come to our aid, neither you nor i would have
 been alive to speak our thanks.”
 
the child stuck out his lips and turned away his head in disdainful
 manner, saying, “he’s too ugly.”
 
20353m
 


the count smiled as if the child bade fair to realize his hopes, while
 madame villefort reprimanded her with gentleness and
 moderation very far from conveying the least idea of fault having
 been committed.
 
“this lady,” said the count, speaking to ali in the arabic language,
 “is desirous that her should thank you for saving both their lives;
 but the boy refuses, saying you are too ugly.”
 
ali turned his intelligent countenance towards the boy, on whom he
 gazed without any apparent emotion; but the spasmodic working of the
 nostrils showed to the practiced eye of monte cristo that the arab had
 been wounded to the heart.
 
“will you permit to inquire,” said madame villefort, as she arose
 to take her leave, “whether you usually reside here?”
 
“no, i do not,” replied monte cristo; “it is small place i have
 purchased quite lately. my place of abode is no. 30, avenue des
 champs-Élysées; but i see you have quite recovered from your fright,
 and are, doubt, desirous of returning home. anticipating your
 wishes, i have desired the same horses you came with to be put to one
 of my carriages, and ali, whom you think so very ugly,” continued
 he, addressing the boy with smiling air, “will have the honor of
 driving you home, while your coachman remains here to attend to the
 necessary repairs of your calash. as soon as that important business is
 concluded, i will have pair of my own horses harnessed to convey it
 direct to madame danglars.”
 
“i dare not return with those dreadful horses,” said madame de
 villefort.
 
“you will see,” replied monte cristo, “that they will be as different
 as possible in the hands of ali. with him they will be gentle and
 docile as lambs.”
 
ali had, indeed, given proof of this; for, approaching the animals, who
 had been got upon their legs with considerable difficulty, rubbed
 their foreheads and nostrils with sponge soaked in aromatic vinegar,
 and wiped off the sweat and foam that covered their mouths. then,
 commencing loud whistling noise, rubbed them well all over their
 bodies for several minutes; then, undisturbed by the noisy crowd
 collected round the broken carriage, ali quietly harnessed the pacified
 animals to the count’s chariot, took the reins in his hands, and
 mounted the box, when to the utter astonishment of those who had
 witnessed the ungovernable spirit and maddened speed of the same
 horses, was actually compelled to apply his whip in very gentle
 manner before could induce them to start; and even then all that
 could be obtained from the celebrated “dappled grays,” now changed into
 couple of dull, sluggish, stupid brutes, was slow, pottering pace,
 kept up with so much difficulty that madame villefort was more than
 two hours returning to her residence in the faubourg saint-honoré.
 
20355m
 


scarcely had the first congratulations upon her marvellous escape been
 gone through when she wrote the following letter to madame danglars:—
 
“dear hermine,—i have just had wonderful escape from the most
 imminent danger, and i owe my safety to the very count of monte cristo
 we were talking about yesterday, but whom i little expected to see
 today. i remember how unmercifully i laughed at what i considered your
 eulogistic and exaggerated praises of him; but i have now ample cause
 to admit that your enthusiastic description of this wonderful man fell
 far short of his merits. your horses got as far as ranelagh, when they
 darted forward like mad things, and galloped away at so fearful rate,
 that there seemed other prospect for myself and my poor edward but
 that of being dashed to pieces against the first object that impeded
 their progress, when strange-looking man,—an arab, negro, or a
 nubian, at least black of some nation or other—at signal from the
 count, whose domestic is, suddenly seized and stopped the infuriated
 animals, even at the risk of being trampled to death himself; and
 certainly must have had most wonderful escape. the count then
 hastened to us, and took us into his house, where speedily recalled
 my poor edward to life. sent us home in his own carriage. yours will
 be returned to you tomorrow. you will find your horses in bad
 condition, from the results of this accident; they seem thoroughly
 stupefied, as if sulky and vexed at having been conquered by man. the
 count, however, has commissioned to assure you that two or three
 days’ rest, with plenty of barley for their sole food during that time,
 will bring them back to as fine, that is as terrifying, condition as
 they were in yesterday.
 
20356m
 


adieu! i cannot return you many thanks for the drive of yesterday; but,
 after all, i ought not to blame you for the misconduct of your horses,
 more especially as it procured the pleasure of an introduction to
 the count of monte cristo,—and certainly that illustrious personage,
 apart from the millions is said to be so very anxious to dispose of,
 seemed to one of those curiously interesting problems i, for one,
 delight in solving at any risk, even if it were to necessitate another
 drive to the bois behind your horses.
 
edward endured the accident with miraculous courage—he did not utter a
 single cry, but fell lifeless into my arms; nor did tear fall from
 his eyes after it was over. i doubt not you will consider these praises
 the result of blind maternal affection, but there is soul of iron in
 that delicate, fragile body. valentine sends many affectionate
 remembrances to your dear eugénie. i embrace you with all my heart.
 
héloïse villefort.
 
p.s.—do pray contrive some means for to meet the count of monte
 cristo at your house. i must and will see him again. i have just made
 m. villefort promise to call on him, and i hope the visit will be
 returned.
 
that night the adventure at auteuil was talked of everywhere. albert
 related it to his mother; château-renaud recounted it at the jockey
 club, and debray detailed it at length in the salons of the minister;
 even beauchamp accorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of
 the count’s courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him as the
 greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the feminine members of the
 aristocracy.
 
vast was the crowd of visitors and inquiring friends who left their
 names at the residence of madame villefort, with the design of
 renewing their visit at the right moment, of hearing from her lips all
 the interesting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.
 
as for m. villefort, fulfilled the predictions of héloïse to the
 letter,—donned his dress suit, drew on pair of white gloves, ordered
 the servants to attend the carriage dressed in their full livery, and
 drove that same night to no. 30 in the avenue des champs-Élysées.
 


volume three
 
30009m
 


30011m
 



chapter 48. ideology
 
if the count of monte cristo had been for long time familiar with the
 ways of parisian society, would have appreciated better the
 significance of the step which m. villefort had taken. standing well
 at court, whether the king regnant was of the older or younger branch,
 whether the government was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; looked
 upon by all as man of talent, since those who have never experienced
 political check are generally so regarded; hated by many, but warmly
 supported by others, without being really liked by anybody, m. de
 villefort held high position in the magistracy, and maintained his
 eminence like harlay or molé. his drawing-room, under the
 regenerating influence of young wife and daughter by his first
 marriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of the well-regulated paris
 salons where the worship of traditional customs and the observance of
 rigid etiquette were carefully maintained. freezing politeness, a
 strict fidelity to government principles, profound contempt for
 theories and theorists, deep-seated hatred of ideality,—these were
 the elements of private and public life displayed by m. villefort.
 
30023m
 


m. villefort was not only magistrate, was almost diplomatist.
 his relations with the former court, of which always spoke with
 dignity and respect, made him respected by the new one, and knew so
 many things, that not only was always carefully considered, but
 sometimes consulted. perhaps this would not have been so had it been
 possible to get rid of m. villefort; but, like the feudal barons who
 rebelled against their sovereign, dwelt in an impregnable fortress.
 this fortress was his post as king’s attorney, all the advantages of
 which exploited with marvellous skill, and which would not have
 resigned but to be made deputy, and thus to replace neutrality by
 opposition.
 
ordinarily m. villefort made and returned very few visits. his wife
 visited for him, and this was the received thing in the world, where
 the weighty and multifarious occupations of the magistrate were
 accepted as an excuse for what was really only calculated pride, a
 manifestation of professed superiority—in fact, the application of the
 axiom, _pretend to think well of yourself, and the world will think
 well of you_, an axiom hundred times more useful in society nowadays
 than that of the greeks, “know thyself,” knowledge for which, in our
 days, we have substituted the less difficult and more advantageous
 science of _knowing others_.
 
to his friends m. villefort was powerful protector; to his
 enemies, was silent, but bitter opponent; for those who were
 neither the one nor the other, was statue of the law-made man. he
 had haughty bearing, look either steady and impenetrable or
 insolently piercing and inquisitorial. four successive revolutions had
 built and cemented the pedestal upon which his fortune was based.
 
m. villefort had the reputation of being the least curious and the
 least wearisome man in france. gave ball every year, at which he
 appeared for quarter of an hour only,—that is to say, five-and-forty
 minutes less than the king is visible at his balls. was never seen
 at the theatres, at concerts, or in any place of public resort.
 occasionally, but seldom, played at whist, and then care was taken
 to select partners worthy of him—sometimes they were ambassadors,
 sometimes archbishops, or sometimes prince, or president, or some
 dowager duchess.
 
such was the man whose carriage had just now stopped before the count
 of monte cristo’s door. the valet chambre announced m. villefort
 at the moment when the count, leaning over large table, was tracing
 on map the route from st. petersburg to china.
 
the procureur entered with the same grave and measured step would
 have employed in entering court of justice. was the same man, or
 rather the development of the same man, whom we have heretofore seen as
 assistant attorney at marseilles. nature, according to her way, had
 made deviation in the path had marked out for himself. from being
 slender had now become meagre; once pale, was now yellow; his
 deep-set eyes were hollow, and the gold spectacles shielding his eyes
 seemed to be an integral portion of his face. dressed entirely in
 black, with the exception of his white tie, and his funeral appearance
 was only mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passed almost
 imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appeared like streak of
 blood traced with delicate brush.
 
although master of himself, monte cristo, scrutinized with
 irrepressible curiosity the magistrate whose salute returned, and
 who, distrustful by habit, and especially incredulous as to social
 prodigies, was much more despised to look upon “the noble stranger,” as
 monte cristo was already called, as an adventurer in search of new
 fields, or an escaped criminal, rather than as prince of the holy
 see, or sultan of the _thousand and one nights_.
 
“sir,” said villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by magistrates in
 their oratorical periods, and of which they cannot, or will not, divest
 themselves in society, “sir, the signal service which you yesterday
 rendered to my wife and has made it duty for to offer you my
 thanks. i have come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express
 to you my overwhelming gratitude.”
 
and as said this, the “eye severe” of the magistrate had lost
 nothing of its habitual arrogance. spoke in voice of the
 procureur-general, with the rigid inflexibility of neck and shoulders
 which caused his flatterers to say (as we have before observed) that he
 was the living statue of the law.
 
“monsieur,” replied the count, with chilling air, “i am very happy to
 have been the means of preserving to his mother, for they say
 that the sentiment of maternity is the most holy of all; and the good
 fortune which occurred to me, monsieur, might have enabled you to
 dispense with duty which, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly
 great honor; for i am aware that m. villefort is not usually lavish
 of the favor which now bestows on me,—a favor which, however
 estimable, is unequal to the satisfaction which i have in my own
 consciousness.”
 
villefort, astonished at this reply, which by means expected,
 started like soldier who feels the blow levelled at him over the
 armor wears, and curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from
 that moment noted in the tablets of his brain that the count of
 monte cristo was by means highly bred gentleman.
 
glanced around, in order to seize on something on which the
 conversation might turn, and seemed to fall easily on topic. saw
 the map which monte cristo had been examining when entered, and
 said:
 
“you seem geographically engaged, sir? it is rich study for you, who,
 as i learn, have seen as many lands as are delineated on this map.”
 
“yes, sir,” replied the count; “i have sought to make of the human
 race, taken in the mass, what you practice every day on individuals—a
 physiological study. i have believed it was much easier to descend from
 the whole to part than to ascend from part to the whole. it is an
 algebraic axiom, which makes us proceed from known to an unknown
 quantity, and not from an unknown to known; but sit down, sir, i beg
 of you.”
 
monte cristo pointed to chair, which the procureur was obliged to
 take the trouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell
 back into his own, on which had been kneeling when m. villefort
 entered. thus the count was halfway turned towards his visitor, having
 his back towards the window, his elbow resting on the geographical
 chart which furnished the theme of conversation for the moment,—a
 conversation which assumed, as in the case of the interviews with
 danglars and morcerf, turn analogous to the persons, if not to the
 situation.
 
“ah, you philosophize,” replied villefort, after moment’s silence,
 during which, like wrestler who encounters powerful opponent, he
 took breath; “well, sir, really, if, like you, i had nothing else to
 do, i should seek more amusing occupation.”
 
“why, in truth, sir,” was monte cristo’s reply, “man is but an ugly
 caterpillar for him who studies him through solar microscope; but you
 said, i think, that i had nothing else to do. now, really, let ask,
 sir, have you?—do you believe you have anything to do? or to speak in
 plain terms, do you really think that what you do deserves being called
 anything?”
 
villefort’s astonishment redoubled at this second thrust so forcibly
 made by his strange adversary. it was long time since the magistrate
 had heard paradox so strong, or rather, to say the truth more
 exactly, it was the first time had ever heard of it. the procureur
 exerted himself to reply.
 
“sir,” responded, “you are stranger, and i believe you say
 yourself that portion of your life has been spent in oriental
 countries, so you are not aware how human justice, so expeditious in
 barbarous countries, takes with us prudent and well-studied course.”
 
“oh, yes—yes, i do, sir; it is the _pede claudo_ of the ancients. i
 know all that, for it is with the justice of all countries especially
 that i have occupied myself—it is with the criminal procedure of all
 nations that i have compared natural justice, and i must say, sir, that
 it is the law of primitive nations, that is, the law of retaliation,
 that i have most frequently found to be according to the law of god.”
 
“if this law were adopted, sir,” said the procureur, “it would greatly
 simplify our legal codes, and in that case the magistrates would not
 (as you just observed) have much to do.”
 
“it may, perhaps, come to this in time,” observed monte cristo; “you
 know that human inventions march from the complex to the simple, and
 simplicity is always perfection.”
 
“in the meanwhile,” continued the magistrate, “our codes are in full
 force, with all their contradictory enactments derived from gallic
 customs, roman laws, and frank usages; the knowledge of all which, you
 will agree, is not to be acquired without extended labor; it needs
 tedious study to acquire this knowledge, and, when acquired, strong
 power of brain to retain it.”
 
“i agree with you entirely, sir; but all that even you know with
 respect to the french code, i know, not only in reference to that code,
 but as regards the codes of all nations. the english, turkish,
 japanese, hindu laws, are as familiar to as the french laws, and
 thus i was right, when i said to you, that relatively (you know that
 everything is relative, sir)—that relatively to what i have done, you
 have very little to do; but that relatively to all i have learned, you
 have yet great deal to learn.”
 
“but with what motive have you learned all this?” inquired villefort,
 in astonishment.
 
monte cristo smiled.
 
“really, sir,” observed, “i see that in spite of the reputation
 which you have acquired as superior man, you look at everything from
 the material and vulgar view of society, beginning with man, and ending
 with man—that is to say, in the most restricted, most narrow view which
 it is possible for human understanding to embrace.”
 
“pray, sir, explain yourself,” said villefort, more and more
 astonished, “i really do—not—understand you—perfectly.”
 
“i say, sir, that with the eyes fixed on the social organization of
 nations, you see only the springs of the machine, and lose sight of the
 sublime workman who makes them act; i say that you do not recognize
 before you and around you any but those office-holders whose
 commissions have been signed by minister or king; and that the men
 whom god has put above those office-holders, ministers, and kings, by
 giving them mission to follow out, instead of post to fill—i say
 that they escape your narrow, limited field of observation. it is thus
 that human weakness fails, from its debilitated and imperfect organs.
 tobias took the angel who restored him to light for an ordinary young
 man. the nations took attila, who was doomed to destroy them, for a
 conqueror similar to other conquerors, and it was necessary for both to
 reveal their missions, that they might be known and acknowledged; one
 was compelled to say, ‘i am the angel of the lord’; and the other, ‘i
 am the hammer of god,’ in order that the divine essence in both might
 be revealed.”
 
“then,” said villefort, more and more amazed, and really supposing he
 was speaking to mystic or madman, “you consider yourself as one of
 those extraordinary beings whom you have mentioned?”
 
“and why not?” said monte cristo coldly.
 
“your pardon, sir,” replied villefort, quite astounded, “but you will
 excuse if, when i presented myself to you, i was unaware that i
 should meet with person whose knowledge and understanding so far
 surpass the usual knowledge and understanding of men. it is not usual
 with us corrupted wretches of civilization to find gentlemen like
 yourself, possessors, as you are, of immense fortune—at least, so it is
 said—and i beg you to observe that i do not inquire, i merely
 repeat;—it is not usual, i say, for such privileged and wealthy beings
 to waste their time in speculations on the state of society, in
 philosophical reveries, intended at best to console those whom fate has
 disinherited from the goods of this world.”
 
“really, sir,” retorted the count, “have you attained the eminent
 situation in which you are, without having admitted, or even without
 having met with exceptions? and do you never use your eyes, which must
 have acquired so much _finesse_ and certainty, to divine, at glance,
 the kind of man by whom you are confronted? should not magistrate be
 not merely the best administrator of the law, but the most crafty
 expounder of the chicanery of his profession, steel probe to search
 hearts, touchstone to try the gold which in each soul is mingled with
 more or less of alloy?”
 
“sir,” said villefort, “upon my word, you overcome me. i really never
 heard person speak as you do.”
 
“because you remain eternally encircled in round of general
 conditions, and have never dared to raise your wings into those upper
 spheres which god has peopled with invisible or exceptional beings.”
 
“and you allow then, sir, that spheres exist, and that these marked and
 invisible beings mingle amongst us?”
 
“why should they not? can you see the air you breathe, and yet without
 which you could not for moment exist?”
 
“then we do not see those beings to whom you allude?”
 
“yes, we do; you see them whenever god pleases to allow them to assume
 material form. you touch them, come in contact with them, speak to
 them, and they reply to you.”
 
“ah,” said villefort, smiling, “i confess i should like to be warned
 when one of these beings is in contact with me.”
 
“you have been served as you desire, monsieur, for you were warned just
 now, and i now again warn you.”
 
“then you yourself are one of these marked beings?”
 
“yes, monsieur, i believe so; for until now, man has found himself
 in position similar to mine. the dominions of kings are limited
 either by mountains or rivers, or change of manners, or an alteration
 of language. my kingdom is bounded only by the world, for i am not an
 italian, or frenchman, or hindu, or an american, or spaniard—i am
 cosmopolite. country can say it saw my birth. god alone knows what
 country will see die. i adopt all customs, speak all languages. you
 believe to be frenchman, for i speak french with the same facility
 and purity as yourself. well, ali, my nubian, believes to be an
 arab; bertuccio, my steward, takes for roman; haydée, my slave,
 thinks greek. you may, therefore, comprehend, that being of no
 country, asking protection from any government, acknowledging man
 as my brother, not one of the scruples that arrest the powerful, or the
 obstacles which paralyze the weak, paralyzes or arrests me. i have only
 two adversaries—i will not say two conquerors, for with perseverance i
 subdue even them,—they are time and distance. there is third, and the
 most terrible—that is my condition as mortal being. this alone can
 stop in my onward career, before i have attained the goal at which i
 aim, for all the rest i have reduced to mathematical terms. what men
 call the chances of fate—namely, ruin, change, circumstances—i have
 fully anticipated, and if any of these should overtake me, yet it will
 not overwhelm me. unless i die, i shall always be what i am, and
 therefore it is that i utter the things you have never heard, even from
 the mouths of kings—for kings have need, and other persons have fear of
 you. for who is there who does not say to himself, in society as
 incongruously organized as ours, ‘perhaps some day i shall have to do
 with the king’s attorney’?”
 
“but can you not say that, sir? the moment you become an inhabitant of
 france, you are naturally subjected to the french law.”
 
“i know it sir,” replied monte cristo; “but when i visit country i
 begin to study, by all the means which are available, the men from whom
 i may have anything to hope or to fear, till i know them as well as,
 perhaps better than, they know themselves. it follows from this, that
 the king’s attorney, be who may, with whom i should have to deal,
 would assuredly be more embarrassed than i should.”
 
“that is to say,” replied villefort with hesitation, “that human nature
 being weak, every man, according to your creed, has committed faults.”
 
“faults or crimes,” responded monte cristo with negligent air.
 
“and that you alone, amongst the men whom you do not recognize as your
 brothers—for you have said so,” observed villefort in tone that
 faltered somewhat—“you alone are perfect.”
 
“no, not perfect,” was the count’s reply; “only impenetrable, that’s
 all. but let us leave off this strain, sir, if the tone of it is
 displeasing to you; i am more disturbed by your justice than are you
 by my second-sight.”
 
“no, no,—by means,” said villefort, who was afraid of seeming to
 abandon his ground. “no; by your brilliant and almost sublime
 conversation you have elevated above the ordinary level; we no
 longer talk, we rise to dissertation. but you know how the theologians
 in their collegiate chairs, and philosophers in their controversies,
 occasionally say cruel truths; let us suppose for the moment that we
 are theologizing in social way, or even philosophically, and i will
 say to you, rude as it may seem, ‘my brother, you sacrifice greatly to
 pride; you may be above others, but above you there is god.’”
 
30029m
 


“above us all, sir,” was monte cristo’s response, in tone and with an
 emphasis so deep that villefort involuntarily shuddered. “i have my
 pride for men—serpents always ready to threaten everyone who would pass
 without crushing them under foot. but i lay aside that pride before
 god, who has taken from nothing to make what i am.”
 
“then, count, i admire you,” said villefort, who, for the first time in
 this strange conversation, used the aristocratic form to the unknown
 personage, whom, until now, had only called monsieur. “yes, and i
 say to you, if you are really strong, really superior, really pious, or
 impenetrable, which you were right in saying amounts to the same
 thing—then be proud, sir, for that is the characteristic of
 predominance. yet you have unquestionably some ambition.”
 
“i have, sir.”
 
“and what may it be?”
 
“i too, as happens to every man once in his life, have been taken by
 satan into the highest mountain in the earth, and when there showed
 all the kingdoms of the world, and as said before, so said to
 me, ‘child of earth, what wouldst thou have to make thee adore me?’ i
 reflected long, for gnawing ambition had long preyed upon me, and
 then i replied, ‘listen,—i have always heard of providence, and yet i
 have never seen him, or anything that resembles him, or which can make
 believe that exists. i wish to be providence myself, for i feel
 that the most beautiful, noblest, most sublime thing in the world, is
 to recompense and punish.’ satan bowed his head, and groaned. ‘you
 mistake,’ said, ‘providence does exist, only you have never seen
 him, because the child of god is as invisible as the parent. you have
 seen nothing that resembles him, because works by secret springs,
 and moves by hidden ways. all i can do for you is to make you one of
 the agents of that providence.’ the bargain was concluded. i may
 sacrifice my soul, but what matters it?” added monte cristo. “if the
 thing were to do again, i would again do it.”
 
villefort looked at monte cristo with extreme amazement.
 
“count,” inquired, “have you any relations?”
 
“no, sir, i am alone in the world.”
 
“so much the worse.”
 
“why?” asked monte cristo.
 
“because then you might witness spectacle calculated to break down
 your pride. you say you fear nothing but death?”
 
“i did not say that i feared it; i only said that death alone could
 check the execution of my plans.”
 
“and old age?”
 
“my end will be achieved before i grow old.”
 
“and madness?”
 
“i have been nearly mad; and you know the axiom,—_non bis in idem_. it
 is an axiom of criminal law, and, consequently, you understand its full
 application.”
 
30031m
 


“sir,” continued villefort, “there is something to fear besides death,
 old age, and madness. for instance, there is apoplexy—that
 lightning-stroke which strikes but does not destroy you, and yet which
 brings everything to an end. you are still yourself as now, and yet you
 are yourself longer; you who, like ariel, verge on the angelic, are
 but an inert mass, which, like caliban, verges on the brutal; and this
 is called in human tongues, as i tell you, neither more nor less than
 apoplexy. come, if so you will, count, and continue this conversation
 at my house, any day you may be willing to see an adversary capable of
 understanding and anxious to refute you, and i will show you my father,
 m. noirtier villefort, one of the most fiery jacobins of the french
 revolution; that is to say, had the most remarkable audacity,
 seconded by most powerful organization—a man who has not, perhaps,
 like yourself seen all the kingdoms of the earth, but who has helped to
 overturn one of the greatest; in fact, man who believed himself, like
 you, one of the envoys, not of god, but of supreme being; not of
 providence, but of fate. well, sir, the rupture of blood-vessel on
 the lobe of the brain has destroyed all this, not in day, not in an
 hour, but in second. m. noirtier, who, on the previous night, was the
 old jacobin, the old senator, the old carbonaro, laughing at the
 guillotine, the cannon, and the dagger—m. noirtier, playing with
 revolutions—m. noirtier, for whom france was vast chess-board, from
 which pawns, rooks, knights, and queens were to disappear, so that the
 king was checkmated—m. noirtier, the redoubtable, was the next morning
 _poor m. noirtier_, the helpless old man, at the tender mercies of the
 weakest creature in the household, that is, his grandchild, valentine;
 dumb and frozen carcass, in fact, living painlessly on, that time may
 be given for his frame to decompose without his consciousness of its
 decay.”
 
“alas, sir,” said monte cristo “this spectacle is neither strange to my
 eye nor my thought. i am something of physician, and have, like my
 fellows, sought more than once for the soul in living and in dead
 matter; yet, like providence, it has remained invisible to my eyes,
 although present to my heart. hundred writers since socrates, seneca,
 st. augustine, and gall, have made, in verse and prose, the comparison
 you have made, and yet i can well understand that father’s sufferings
 may effect great changes in the mind of son. i will call on you, sir,
 since you bid contemplate, for the advantage of my pride, this
 terrible spectacle, which must have been so great source of sorrow to
 your family.”
 
“it would have been so unquestionably, had not god given so large a
 compensation. in contrast with the old man, who is dragging his way to
 the tomb, are two children just entering into life—valentine, the
 daughter by my first wife—mademoiselle renée saint-méran—and edward,
 the boy whose life you have this day saved.”
 
“and what is your deduction from this compensation, sir?” inquired
 monte cristo.
 
“my deduction is,” replied villefort, “that my father, led away by his
 passions, has committed some fault unknown to human justice, but marked
 by the justice of god. that god, desirous in his mercy to punish but
 one person, has visited this justice on him alone.”
 
monte cristo with smile on his lips, uttered in the depths of his
 soul groan which would have made villefort fly had but heard it.
 
“adieu, sir,” said the magistrate, who had risen from his seat; “i
 leave you, bearing remembrance of you—a remembrance of esteem, which
 i hope will not be disagreeable to you when you know better; for i
 am not man to bore my friends, as you will learn. besides, you have
 made an eternal friend of madame villefort.”
 
the count bowed, and contented himself with seeing villefort to the
 door of his cabinet, the procureur being escorted to his carriage by
 two footmen, who, on signal from their master, followed him with
 every mark of attention. when had gone, monte cristo breathed a
 profound sigh, and said:
 
“enough of this poison, let now seek the antidote.”
 
then sounding his bell, said to ali, who entered:
 
“i am going to madame’s chamber—have the carriage ready at one
 o’clock.”
 


chapter 49. haydée
 
it will be recollected that the new, or rather old, acquaintances of
 the count of monte cristo, residing in the rue meslay, were other
 than maximilian, julie, and emmanuel.
 
the very anticipations of delight to be enjoyed in his forthcoming
 visits—the bright, pure gleam of heavenly happiness it diffused over
 the almost deadly warfare in which had voluntarily engaged,
 illumined his whole countenance with look of ineffable joy and
 calmness, as, immediately after villefort’s departure, his thoughts
 flew back to the cheering prospect before him, of tasting, at least, a
 brief respite from the fierce and stormy passions of his mind. even
 ali, who had hastened to obey the count’s summons, went forth from his
 master’s presence in charmed amazement at the unusual animation and
 pleasure depicted on features ordinarily so stern and cold; while, as
 though dreading to put to flight the agreeable ideas hovering over his
 patron’s meditations, whatever they were, the faithful nubian walked on
 tiptoe towards the door, holding his breath, lest its faintest sound
 should dissipate his master’s happy reverie.
 
it was noon, and monte cristo had set apart one hour to be passed in
 the apartments of haydée, as though his oppressed spirit could not all
 at once admit the feeling of pure and unmixed joy, but required a
 gradual succession of calm and gentle emotions to prepare his mind to
 receive full and perfect happiness, in the same manner as ordinary
 natures demand to be inured by degrees to the reception of strong or
 violent sensations.
 
the young greek, as we have already said, occupied apartments wholly
 unconnected with those of the count. the rooms had been fitted up in
 strict accordance with oriental ideas; the floors were covered with the
 richest carpets turkey could produce; the walls hung with brocaded silk
 of the most magnificent designs and texture; while around each chamber
 luxurious divans were placed, with piles of soft and yielding cushions,
 that needed only to be arranged at the pleasure or convenience of such
 as sought repose.
 
haydée had three french maids, and one who was greek. the first three
 remained constantly in small waiting-room, ready to obey the summons
 of small golden bell, or to receive the orders of the romaic slave,
 who knew just enough french to be able to transmit her mistress’s
 wishes to the three other waiting-women; the latter had received most
 peremptory instructions from monte cristo to treat haydée with all the
 deference they would observe to queen.
 
the young girl herself generally passed her time in the chamber at the
 farther end of her apartments. this was sort of boudoir, circular,
 and lighted only from the roof, which consisted of rose-colored glass.
 haydée was reclining upon soft downy cushions, covered with blue satin
 spotted with silver; her head, supported by one of her exquisitely
 moulded arms, rested on the divan immediately behind her, while the
 other was employed in adjusting to her lips the coral tube of rich
 narghile, through whose flexible pipe she drew the smoke fragrant by
 its passage through perfumed water. her attitude, though perfectly
 natural for an eastern woman would, in european, have been deemed too
 full of coquettish straining after effect.
 
her dress, which was that of the women of epirus, consisted of pair
 of white satin trousers, embroidered with pink roses, displaying feet
 so exquisitely formed and so delicately fair, that they might well have
 been taken for parian marble, had not the eye been undeceived by their
 movements as they constantly shifted in and out of pair of little
 slippers with upturned toes, beautifully ornamented with gold and
 pearls. she wore blue and white-striped vest, with long open sleeves,
 trimmed with silver loops and buttons of pearls, and sort of bodice,
 which, closing only from the centre to the waist, exhibited the whole
 of the ivory throat and upper part of the bosom; it was fastened with
 three magnificent diamond clasps. the junction of the bodice and
 drawers was entirely concealed by one of the many-colored scarves,
 whose brilliant hues and rich silken fringe have rendered them so
 precious in the eyes of parisian belles.
 
tilted on one side of her head she had small cap of gold-colored
 silk, embroidered with pearls; while on the other purple rose mingled
 its glowing colors with the luxuriant masses of her hair, of which the
 blackness was so intense that it was tinged with blue.
 
the extreme beauty of the countenance, that shone forth in loveliness
 that mocked the vain attempts of dress to augment it, was peculiarly
 and purely grecian; there were the large, dark, melting eyes, the
 finely formed nose, the coral lips, and pearly teeth, that belonged to
 her race and country.
 
and, to complete the whole, haydée was in the very springtide and
 fulness of youthful charms—she had not yet numbered more than nineteen
 or twenty summers.
 
monte cristo summoned the greek attendant, and bade her inquire whether
 it would be agreeable to her mistress to receive his visit. haydée’s
 only reply was to direct her servant by sign to withdraw the
 tapestried curtain that hung before the door of her boudoir, the
 framework of the opening thus made serving as sort of border to the
 graceful tableau presented by the young girl’s picturesque attitude and
 appearance.
 
as monte cristo approached, she leaned upon the elbow of the arm that
 held the narghile, and extending to him her other hand, said, with a
 smile of captivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken by the
 women of athens and sparta:
 
“why demand permission ere you enter? are you longer my master, or
 have i ceased to be your slave?”
 
monte cristo returned her smile.
 
“haydée,” said he, “you well know.”
 
“why do you address so coldly—so distantly?” asked the young greek.
 “have i by any means displeased you? oh, if so, punish as you will;
 but do not—do not speak to in tones and manner so formal and
 constrained.”
 
“haydée,” replied the count, “you know that you are now in france, and
 are free.”
 
“free to do what?” asked the young girl.
 
“free to leave me.”
 
“leave you? why should i leave you?”
 
“that is not for to say; but we are now about to mix in society—to
 visit and be visited.”
 
“i don’t wish to see anybody but you.”
 
“and should you see one whom you could prefer, i would not be so
 unjust——”
 
“i have never seen anyone i preferred to you, and i have never loved
 anyone but you and my father.”
 
“my poor child,” replied monte cristo, “that is merely because your
 father and myself are the only men who have ever talked to you.”
 
“i don’t want anybody else to talk to me. my father said i was his
 ‘joy’—you style your ‘love,’—and both of you have called ‘my
 child.’”
 
“do you remember your father, haydée?”
 
the young greek smiled.
 
“he is here, and here,” said she, touching her eyes and her heart.
 
“and where am i?” inquired monte cristo laughingly.
 
“you?” cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, “you are
 everywhere!” monte cristo took the delicate hand of the young girl in
 his, and was about to raise it to his lips, when the simple child of
 nature hastily withdrew it, and presented her cheek.
 
“you now understand, haydée,” said the count, “that from this moment
 you are absolutely free; that here you exercise unlimited sway, and are
 at liberty to lay aside or continue the costume of your country, as it
 may suit your inclination. within this mansion you are absolute
 mistress of your actions, and may go abroad or remain in your
 apartments as may seem most agreeable to you. carriage waits your
 orders, and ali and myrtho will accompany you whithersoever you desire
 to go. there is but one favor i would entreat of you.”
 
“speak.”
 
“guard carefully the secret of your birth. make allusion to the
 past; nor upon any occasion be induced to pronounce the names of your
 illustrious father or ill-fated mother.”
 
“i have already told you, my lord, that i shall see one.”
 
“it is possible, haydée, that so perfect seclusion, though
 conformable with the habits and customs of the east, may not be
 practicable in paris. endeavor, then, to accustom yourself to our
 manner of living in these northern climes as you did to those of rome,
 florence, milan, and madrid; it may be useful to you one of these days,
 whether you remain here or return to the east.”
 
the young girl raised her tearful eyes towards monte cristo as she said
 with touching earnestness, “whether _we_ return to the east, you mean
 to say, my lord, do you not?”
 
“my child,” returned monte cristo “you know full well that whenever we
 part, it will be fault or wish of mine; the tree forsakes not the
 flower—the flower falls from the tree.”
 
“my lord,” replied haydée, “i never will leave you, for i am sure i
 could not exist without you.”
 
“my poor girl, in ten years i shall be old, and you will be still
 young.”
 
“my father had long white beard, but i loved him; was sixty years
 old, but to was handsomer than all the fine youths i saw.”
 
“then tell me, haydée, do you believe you shall be able to accustom
 yourself to our present mode of life?”
 
“shall i see you?”
 
“every day.”
 
“then what do you fear, my lord?”
 
“you might find it dull.”
 
“no, my lord. in the morning, i shall rejoice in the prospect of your
 coming, and in the evening dwell with delight on the happiness i have
 enjoyed in your presence; then too, when alone, i can call forth mighty
 pictures of the past, see vast horizons bounded only by the towering
 mountains of pindus and olympus. oh, believe me, that when three great
 passions, such as sorrow, love, and gratitude fill the heart, _ennui_
 can find place.”
 
“you are worthy daughter of epirus, haydée, and your charming and
 poetical ideas prove well your descent from that race of goddesses who
 claim your country as their birthplace. depend on my care to see that
 your youth is not blighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial
 solitude; and of this be well assured, that if you love as father,
 i love you as child.”
 
“you are wrong, my lord. the love i have for you is very different from
 the love i had for my father. my father died, but i did not die. if you
 were to die, i should die too.”
 
the count, with smile of profound tenderness, extended his hand, and
 she carried it to her lips.
 
monte cristo, thus attuned to the interview proposed to hold with
 morrel and his family, departed, murmuring as went these lines of
 pindar, “youth is flower of which love is the fruit; happy is who,
 after having watched its silent growth, is permitted to gather and call
 it his own.” the carriage was prepared according to orders, and
 stepping lightly into it, the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.
 


chapter 50. the morrel family
 
in very few minutes the count reached no. 7 in the rue meslay. the
 house was of white stone, and in small court before it were two small
 beds full of beautiful flowers. in the concierge that opened the gate
 the count recognized cocles; but as had but one eye, and that eye
 had become somewhat dim in the course of nine years, cocles did not
 recognize the count.
 
the carriages that drove up to the door were compelled to turn, to
 avoid fountain that played in basin of rockwork,—an ornament that
 had excited the jealousy of the whole quarter, and had gained for the
 place the appellation of _the little versailles_. it is needless to add
 that there were gold and silver fish in the basin. the house, with
 kitchens and cellars below, had above the ground floor, two stories and
 attics. the whole of the property, consisting of an immense workshop,
 two pavilions at the bottom of the garden, and the garden itself, had
 been purchased by emmanuel, who had seen at glance that could make
 of it profitable speculation. had reserved the house and half the
 garden, and building wall between the garden and the workshops, had
 let them upon lease with the pavilions at the bottom of the garden. so
 that for trifling sum was as well lodged, and as perfectly shut
 out from observation, as the inhabitants of the finest mansion in the
 faubourg st. germain.
 
the breakfast-room was finished in oak; the salon in mahogany, and the
 furnishings were of blue velvet; the bedroom was in citronwood and
 green damask. there was study for emmanuel, who never studied, and a
 music-room for julie, who never played. the whole of the second story
 was set apart for maximilian; it was precisely similar to his sister’s
 apartments, except that for the breakfast-parlor had a
 billiard-room, where received his friends. was superintending the
 grooming of his horse, and smoking his cigar at the entrance of the
 garden, when the count’s carriage stopped at the gate.
 
cocles opened the gate, and baptistin, springing from the box, inquired
 whether monsieur and madame herbault and monsieur maximilian morrel
 would see his excellency the count of monte cristo.
 
“the count of monte cristo?” cried morrel, throwing away his cigar and
 hastening to the carriage; “i should think we would see him. ah, a
 thousand thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise.”
 
and the young officer shook the count’s hand so warmly, that monte
 cristo could not be mistaken as to the sincerity of his joy, and saw
 that had been expected with impatience, and was received with
 pleasure.
 
“come, come,” said maximilian, “i will serve as your guide; such man
 as you are ought not to be introduced by servant. my sister is in the
 garden plucking the dead roses; my brother is reading his two papers,
 _la presse_ and _les débats_, within six steps of her; for wherever you
 see madame herbault, you have only to look within circle of four
 yards and you will find m. emmanuel, and ‘reciprocally,’ as they say at
 the polytechnic school.”
 
at the sound of their steps young woman of twenty to five-and-twenty,
 dressed in silk morning gown, and busily engaged in plucking the dead
 leaves off noisette rose-tree, raised her head. this was julie, who
 had become, as the clerk of the house of thomson & french had
 predicted, madame emmanuel herbault. she uttered cry of surprise at
 the sight of stranger, and maximilian began to laugh.
 
“don’t disturb yourself, julie,” said he. “the count has only been two
 or three days in paris, but already knows what fashionable woman
 of the marais is, and if does not, you will show him.”
 
“ah, monsieur,” returned julie, “it is treason in my brother to bring
 you thus, but never has any regard for his poor sister. penelon,
 penelon!”
 
an old man, who was digging busily at one of the beds, stuck his spade
 in the earth, and approached, cap in hand, striving to conceal quid
 of tobacco had just thrust into his cheek. few locks of gray
 mingled with his hair, which was still thick and matted, while his
 bronzed features and determined glance well suited an old sailor who
 had braved the heat of the equator and the storms of the tropics.
 
“i think you hailed me, mademoiselle julie?” said he.
 
penelon had still preserved the habit of calling his master’s daughter
 “mademoiselle julie,” and had never been able to change the name to
 madame herbault.
 
“penelon,” replied julie, “go and inform m. emmanuel of this
 gentleman’s visit, and maximilian will conduct him to the salon.”
 
then, turning to monte cristo,—“i hope you will permit to leave you
 for few minutes,” continued she; and without awaiting any reply,
 disappeared behind clump of trees, and escaped to the house by a
 lateral alley.
 
30041m
 


“i am sorry to see,” observed monte cristo to morrel, “that i cause no
 small disturbance in your house.”
 
“look there,” said maximilian, laughing; “there is her husband changing
 his jacket for coat. i assure you, you are well known in the rue
 meslay.”
 
“your family appears to be very happy one,” said the count, as if
 speaking to himself.
 
“oh, yes, i assure you, count, they want nothing that can render them
 happy; they are young and cheerful, they are tenderly attached to each
 other, and with twenty-five thousand francs year they fancy
 themselves as rich as rothschild.”
 
“five-and-twenty thousand francs is not large sum, however,” replied
 monte cristo, with tone so sweet and gentle, that it went to
 maximilian’s heart like the voice of father; “but they will not be
 content with that. your brother-in-law is barrister? doctor?”
 
“he was merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to the business of my
 poor father. m. morrel, at his death, left 500,000 francs, which were
 divided between my sister and myself, for we were his only children.
 her husband, who, when married her, had other patrimony than his
 noble probity, his first-rate ability, and his spotless reputation,
 wished to possess as much as his wife. labored and toiled until he
 had amassed 250,000 francs; six years sufficed to achieve this object.
 oh, i assure you, sir, it was touching spectacle to see these young
 creatures, destined by their talents for higher stations, toiling
 together, and through their unwillingness to change any of the customs
 of their paternal house, taking six years to accomplish what less
 scrupulous people would have effected in two or three. marseilles
 resounded with their well-earned praises. at last, one day, emmanuel
 came to his wife, who had just finished making up the accounts.
 
“‘julie,’ said to her, ‘cocles has just given the last rouleau of
 hundred francs; that completes the 250,000 francs we had fixed as the
 limits of our gains. can you content yourself with the small fortune
 which we shall possess for the future? listen to me. our house
 transacts business to the amount of million year, from which we
 derive an income of 40,000 francs. we can dispose of the business, if
 we please, in an hour, for i have received letter from m. delaunay,
 in which offers to purchase the good-will of the house, to unite
 with his own, for 300,000 francs. advise what i had better do.’
 
“‘emmanuel,’ returned my sister, ‘the house of morrel can only be
 carried on by morrel. is it not worth 300,000 francs to save our
 father’s name from the chances of evil fortune and failure?’
 
“‘i thought so,’ replied emmanuel; ‘but i wished to have your advice.’
 
“‘this is my counsel:—our accounts are made up and our bills paid; all
 we have to do is to stop the issue of any more, and close our office.’
 
“this was done instantly. it was three o’clock; at quarter past, a
 merchant presented himself to insure two ships; it was clear profit
 of 15,000 francs.
 
“‘monsieur,’ said emmanuel, ‘have the goodness to address yourself to
 m. delaunay. we have quitted business.’
 
“‘how long?’ inquired the astonished merchant.
 
30043m
 


“‘a quarter of an hour,’ was the reply.
 
“and this is the reason, monsieur,” continued maximilian, “of my sister
 and brother-in-law having only 25,000 francs year.”
 
maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the count’s
 heart had swelled within him, when emmanuel entered wearing hat and
 coat. saluted the count with the air of man who is aware of the
 rank of his guest; then, after having led monte cristo around the
 little garden, returned to the house.
 
large vase of japan porcelain, filled with flowers that loaded the
 air with their perfume, stood in the salon. julie, suitably dressed,
 and her hair arranged (she had accomplished this feat in less than ten
 minutes), received the count on his entrance. the songs of the birds
 were heard in an aviary hard by, and the branches of laburnums and rose
 acacias formed an exquisite framework to the blue velvet curtains.
 everything in this charming retreat, from the warble of the birds to
 the smile of the mistress, breathed tranquillity and repose.
 
the count had felt the influence of this happiness from the moment he
 entered the house, and remained silent and pensive, forgetting that
 was expected to renew the conversation, which had ceased after the
 first salutations had been exchanged. the silence became almost painful
 when, by violent effort, tearing himself from his pleasing reverie:
 
“madame,” said at length, “i pray you to excuse my emotion, which
 must astonish you who are only accustomed to the happiness i meet here;
 but contentment is so new sight to me, that i could never be weary of
 looking at yourself and your husband.”
 
“we are very happy, monsieur,” replied julie; “but we have also known
 unhappiness, and few have ever undergone more bitter sufferings than
 ourselves.”
 
the count’s features displayed an expression of the most intense
 curiosity.
 
“oh, all this is family history, as château-renaud told you the other
 day,” observed maximilian. “this humble picture would have but little
 interest for you, accustomed as you are to behold the pleasures and the
 misfortunes of the wealthy and industrious; but such as we are, we have
 experienced bitter sorrows.”
 
“and god has poured balm into your wounds, as does into those of all
 who are in affliction?” said monte cristo inquiringly.
 
“yes, count,” returned julie, “we may indeed say has, for has
 done for us what grants only to his chosen; sent us one of his
 angels.”
 
the count’s cheeks became scarlet, and coughed, in order to have an
 excuse for putting his handkerchief to his mouth.
 
“those born to wealth, and who have the means of gratifying every
 wish,” said emmanuel, “know not what is the real happiness of life,
 just as those who have been tossed on the stormy waters of the ocean on
 few frail planks can alone realize the blessings of fair weather.”
 
monte cristo rose, and without making any answer (for the tremulousness
 of his voice would have betrayed his emotion) walked up and down the
 apartment with slow step.
 
“our magnificence makes you smile, count,” said maximilian, who had
 followed him with his eyes.
 
“no, no,” returned monte cristo, pale as death, pressing one hand on
 his heart to still its throbbings, while with the other pointed to a
 crystal cover, beneath which silken purse lay on black velvet
 cushion. “i was wondering what could be the significance of this purse,
 with the paper at one end and the large diamond at the other.”
 
“count,” replied maximilian, with an air of gravity, “those are our
 most precious family treasures.”
 
“the stone seems very brilliant,” answered the count.
 
“oh, my brother does not allude to its value, although it has been
 estimated at 100,000 francs; means, that the articles contained in
 this purse are the relics of the angel i spoke of just now.”
 
“this i do not comprehend; and yet i may not ask for an explanation,
 madame,” replied monte cristo bowing. “pardon me, i had intention of
 committing an indiscretion.”
 
“indiscretion,—oh, you make us happy by giving us an excuse for
 expatiating on this subject. if we wanted to conceal the noble action
 this purse commemorates, we should not expose it thus to view. oh,
 would we could relate it everywhere, and to everyone, so that the
 emotion of our unknown benefactor might reveal his presence.”
 
“ah, really,” said monte cristo in half-stifled voice.
 
“monsieur,” returned maximilian, raising the glass cover, and
 respectfully kissing the silken purse, “this has touched the hand of a
 man who saved my father from suicide, us from ruin, and our name from
 shame and disgrace,—a man by whose matchless benevolence we poor
 children, doomed to want and wretchedness, can at present hear everyone
 envying our happy lot. this letter” (as spoke, maximilian drew a
 letter from the purse and gave it to the count)—“this letter was
 written by him the day that my father had taken desperate resolution,
 and this diamond was given by the generous unknown to my sister as her
 dowry.”
 
monte cristo opened the letter, and read it with an indescribable
 feeling of delight. it was the letter written (as our readers know) to
 julie, and signed “sinbad the sailor.”
 
“unknown you say, is the man who rendered you this service—unknown to
 you?”
 
“yes; we have never had the happiness of pressing his hand,” continued
 maximilian. “we have supplicated heaven in vain to grant us this favor,
 but the whole affair has had mysterious meaning that we cannot
 comprehend—we have been guided by an invisible hand,—a hand as powerful
 as that of an enchanter.”
 
“oh,” cried julie, “i have not lost all hope of some day kissing that
 hand, as i now kiss the purse which has touched. four years ago,
 penelon was at trieste—penelon, count, is the old sailor you saw in the
 garden, and who, from quartermaster, has become gardener—penelon, when
 was at trieste, saw on the quay an englishman, who was on the point
 of embarking on board yacht, and recognized him as the person who
 called on my father the fifth of june, 1829, and who wrote this
 letter on the fifth of september. felt convinced of his identity,
 but did not venture to address him.”
 
“an englishman,” said monte cristo, who grew uneasy at the attention
 with which julie looked at him. “an englishman you say?”
 
“yes,” replied maximilian, “an englishman, who represented himself as
 the confidential clerk of the house of thomson & french, at rome. it
 was this that made start when you said the other day, at m. de
 morcerf’s, that messrs. thomson & french were your bankers. that
 happened, as i told you, in 1829. for god’s sake, tell me, did you know
 this englishman?”
 
“but you tell me, also, that the house of thomson & french have
 constantly denied having rendered you this service?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then is it not probable that this englishman may be someone who,
 grateful for kindness your father had shown him, and which himself
 had forgotten, has taken this method of requiting the obligation?”
 
“everything is possible in this affair, even miracle.”
 
“what was his name?” asked monte cristo.
 
“he gave other name,” answered julie, looking earnestly at the
 count, “than that at the end of his letter—‘sinbad the sailor.’”
 
“which is evidently not his real name, but fictitious one.”
 
then, noticing that julie was struck with the sound of his voice:
 
“tell me,” continued he, “was not about my height, perhaps little
 taller, with his chin imprisoned, as it were, in high cravat; his
 coat closely buttoned up, and constantly taking out his pencil?”
 
“oh, do you then know him?” cried julie, whose eyes sparkled with joy.
 
“no,” returned monte cristo “i only guessed. i knew lord wilmore, who
 was constantly doing actions of this kind.”
 
“without revealing himself?”
 
“he was an eccentric being, and did not believe in the existence of
 gratitude.”
 
“oh, heaven,” exclaimed julie, clasping her hands, “in what did he
 believe, then?”
 
30047m
 


“he did not credit it at the period which i knew him,” said monte
 cristo, touched to the heart by the accents of julie’s voice; “but,
 perhaps, since then has had proofs that gratitude does exist.”
 
“and do you know this gentleman, monsieur?” inquired emmanuel.
 
“oh, if you do know him,” cried julie, “can you tell us where he
 is—where we can find him? maximilian—emmanuel—if we do but discover
 him, must believe in the gratitude of the heart!”
 
monte cristo felt tears start into his eyes, and again walked
 hastily up and down the room.
 
“in the name of heaven,” said maximilian, “if you know anything of him,
 tell us what it is.”
 
“alas,” cried monte cristo, striving to repress his emotion, “if lord
 wilmore was your unknown benefactor, i fear you will never see him
 again. i parted from him two years ago at palermo, and was then on
 the point of setting out for the most remote regions; so that i fear he
 will never return.”
 
“oh, monsieur, this is cruel of you,” said julie, much affected; and
 the young lady’s eyes swam with tears.
 
“madame,” replied monte cristo gravely, and gazing earnestly on the two
 liquid pearls that trickled down julie’s cheeks, “had lord wilmore seen
 what i now see, would become attached to life, for the tears you
 shed would reconcile him to mankind;” and held out his hand to
 julie, who gave him hers, carried away by the look and accent of the
 count.
 
“but,” continued she, “lord wilmore had family or friends, must
 have known someone, can we not——”
 
“oh, it is useless to inquire,” returned the count; “perhaps, after
 all, was not the man you seek for. was my friend: had no
 secrets from me, and if this had been so would have confided in me.”
 
“and told you nothing?”
 
“not word.”
 
“nothing that would lead you to suppose?”
 
“nothing.”
 
“and yet you spoke of him at once.”
 
“ah, in such case one supposes——”
 
“sister, sister,” said maximilian, coming to the count’s aid, “monsieur
 is quite right. recollect what our excellent father so often told us,
 ‘it was englishman that thus saved us.’”
 
monte cristo started. “what did your father tell you, m. morrel?” said
 eagerly.
 
“my father thought that this action had been miraculously performed—he
 believed that benefactor had arisen from the grave to save us. oh, it
 was touching superstition, monsieur, and although i did not myself
 believe it, i would not for the world have destroyed my father’s faith.
 how often did muse over it and pronounce the name of dear friend—a
 friend lost to him forever; and on his death-bed, when the near
 approach of eternity seemed to have illumined his mind with
 supernatural light, this thought, which had until then been but a
 doubt, became conviction, and his last words were, ‘maximilian, it
 was edmond dantès!’”
 
at these words the count’s paleness, which had for some time been
 increasing, became alarming; could not speak; looked at his watch
 like man who has forgotten the hour, said few hurried words to
 madame herbault, and pressing the hands of emmanuel and
 maximilian,—“madame,” said he, “i trust you will allow to visit you
 occasionally; i value your friendship, and feel grateful to you for
 your welcome, for this is the first time for many years that i have
 thus yielded to my feelings;” and hastily quitted the apartment.
 
“this count of monte cristo is strange man,” said emmanuel.
 
“yes,” answered maximilian, “but i feel sure has an excellent heart,
 and that likes us.”
 
“his voice went to my heart,” observed julie; “and two or three times i
 fancied that i had heard it before.”
 


chapter 51. pyramus and thisbe
 
about two-thirds of the way along the faubourg saint-honoré, and in the
 rear of one of the most imposing mansions in this rich neighborhood,
 where the various houses vie with each other for elegance of design and
 magnificence of construction, extended large garden, where the
 wide-spreading chestnut-trees raised their heads high above the walls
 in solid rampart, and with the coming of every spring scattered a
 shower of delicate pink and white blossoms into the large stone vases
 that stood upon the two square pilasters of curiously wrought iron
 gate, that dated from the time of louis xiii.
 
this noble entrance, however, in spite of its striking appearance and
 the graceful effect of the geraniums planted in the two vases, as they
 waved their variegated leaves in the wind and charmed the eye with
 their scarlet bloom, had fallen into utter disuse. the proprietors of
 the mansion had many years before thought it best to confine themselves
 to the possession of the house itself, with its thickly planted
 courtyard, opening into the faubourg saint-honoré, and to the garden
 shut in by this gate, which formerly communicated with fine
 kitchen-garden of about an acre. for the demon of speculation drew a
 line, or in other words projected street, at the farther side of the
 kitchen-garden. the street was laid out, name was chosen and posted
 up on an iron plate, but before construction was begun, it occurred to
 the possessor of the property that handsome sum might be obtained for
 the ground then devoted to fruits and vegetables, by building along the
 line of the proposed street, and so making it branch of communication
 with the faubourg saint-honoré itself, one of the most important
 thoroughfares in the city of paris.
 
in matters of speculation, however, though “man proposes,” yet “money
 disposes.” from some such difficulty the newly named street died almost
 in birth, and the purchaser of the kitchen-garden, having paid high
 price for it, and being quite unable to find anyone willing to take his
 bargain off his hands without considerable loss, yet still clinging
 to the belief that at some future day should obtain sum for it
 that would repay him, not only for his past outlay, but also the
 interest upon the capital locked up in his new acquisition, contented
 himself with letting the ground temporarily to some market-gardeners,
 at yearly rental of 500 francs.
 
and so, as we have said, the iron gate leading into the kitchen-garden
 had been closed up and left to the rust, which bade fair before long to
 eat off its hinges, while to prevent the ignoble glances of the diggers
 and delvers of the ground from presuming to sully the aristocratic
 enclosure belonging to the mansion, the gate had been boarded up to a
 height of six feet. true, the planks were not so closely adjusted but
 that hasty peep might be obtained through their interstices; but the
 strict decorum and rigid propriety of the inhabitants of the house left
 grounds for apprehending that advantage would be taken of that
 circumstance.
 
horticulture seemed, however, to have been abandoned in the deserted
 kitchen-garden; and where cabbages, carrots, radishes, peas, and melons
 had once flourished, scanty crop of lucern alone bore evidence of its
 being deemed worthy of cultivation. small, low door gave egress from
 the walled space we have been describing into the projected street, the
 ground having been abandoned as unproductive by its various renters,
 and had now fallen so completely in general estimation as to return not
 even the one-half per cent it had originally paid. towards the house
 the chestnut-trees we have before mentioned rose high above the wall,
 without in any way affecting the growth of other luxuriant shrubs and
 flowers that eagerly dressed forward to fill up the vacant spaces, as
 though asserting their right to enjoy the boon of light and air. at one
 corner, where the foliage became so thick as almost to shut out day, a
 large stone bench and sundry rustic seats indicated that this sheltered
 spot was either in general favor or particular use by some inhabitant
 of the house, which was faintly discernible through the dense mass of
 verdure that partially concealed it, though situated but hundred
 paces off.
 
whoever had selected this retired portion of the grounds as the
 boundary of walk, or as place for meditation, was abundantly
 justified in the choice by the absence of all glare, the cool,
 refreshing shade, the screen it afforded from the scorching rays of the
 sun, that found entrance there even during the burning days of
 hottest summer, the incessant and melodious warbling of birds, and the
 entire removal from either the noise of the street or the bustle of the
 mansion. on the evening of one of the warmest days spring had yet
 bestowed on the inhabitants of paris, might be seen negligently thrown
 upon the stone bench, book, parasol, and work-basket, from which
 hung partly embroidered cambric handkerchief, while at little
 distance from these articles was young woman, standing close to the
 iron gate, endeavoring to discern something on the other side by means
 of the openings in the planks,—the earnestness of her attitude and the
 fixed gaze with which she seemed to seek the object of her wishes,
 proving how much her feelings were interested in the matter.
 
at that instant the little side-gate leading from the waste ground to
 the street was noiselessly opened, and tall, powerful young man
 appeared. was dressed in common gray blouse and velvet cap, but
 his carefully arranged hair, beard and moustache, all of the richest
 and glossiest black, ill accorded with his plebeian attire. after
 casting rapid glance around him, in order to assure himself that he
 was unobserved, entered by the small gate, and, carefully closing
 and securing it after him, proceeded with hurried step towards the
 barrier.
 
at the sight of him she expected, though probably not in such a
 costume, the young woman started in terror, and was about to make a
 hasty retreat. but the eye of love had already seen, even through the
 narrow chinks of the wooden palisades, the movement of the white robe,
 and observed the fluttering of the blue sash. pressing his lips close
 to the planks, exclaimed:
 
“don’t be alarmed, valentine—it is i!”
 
again the timid girl found courage to return to the gate, saying, as
 she did so:
 
“and why do you come so late today? it is almost dinner-time, and i had
 to use little diplomacy to get rid of my watchful stepmother, my
 too-devoted maid, and my troublesome brother, who is always teasing me
 about coming to work at my embroidery, which i am in fair way never
 to get done. so pray excuse yourself as well as you can for having made
 wait, and, after that, tell why i see you in dress so singular
 that at first i did not recognize you.”
 
“dearest valentine,” said the young man, “the difference between our
 respective stations makes fear to offend you by speaking of my love,
 but yet i cannot find myself in your presence without longing to pour
 forth my soul, and tell you how fondly i adore you. if it be but to
 carry away with the recollection of such sweet moments, i could even
 thank you for chiding me, for it leaves gleam of hope, that if you
 did not expect (and that indeed would be worse than vanity to
 suppose), at least i was in your thoughts. you asked the cause of my
 being late, and why i come disguised. i will candidly explain the
 reason of both, and i trust to your goodness to pardon me. i have
 chosen trade.”
 
“a trade? oh, maximilian, how can you jest at time when we have such
 deep cause for uneasiness?”
 
“heaven keep from jesting with that which is far dearer to than
 life itself! but listen to me, valentine, and i will tell you all about
 it. i became weary of ranging fields and scaling walls, and seriously
 alarmed at the idea suggested by you, that if caught hovering about
 here your father would very likely have sent to prison as thief.
 that would compromise the honor of the french army, to say nothing of
 the fact that the continual presence of captain of spahis in place
 where warlike projects could be supposed to account for it might
 well create surprise; so i have become gardener, and, consequently,
 adopted the costume of my calling.”
 
“what excessive nonsense you talk, maximilian!”
 
“nonsense? pray do not call what i consider the wisest action of my
 life by such name. consider, by becoming gardener i effectually
 screen our meetings from all suspicion or danger.”
 
30053m
 


“i beseech of you, maximilian, to cease trifling, and tell what you
 really mean.”
 
“simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on which i
 stand was to let, i made application for it, was readily accepted by
 the proprietor, and am now master of this fine crop of lucern. think of
 that, valentine! there is nothing now to prevent my building myself a
 little hut on my plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you.
 only imagine what happiness that would afford me. i can scarcely
 contain myself at the bare idea. such felicity seems above all price—as
 thing impossible and unattainable. but would you believe that i
 purchase all this delight, joy, and happiness, for which i would
 cheerfully have surrendered ten years of my life, at the small cost of
 500 francs per annum, paid quarterly? henceforth we have nothing to
 fear. i am on my own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a
 ladder against the wall, and to look over when i please, without having
 any apprehensions of being taken off by the police as suspicious
 character. i may also enjoy the precious privilege of assuring you of
 my fond, faithful, and unalterable affection, whenever you visit your
 favorite bower, unless, indeed, it offends your pride to listen to
 professions of love from the lips of poor workingman, clad in a
 blouse and cap.”
 
faint cry of mingled pleasure and surprise escaped from the lips of
 valentine, who almost instantly said, in saddened tone, as though
 some envious cloud darkened the joy which illumined her heart:
 
“alas, no, maximilian, this must not be, for many reasons. we should
 presume too much on our own strength, and, like others, perhaps, be led
 astray by our blind confidence in each other’s prudence.”
 
“how can you for an instant entertain so unworthy thought, dear
 valentine? have i not, from the first blessed hour of our acquaintance,
 schooled all my words and actions to your sentiments and ideas? and you
 have, i am sure, the fullest confidence in my honor. when you spoke to
 of experiencing vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, i
 placed myself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking other
 reward than the pleasure of being useful to you; and have i ever since,
 by word or look, given you cause of regret for having selected from
 the numbers that would willingly have sacrificed their lives for you?
 you told me, my dear valentine, that you were engaged to m. d’Épinay,
 and that your father was resolved upon completing the match, and that
 from his will there was appeal, as m. villefort was never known
 to change determination once formed. i kept in the background, as you
 wished, and waited, not for the decision of your heart or my own, but
 hoping that providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and
 order events in our favor. but what cared i for delays or difficulties,
 valentine, as long as you confessed that you loved me, and took pity on
 me? if you will only repeat that avowal now and then, i can endure
 anything.”
 
“ah, maximilian, that is the very thing that makes you so bold, and
 which renders at once so happy and unhappy, that i frequently ask
 myself whether it is better for to endure the harshness of my
 stepmother, and her blind preference for her own child, or to be, as i
 now am, insensible to any pleasure save such as i find in these
 meetings, so fraught with danger to both.”
 
“i will not admit that word,” returned the young man; “it is at once
 cruel and unjust. is it possible to find more submissive slave than
 myself? you have permitted to converse with you from time to time,
 valentine, but forbidden my ever following you in your walks or
 elsewhere—have i not obeyed? and since i found means to enter this
 enclosure to exchange few words with you through this gate—to be
 close to you without really seeing you—have i ever asked so much as to
 touch the hem of your gown or tried to pass this barrier which is but a
 trifle to one of my youth and strength? never has complaint or a
 murmur escaped me. i have been bound by my promises as rigidly as any
 knight of olden times. come, come, dearest valentine, confess that what
 i say is true, lest i be tempted to call you unjust.”
 
30055m
 


“it is true,” said valentine, as she passed the end of her slender
 fingers through small opening in the planks, and permitted maximilian
 to press his lips to them, “and you are true and faithful friend; but
 still you acted from motives of self-interest, my dear maximilian, for
 you well knew that from the moment in which you had manifested an
 opposite spirit all would have been ended between us. you promised to
 bestow on the friendly affection of brother. for i have friend
 but yourself upon earth, who am neglected and forgotten by my father,
 harassed and persecuted by my stepmother, and left to the sole
 companionship of paralyzed and speechless old man, whose withered
 hand can longer press mine, and who can speak to with the eye
 alone, although there still lingers in his heart the warmest tenderness
 for his poor grandchild. oh, how bitter fate is mine, to serve either
 as victim or an enemy to all who are stronger than myself, while my
 only friend and supporter is living corpse! indeed, indeed,
 maximilian, i am very miserable, and if you love it must be out of
 pity.”
 
“valentine,” replied the young man, deeply affected, “i will not say
 you are all i love in the world, for i dearly prize my sister and
 brother-in-law; but my affection for them is calm and tranquil, in no
 manner resembling what i feel for you. when i think of you my heart
 beats fast, the blood burns in my veins, and i can hardly breathe; but
 i solemnly promise you to restrain all this ardor, this fervor and
 intensity of feeling, until you yourself shall require to render
 them available in serving or assisting you. m. franz is not expected to
 return home for year to come, i am told; in that time many favorable
 and unforeseen chances may befriend us. let us, then, hope for the
 best; hope is so sweet comforter. meanwhile, valentine, while
 reproaching with selfishness, think little what you have been to
 me—the beautiful but cold resemblance of marble venus. what promise
 of future reward have you made for all the submission and obedience
 i have evinced?—none whatever. what granted me?—scarcely more. you tell
 of m. franz d’Épinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the
 idea of being his wife; but tell me, valentine, is there other
 sorrow in your heart? you see devoted to you, body and soul, my life
 and each warm drop that circles round my heart are consecrated to your
 service; you know full well that my existence is bound up in yours—that
 were i to lose you i would not outlive the hour of such crushing
 misery; yet you speak with calmness of the prospect of your being the
 wife of another! oh, valentine, were i in your place, and did i feel
 conscious, as you do, of being worshipped, adored, with such love as
 mine, hundred times at least should i have passed my hand between
 these iron bars, and said, ‘take this hand, dearest maximilian, and
 believe that, living or dead, i am yours—yours only, and forever!’”
 
the poor girl made reply, but her lover could plainly hear her sobs
 and tears. rapid change took place in the young man’s feelings.
 
“dearest, dearest valentine,” exclaimed he, “forgive if i have
 offended you, and forget the words i spoke if they have unwittingly
 caused you pain.”
 
“no, maximilian, i am not offended,” answered she, “but do you not see
 what poor, helpless being i am, almost stranger and an outcast in
 my father’s house, where even is seldom seen; whose will has been
 thwarted, and spirits broken, from the age of ten years, beneath the
 iron rod so sternly held over me; oppressed, mortified, and persecuted,
 day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, person has cared for,
 even observed my sufferings, nor have i ever breathed one word on the
 subject save to yourself. outwardly and in the eyes of the world, i am
 surrounded by kindness and affection; but the reverse is the case. the
 general remark is, ‘oh, it cannot be expected that one of so stern a
 character as m. villefort could lavish the tenderness some fathers do
 on their daughters. what though she has lost her own mother at tender
 age, she has had the happiness to find second mother in madame de
 villefort.’ the world, however, is mistaken; my father abandons from
 utter indifference, while my stepmother detests with hatred so
 much the more terrible because it is veiled beneath continual smile.”
 
“hate you, sweet valentine,” exclaimed the young man; “how is it
 possible for anyone to do that?”
 
“alas,” replied the weeping girl, “i am obliged to own that my
 stepmother’s aversion to arises from very natural source—her
 overweening love for her own child, my brother edward.”
 
“but why should it?”
 
“i do not know; but, though unwilling to introduce money matters into
 our present conversation, i will just say this much—that her extreme
 dislike to has its origin there; and i much fear she envies the
 fortune i enjoy in right of my mother, and which will be more than
 doubled at the death of m. and mme. saint-méran, whose sole heiress
 i am. madame villefort has nothing of her own, and hates for
 being so richly endowed. alas, how gladly would i exchange the half of
 this wealth for the happiness of at least sharing my father’s love. god
 knows, i would prefer sacrificing the whole, so that it would obtain me
 happy and affectionate home.”
 
“poor valentine!”
 
“i seem to myself as though living life of bondage, yet at the same
 time am so conscious of my own weakness that i fear to break the
 restraint in which i am held, lest i fall utterly helpless. then, too,
 my father is not person whose orders may be infringed with impunity;
 protected as is by his high position and firmly established
 reputation for talent and unswerving integrity, one could oppose
 him; is all-powerful even with the king; would crush you at a
 word. dear maximilian, believe when i assure you that if i do not
 attempt to resist my father’s commands it is more on your account than
 my own.”
 
“but why, valentine, do you persist in anticipating the worst,—why
 picture so gloomy future?”
 
“because i judge it from the past.”
 
“still, consider that although i may not be, strictly speaking, what is
 termed an illustrious match for you, i am, for many reasons, not
 altogether so much beneath your alliance. the days when such
 distinctions were so nicely weighed and considered longer exist in
 france, and the first families of the monarchy have intermarried with
 those of the empire. the aristocracy of the lance has allied itself
 with the nobility of the cannon. now i belong to this last-named class;
 and certainly my prospects of military preferment are most encouraging
 as well as certain. my fortune, though small, is free and unfettered,
 and the memory of my late father is respected in our country,
 valentine, as that of the most upright and honorable merchant of the
 city; i say our country, because you were born not far from
 marseilles.”
 
“don’t speak of marseilles, i beg of you, maximilian; that one word
 brings back my mother to my recollection—my angel mother, who died too
 soon for myself and all who knew her; but who, after watching over her
 child during the brief period allotted to her in this world, now, i
 fondly hope, watches from her home in heaven. oh, if my mother were
 still living, there would be nothing to fear, maximilian, for i would
 tell her that i loved you, and she would protect us.”
 
“i fear, valentine,” replied the lover, “that were she living i should
 never have had the happiness of knowing you; you would then have been
 too happy to have stooped from your grandeur to bestow thought on
 me.”
 
“now it is you who are unjust, maximilian,” cried valentine; “but there
 is one thing i wish to know.”
 
“and what is that?” inquired the young man, perceiving that valentine
 hesitated.
 
“tell truly, maximilian, whether in former days, when our fathers
 dwelt at marseilles, there was ever any misunderstanding between them?”
 
“not that i am aware of,” replied the young man, “unless, indeed, any
 ill-feeling might have arisen from their being of opposite parties—your
 father was, as you know, zealous partisan of the bourbons, while mine
 was wholly devoted to the emperor; there could not possibly be any
 other difference between them. but why do you ask?”
 
“i will tell you,” replied the young girl, “for it is but right you
 should know. well, on the day when your appointment as an officer of
 the legion of honor was announced in the papers, we were all sitting
 with my grandfather, m. noirtier; m. danglars was there also—you
 recollect m. danglars, do you not, maximilian, the banker, whose horses
 ran away with my stepmother and little brother, and very nearly killed
 them? while the rest of the company were discussing the approaching
 marriage of mademoiselle danglars, i was reading the paper to my
 grandfather; but when i came to the paragraph about you, although i had
 done nothing else but read it over to myself all the morning (you know
 you had told all about it the previous evening), i felt so happy,
 and yet so nervous, at the idea of speaking your name aloud, and before
 so many people, that i really think i should have passed it over, but
 for the fear that my doing so might create suspicions as to the cause
 of my silence; so i summoned up all my courage, and read it as firmly
 and as steadily as i could.”
 
30059m
 


“dear valentine!”
 
“well, would you believe it? directly my father caught the sound of
 your name turned round quite hastily, and, like poor silly thing,
 i was so persuaded that everyone must be as much affected as myself by
 the utterance of your name, that i was not surprised to see my father
 start, and almost tremble; but i even thought (though that surely must
 have been mistake) that m. danglars trembled too.”
 
“‘morrel, morrel,’ cried my father, ‘stop bit;’ then knitting his
 brows into deep frown, added, ‘surely this cannot be one of the
 morrel family who lived at marseilles, and gave us so much trouble from
 their violent bonapartism—i mean about the year 1815.’
 
“‘yes,’ replied m. danglars, ‘i believe is the of the old
 shipowner.’”
 
“indeed,” answered maximilian; “and what did your father say then,
 valentine?”
 
“oh, such dreadful thing, that i don’t dare to tell you.”
 
“always tell everything,” said maximilian with smile.
 
“‘ah,’ continued my father, still frowning, ‘their idolized emperor
 treated these madmen as they deserved; called them ‘food for
 cannon,’ which was precisely all they were good for; and i am delighted
 to see that the present government have adopted this salutary principle
 with all its pristine vigor; if algiers were good for nothing but to
 furnish the means of carrying so admirable an idea into practice, it
 would be an acquisition well worthy of struggling to obtain. though it
 certainly does cost france somewhat dear to assert her rights in that
 uncivilized country.’”
 
“brutal politics, i must confess.” said maximilian; “but don’t attach
 any serious importance, dear, to what your father said. my father was
 not bit behind yours in that sort of talk. ‘why,’ said he, ‘does not
 the emperor, who has devised so many clever and efficient modes of
 improving the art of war, organize regiment of lawyers, judges and
 legal practitioners, sending them in the hottest fire the enemy could
 maintain, and using them to save better men?’ you see, my dear, that
 for picturesque expression and generosity of spirit there is not much
 to choose between the language of either party. but what did m.
 danglars say to this outburst on the part of the procureur?”
 
“oh, laughed, and in that singular manner so peculiar to
 himself—half-malicious, half-ferocious; almost immediately got up
 and took his leave; then, for the first time, i observed the agitation
 of my grandfather, and i must tell you, maximilian, that i am the only
 person capable of discerning emotion in his paralyzed frame. and i
 suspected that the conversation that had been carried on in his
 presence (for they always say and do what they like before the dear old
 man, without the smallest regard for his feelings) had made strong
 impression on his mind; for, naturally enough, it must have pained him
 to hear the emperor so devotedly loved and served spoken of in that
 depreciating manner.”
 
“the name of m. noirtier,” interposed maximilian, “is celebrated
 throughout europe; was statesman of high standing, and you may or
 may not know, valentine, that took leading part in every
 bonapartist conspiracy set on foot during the restoration of the
 bourbons.”
 
“oh, i have often heard whispers of things that seem to most
 strange—the father bonapartist, the royalist; what can have
 been the reason of so singular difference in parties and politics?
 but to resume my story; i turned towards my grandfather, as though to
 question him as to the cause of his emotion; looked expressively at
 the newspaper i had been reading. ‘what is the matter, dear
 grandfather?’ said i, ‘are you pleased?’ gave sign in the
 affirmative. ‘with what my father said just now?’ returned sign in
 the negative. ‘perhaps you liked what m. danglars said?’ another sign
 in the negative. ‘oh, then, you were glad to hear that m. morrel (i
 didn’t dare to say maximilian) had been made an officer of the legion
 of honor?’ signified assent; only think of the poor old man’s being
 so pleased to think that you, who were perfect stranger to him, had
 been made an officer of the legion of honor! perhaps it was mere whim
 on his part, for is falling, they say, into second childhood, but i
 love him for showing so much interest in you.”
 
“how singular,” murmured maximilian; “your father hates me, while your
 grandfather, on the contrary—what strange feelings are aroused by
 politics.”
 
“hush,” cried valentine, suddenly; “someone is coming!” maximilian
 leaped at one bound into his crop of lucern, which began to pull up
 in the most ruthless way, under the pretext of being occupied in
 weeding it.
 
“mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” exclaimed voice from behind the trees.
 “madame is searching for you everywhere; there is visitor in the
 drawing-room.”
 
“a visitor?” inquired valentine, much agitated; “who is it?”
 
“some grand personage—a prince i believe they said—the count of monte
 cristo.”
 
“i will come directly,” cried valentine aloud.
 
the name of monte cristo sent an electric shock through the young man
 on the other side of the iron gate, to whom valentine’s _“i am coming”_
 was the customary signal of farewell.
 
“now, then,” said maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade, “i
 would give good deal to know how it comes about that the count of
 monte cristo is acquainted with m. villefort.”
 


chapter 52. toxicology
 
it was really the count of monte cristo who had just arrived at madame
 villefort’s for the purpose of returning the procureur’s visit, and
 at his name, as may be easily imagined, the whole house was in
 confusion.
 
madame villefort, who was alone in her drawing-room when the count
 was announced, desired that her might be brought thither instantly
 to renew his thanks to the count; and edward, who heard this great
 personage talked of for two whole days, made all possible haste to come
 to him, not from obedience to his mother, or out of any feeling of
 gratitude to the count, but from sheer curiosity, and that some chance
 remark might give him the opportunity for making one of the impertinent
 speeches which made his mother say:
 
“oh, that naughty child! but i can’t be severe with him, is really
 _so_ bright.”
 
after the usual civilities, the count inquired after m. villefort.
 
“my husband dines with the chancellor,” replied the young lady; “he has
 just gone, and i am sure he’ll be exceedingly sorry not to have had the
 pleasure of seeing you before went.”
 
two visitors who were there when the count arrived, having gazed at him
 with all their eyes, retired after that reasonable delay which
 politeness admits and curiosity requires.
 
“what is your sister valentine doing?” inquired madame villefort of
 edward; “tell someone to bid her come here, that i may have the honor
 of introducing her to the count.”
 
“you have daughter, then, madame?” inquired the count; “very young, i
 presume?”
 
“the daughter of m. villefort by his first marriage,” replied the
 young wife, “a fine well-grown girl.”
 
“but melancholy,” interrupted master edward, snatching the feathers out
 of the tail of splendid paroquet that was screaming on its gilded
 perch, in order to make plume for his hat.
 
madame villefort merely cried, “be still, edward!” she then added,
 “this young madcap is, however, very nearly right, and merely re-echoes
 what has heard say with pain hundred times; for mademoiselle de
 villefort is, in spite of all we can do to rouse her, of melancholy
 disposition and taciturn habit, which frequently injure the effect of
 her beauty. but what detains her? go, edward, and see.”
 
“because they are looking for her where she is not to be found.”
 
“and where are they looking for her?”
 
“with grandpapa noirtier.”
 
“and do you think she is not there?”
 
“no, no, no, no, no, she is not there,” replied edward, singing his
 words.
 
“and where is she, then? if you know, why don’t you tell?”
 
“she is under the big chestnut-tree,” replied the spoiled brat, as he
 gave, in spite of his mother’s commands, live flies to the parrot,
 which seemed keenly to relish such fare.
 
madame villefort stretched out her hand to ring, intending to direct
 her waiting-maid to the spot where she would find valentine, when the
 young lady herself entered the apartment. she appeared much dejected;
 and any person who considered her attentively might have observed the
 traces of recent tears in her eyes.
 
valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our narrative presented
 to our readers without formally introducing her, was tall and
 graceful girl of nineteen, with bright chestnut hair, deep blue eyes,
 and that reposeful air of quiet distinction which characterized her
 mother. her white and slender fingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks
 tinted with varying hues reminded one of the lovely englishwomen who
 have been so poetically compared in their manner to the gracefulness of
 swan.
 
she entered the apartment, and seeing near her stepmother the stranger
 of whom she had already heard so much, saluted him without any girlish
 awkwardness, or even lowering her eyes, and with an elegance that
 redoubled the count’s attention.
 
rose to return the salutation.
 
“mademoiselle villefort, my step-daughter,” said madame villefort
 to monte cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towards
 valentine with her hand.
 
“and m. monte cristo, king of china, emperor of cochin-china,” said
 the young imp, looking slyly towards his sister.
 
madame villefort at this really did turn pale, and was very nearly
 angry with this household plague, who answered to the name of edward;
 but the count, on the contrary, smiled, and appeared to look at the boy
 complacently, which caused the maternal heart to bound again with joy
 and enthusiasm.
 
“but, madame,” replied the count, continuing the conversation, and
 looking by turns at madame villefort and valentine, “have i not
 already had the honor of meeting yourself and mademoiselle before? i
 could not help thinking so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as
 mademoiselle entered the sight of her was an additional ray of light
 thrown on confused remembrance; excuse the remark.”
 
“i do not think it likely, sir; mademoiselle villefort is not very
 fond of society, and we very seldom go out,” said the young lady.
 
“then it was not in society that i met with mademoiselle or yourself,
 madame, or this charming little merry boy. besides, the parisian world
 is entirely unknown to me, for, as i believe i told you, i have been in
 paris but very few days. no,—but, perhaps, you will permit to call
 to mind—stay!”
 
the count placed his hand on his brow as if to collect his thoughts.
 
“no—it was somewhere—away from here—it was—i do not know—but it appears
 that this recollection is connected with lovely sky and some
 religious _fête_; mademoiselle was holding flowers in her hand, the
 interesting boy was chasing beautiful peacock in garden, and you,
 madame, were under the trellis of some arbor. pray come to my aid,
 madame; do not these circumstances appeal to your memory?”
 
“no, indeed,” replied madame villefort; “and yet it appears to me,
 sir, that if i had met you anywhere, the recollection of you must have
 been imprinted on my memory.”
 
“perhaps the count saw us in italy,” said valentine timidly.
 
“yes, in italy; it was in italy most probably,” replied monte cristo;
 “you have travelled then in italy, mademoiselle?”
 
“yes; madame and i were there two years ago. the doctors, anxious for
 my lungs, had prescribed the air of naples. we went by bologna,
 perugia, and rome.”
 
“ah, yes—true, mademoiselle,” exclaimed monte cristo as if this simple
 explanation was sufficient to revive the recollection sought. “it
 was at perugia on corpus christi day, in the garden of the hôtel des
 postes, when chance brought us together; you, madame villefort, and
 her son; i now remember having had the honor of meeting you.”
 
“i perfectly well remember perugia, sir, and the hôtel des postes, and
 the festival of which you speak,” said madame villefort, “but in
 vain do i tax my memory, of whose treachery i am ashamed, for i really
 do not recall to mind that i ever had the pleasure of seeing you
 before.”
 
“it is strange, but neither do i recollect meeting with you,” observed
 valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to the count.
 
30065m
 


“but i remember it perfectly,” interposed the darling edward.
 
“i will assist your memory, madame,” continued the count; “the day had
 been burning hot; you were waiting for horses, which were delayed in
 consequence of the festival. mademoiselle was walking in the shade of
 the garden, and your disappeared in pursuit of the peacock.”
 
“and i caught it, mamma, don’t you remember?” interposed edward, “and i
 pulled three such beautiful feathers out of his tail.”
 
“you, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not remember, that while
 you were seated on stone bench, and while, as i told you,
 mademoiselle villefort and your young were absent, you conversed
 for considerable time with somebody?”
 
“yes, in truth, yes,” answered the young lady, turning very red, “i do
 remember conversing with person wrapped in long woollen mantle; he
 was medical man, i think.”
 
“precisely so, madame; this man was myself; for fortnight i had been
 at that hotel, during which period i had cured my valet chambre of a
 fever, and my landlord of the jaundice, so that i really acquired a
 reputation as skilful physician. we discoursed long time, madame,
 on different subjects; of perugino, of raphael, of manners, customs, of
 the famous _aqua tofana_, of which they had told you, i think you said,
 that certain individuals in perugia had preserved the secret.”
 
“yes, true,” replied madame villefort, somewhat uneasily, “i
 remember now.”
 
“i do not recollect now all the various subjects of which we
 discoursed, madame,” continued the count with perfect calmness; “but i
 perfectly remember that, falling into the error which others had
 entertained respecting me, you consulted as to the health of
 mademoiselle villefort.”
 
“yes, really, sir, you were in fact medical man,” said madame de
 villefort, “since you had cured the sick.”
 
“molière or beaumarchais would reply to you, madame, that it was
 precisely because i was not, that i had cured my patients; for myself,
 i am content to say to you that i have studied chemistry and the
 natural sciences somewhat deeply, but still only as an amateur, you
 understand.”
 
at this moment the clock struck six.
 
“it is six o’clock,” said madame villefort, evidently agitated.
 “valentine, will you not go and see if your grandpapa will have his
 dinner?”
 
valentine rose, and saluting the count, left the apartment without
 speaking.
 
“oh, madame,” said the count, when valentine had left the room, “was it
 on my account that you sent mademoiselle villefort away?”
 
“by means,” replied the young lady quickly; “but this is the hour
 when we usually give m. noirtier the unwelcome meal that sustains his
 pitiful existence. you are aware, sir, of the deplorable condition of
 my husband’s father?”
 
“yes, madame, m. villefort spoke of it to me—a paralysis, i think.”
 
“alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; the mind alone
 is still active in this human machine, and that is faint and
 flickering, like the light of lamp about to expire. but excuse me,
 sir, for talking of our domestic misfortunes; i interrupted you at the
 moment when you were telling that you were skilful chemist.”
 
“no, madame, i did not say as much as that,” replied the count with a
 smile; “quite the contrary. i have studied chemistry because, having
 determined to live in eastern climates i have been desirous of
 following the example of king mithridates.”
 
“_mithridates, rex ponticus_,” said the young scamp, as tore some
 beautiful portraits out of splendid album, “the individual who took
 cream in his cup of poison every morning at breakfast.”
 
“edward, you naughty boy,” exclaimed madame villefort, snatching the
 mutilated book from the urchin’s grasp, “you are positively past
 bearing; you really disturb the conversation; go, leave us, and join
 your sister valentine in dear grandpapa noirtier’s room.”
 
“the album,” said edward sulkily.
 
“what do you mean?—the album!”
 
“i want the album.”
 
“how dare you tear out the drawings?”
 
“oh, it amuses me.”
 
“go—go at once.”
 
“i won’t go unless you give the album,” said the boy, seating
 himself doggedly in an armchair, according to his habit of never giving
 way.
 
“take it, then, and pray disturb us longer,” said madame de
 villefort, giving the album to edward, who then went towards the door,
 led by his mother. the count followed her with his eyes.
 
“let us see if she shuts the door after him,” muttered.
 
madame villefort closed the door carefully after the child, the
 count appearing not to notice her; then casting scrutinizing glance
 around the chamber, the young wife returned to her chair, in which she
 seated herself.
 
“allow to observe, madame,” said the count, with that kind tone he
 could assume so well, “you are really very severe with that dear clever
 child.”
 
“oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary,” replied madame de
 villefort, with all mother’s real firmness.
 
“it was his cornelius nepos that master edward was repeating when he
 referred to king mithridates,” continued the count, “and you
 interrupted him in quotation which proves that his tutor has by no
 means neglected him, for your is really advanced for his years.”
 
“the fact is, count,” answered the mother, agreeably flattered, “he has
 great aptitude, and learns all that is set before him. has but one
 fault, is somewhat wilful; but really, on referring for the moment
 to what said, do you truly believe that mithridates used these
 precautions, and that these precautions were efficacious?”
 
“i think so, madame, because i myself have made use of them, that i
 might not be poisoned at naples, at palermo, and at smyrna—that is to
 say, on three several occasions when, but for these precautions, i must
 have lost my life.”
 
“and your precautions were successful?”
 
“completely so.”
 
“yes, i remember now your mentioning to at perugia something of this
 sort.”
 
“indeed?” said the count with an air of surprise, remarkably well
 counterfeited; “i really did not remember.”
 
“i inquired of you if poisons acted equally, and with the same effect,
 on men of the north as on men of the south; and you answered that
 the cold and sluggish habits of the north did not present the same
 aptitude as the rich and energetic temperaments of the natives of the
 south.”
 
“and that is the case,” observed monte cristo. “i have seen russians
 devour, without being visibly inconvenienced, vegetable substances
 which would infallibly have killed neapolitan or an arab.”
 
“and you really believe the result would be still more sure with us
 than in the east, and in the midst of our fogs and rains man would
 habituate himself more easily than in warm latitude to this
 progressive absorption of poison?”
 
“certainly; it being at the same time perfectly understood that he
 should have been duly fortified against the poison to which had not
 been accustomed.”
 
“yes, i understand that; and how would you habituate yourself, for
 instance, or rather, how did you habituate yourself to it?”
 
“oh, very easily. suppose you knew beforehand the poison that would be
 made use of against you; suppose the poison was, for instance,
 brucine——”
 
“brucine is extracted from the false angostura8 is it not?” inquired
 madame villefort.
 
“precisely, madame,” replied monte cristo; “but i perceive i have not
 much to teach you. allow to compliment you on your knowledge; such
 learning is very rare among ladies.”
 
“oh, i am aware of that,” said madame villefort; “but i have a
 passion for the occult sciences, which speak to the imagination like
 poetry, and are reducible to figures, like an algebraic equation; but
 go on, i beg of you; what you say interests to the greatest degree.”
 
30069m
 


“well,” replied monte cristo “suppose, then, that this poison was
 brucine, and you were to take milligramme the first day, two
 milligrammes the second day, and so on. well, at the end of ten days
 you would have taken centigramme, at the end of twenty days,
 increasing another milligramme, you would have taken three hundred
 centigrammes; that is to say, dose which you would support without
 inconvenience, and which would be very dangerous for any other person
 who had not taken the same precautions as yourself. well, then, at the
 end of month, when drinking water from the same carafe, you would
 kill the person who drank with you, without your perceiving, otherwise
 than from slight inconvenience, that there was any poisonous substance
 mingled with this water.”
 
“do you know any other counter-poisons?”
 
“i do not.”
 
“i have often read, and read again, the history of mithridates,” said
 madame villefort in tone of reflection, “and had always considered
 it fable.”
 
“no, madame, contrary to most history, it is true; but what you tell
 me, madame, what you inquire of me, is not the result of chance
 query, for two years ago you asked the same questions, and said
 then, that for very long time this history of mithridates had
 occupied your mind.”
 
“true, sir. the two favorite studies of my youth were botany and
 mineralogy, and subsequently, when i learned that the use of simples
 frequently explained the whole history of people, and the entire life
 of individuals in the east, as flowers betoken and symbolize love
 affair, i have regretted that i was not man, that i might have been a
 flamel, fontana, or cabanis.”
 
“and the more, madame,” said monte cristo, “as the orientals do not
 confine themselves, as did mithridates, to make cuirass of his
 poisons, but they also made them dagger. science becomes, in their
 hands, not only defensive weapon, but still more frequently an
 offensive one; the one serves against all their physical sufferings,
 the other against all their enemies. with opium, belladonna, brucea,
 snake-wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all who stand in
 their way. there is not one of those women, egyptian, turkish, or
 greek, whom here you call ‘good women,’ who do not know how, by means
 of chemistry, to stupefy doctor, and in psychology to amaze a
 confessor.”
 
“really,” said madame villefort, whose eyes sparkled with strange
 fire at this conversation.
 
“oh, yes, indeed, madame,” continued monte cristo, “the secret dramas
 of the east begin with love philtre and end with death potion—begin
 with paradise and end with—hell. there are as many elixirs of every
 kind as there are caprices and peculiarities in the physical and moral
 nature of humanity; and i will say further—the art of these chemists is
 capable with the utmost precision to accommodate and proportion the
 remedy and the bane to yearnings for love or desires for vengeance.”
 
“but, sir,” remarked the young woman, “these eastern societies, in the
 midst of which you have passed portion of your existence, are as
 fantastic as the tales that come from their strange land. man can
 easily be put out of the way there, then; it is, indeed, the bagdad and
 bassora of the _thousand and one nights_. the sultans and viziers who
 rule over society there, and who constitute what in france we call the
 government, are really haroun-al-raschids and giaffars, who not only
 pardon poisoner, but even make him prime minister, if his crime has
 been an ingenious one, and who, under such circumstances, have the
 whole story written in letters of gold, to divert their hours of
 idleness and _ennui_.”
 
“by means, madame; the fanciful exists longer in the east. there,
 disguised under other names, and concealed under other costumes, are
 police agents, magistrates, attorneys-general, and bailiffs. they hang,
 behead, and impale their criminals in the most agreeable possible
 manner; but some of these, like clever rogues, have contrived to escape
 human justice, and succeed in their fraudulent enterprises by cunning
 stratagems. amongst us simpleton, possessed by the demon of hate or
 cupidity, who has an enemy to destroy, or some near relation to dispose
 of, goes straight to the grocer’s or druggist’s, gives false name,
 which leads more easily to his detection than his real one, and under
 the pretext that the rats prevent him from sleeping, purchases five or
 six grammes of arsenic—if is really cunning fellow, goes to
 five or six different druggists or grocers, and thereby becomes only
 five or six times more easily traced;—then, when has acquired his
 specific, administers duly to his enemy, or near kinsman, dose of
 arsenic which would make mammoth or mastodon burst, and which,
 without rhyme or reason, makes his victim utter groans which alarm the
 entire neighborhood. then arrive crowd of policemen and constables.
 they fetch doctor, who opens the dead body, and collects from the
 entrails and stomach quantity of arsenic in spoon. next day a
 hundred newspapers relate the fact, with the names of the victim and
 the murderer. the same evening the grocer or grocers, druggist or
 druggists, come and say, ‘it was i who sold the arsenic to the
 gentleman;’ and rather than not recognize the guilty purchaser, they
 will recognize twenty. then the foolish criminal is taken, imprisoned,
 interrogated, confronted, confounded, condemned, and cut off by hemp or
 steel; or if she be woman of any consideration, they lock her up for
 life. this is the way in which you northerns understand chemistry,
 madame. desrues was, however, i must confess, more skilful.”
 
“what would you have, sir?” said the lady, laughing; “we do what we
 can. all the world has not the secret of the medicis or the borgias.”
 
“now,” replied the count, shrugging his shoulders, “shall i tell you
 the cause of all these stupidities? it is because, at your theatres, by
 what at least i could judge by reading the pieces they play, they see
 persons swallow the contents of phial, or suck the button of ring,
 and fall dead instantly. five minutes afterwards the curtain falls, and
 the spectators depart. they are ignorant of the consequences of the
 murder; they see neither the police commissary with his badge of
 office, nor the corporal with his four men; and so the poor fools
 believe that the whole thing is as easy as lying. but go little way
 from france—go either to aleppo or cairo, or only to naples or rome,
 and you will see people passing by you in the streets—people erect,
 smiling, and fresh-colored, of whom asmodeus, if you were holding on by
 the skirt of his mantle, would say, ‘that man was poisoned three weeks
 ago; will be dead man in month.’”
 
“then,” remarked madame villefort, “they have again discovered the
 secret of the famous _aqua tofana_ that they said was lost at perugia.”
 
“ah, but madame, does mankind ever lose anything? the arts change about
 and make tour of the world; things take different name, and the
 vulgar do not follow them—that is all; but there is always the same
 result. poisons act particularly on some organ or another—one on the
 stomach, another on the brain, another on the intestines. well, the
 poison brings on cough, the cough an inflammation of the lungs, or
 some other complaint catalogued in the book of science, which, however,
 by means precludes it from being decidedly mortal; and if it were
 not, would be sure to become so, thanks to the remedies applied by
 foolish doctors, who are generally bad chemists, and which will act in
 favor of or against the malady, as you please; and then there is a
 human being killed according to all the rules of art and skill, and of
 whom justice learns nothing, as was said by terrible chemist of my
 acquaintance, the worthy abbé adelmonte of taormina, in sicily, who has
 studied these national phenomena very profoundly.”
 
“it is quite frightful, but deeply interesting,” said the young lady,
 motionless with attention. “i thought, i must confess, that these
 tales, were inventions of the middle ages.”
 
“yes, doubt, but improved upon by ours. what is the use of time,
 rewards of merit, medals, crosses, monthyon prizes, if they do not lead
 society towards more complete perfection? yet man will never be perfect
 until learns to create and destroy; does know how to destroy, and
 that is half the battle.”
 
“so,” added madame villefort, constantly returning to her object,
 “the poisons of the borgias, the medicis, the renées, the ruggieris,
 and later, probably, that of baron trenck, whose story has been so
 misused by modern drama and romance——”
 
“were objects of art, madame, and nothing more,” replied the count. “do
 you suppose that the real _savant_ addresses himself stupidly to the
 mere individual? by means. science loves eccentricities, leaps and
 bounds, trials of strength, fancies, if i may be allowed so to term
 them. thus, for instance, the excellent abbé adelmonte, of whom i spoke
 just now, made in this way some marvellous experiments.”
 
“really?”
 
“yes; i will mention one to you. had remarkably fine garden, full
 of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. from amongst these vegetables he
 selected the most simple—a cabbage, for instance. for three days he
 watered this cabbage with distillation of arsenic; on the third, the
 cabbage began to droop and turn yellow. at that moment cut it. in
 the eyes of everybody it seemed fit for table, and preserved its
 wholesome appearance. it was only poisoned to the abbé adelmonte. he
 then took the cabbage to the room where had rabbits—for the abbé
 adelmonte had collection of rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs, fully as
 fine as his collection of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. well, the
 abbé adelmonte took rabbit, and made it eat leaf of the cabbage.
 the rabbit died. what magistrate would find, or even venture to
 insinuate, anything against this? what procureur has ever ventured to
 draw up an accusation against m. magendie or m. flourens, in
 consequence of the rabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs they have killed?—not
 one. so, then, the rabbit dies, and justice takes notice. this
 rabbit dead, the abbé adelmonte has its entrails taken out by his cook
 and thrown on the dunghill; on this dunghill is hen, who, pecking
 these intestines, is in her turn taken ill, and dies next day. at the
 moment when she is struggling in the convulsions of death, vulture is
 flying by (there are good many vultures in adelmonte’s country); this
 bird darts on the dead fowl, and carries it away to rock, where it
 dines off its prey. three days afterwards, this poor vulture, which has
 been very much indisposed since that dinner, suddenly feels very giddy
 while flying aloft in the clouds, and falls heavily into fish-pond.
 the pike, eels, and carp eat greedily always, as everybody knows—well,
 they feast on the vulture. now suppose that next day, one of these
 eels, or pike, or carp, poisoned at the fourth remove, is served up at
 your table. well, then, your guest will be poisoned at the fifth
 remove, and die, at the end of eight or ten days, of pains in the
 intestines, sickness, or abscess of the pylorus. the doctors open the
 body and say with an air of profound learning, ‘the subject has died of
 tumor on the liver, or of typhoid fever!’”
 
“but,” remarked madame villefort, “all these circumstances which you
 link thus to one another may be broken by the least accident; the
 vulture may not see the fowl, or may fall hundred yards from the
 fish-pond.”
 
“ah, that is where the art comes in. to be great chemist in the east,
 one must direct chance; and this is to be achieved.”
 
madame villefort was in deep thought, yet listened attentively.
 
“but,” she exclaimed, suddenly, “arsenic is indelible, indestructible;
 in whatsoever way it is absorbed, it will be found again in the body of
 the victim from the moment when it has been taken in sufficient
 quantity to cause death.”
 
“precisely so,” cried monte cristo—“precisely so; and this is what i
 said to my worthy adelmonte. reflected, smiled, and replied to by
 sicilian proverb, which i believe is also french proverb, ‘my son,
 the world was not made in day—but in seven. return on sunday.’ on the
 sunday following i did return to him. instead of having watered his
 cabbage with arsenic, had watered it this time with solution of
 salts, having their basis in strychnine, _strychnos colubrina_, as the
 learned term it. now, the cabbage had not the slightest appearance of
 disease in the world, and the rabbit had not the smallest distrust;
 yet, five minutes afterwards, the rabbit was dead. the fowl pecked at
 the rabbit, and the next day was dead hen. this time we were the
 vultures; so we opened the bird, and this time all special symptoms had
 disappeared, there were only general symptoms. there was peculiar
 indication in any organ—an excitement of the nervous system—that was
 it; case of cerebral congestion—nothing more. the fowl had not been
 poisoned—she had died of apoplexy. apoplexy is rare disease among
 fowls, i believe, but very common among men.”
 
madame villefort appeared more and more thoughtful.
 
“it is very fortunate,” she observed, “that such substances could only
 be prepared by chemists; otherwise, all the world would be poisoning
 each other.”
 
“by chemists and persons who have taste for chemistry,” said monte
 cristo carelessly.
 
“and then,” said madame villefort, endeavoring by struggle, and
 with effort, to get away from her thoughts, “however skilfully it is
 prepared, crime is always crime, and if it avoid human scrutiny, it
 does not escape the eye of god. the orientals are stronger than we are
 in cases of conscience, and, very prudently, have hell—that is the
 point.”
 
30075m
 


“really, madame, this is scruple which naturally must occur to pure
 mind like yours, but which would easily yield before sound reasoning.
 the bad side of human thought will always be defined by the paradox of
 jean jacques rousseau,—you remember,—the mandarin who is killed five
 hundred leagues off by raising the tip of the finger. man’s whole life
 passes in doing these things, and his intellect is exhausted by
 reflecting on them. you will find very few persons who will go and
 brutally thrust knife in the heart of fellow-creature, or will
 administer to him, in order to remove him from the surface of the globe
 on which we move with life and animation, that quantity of arsenic of
 which we just now talked. such thing is really out of rule—eccentric
 or stupid. to attain such point, the blood must be heated to
 thirty-six degrees, the pulse be, at least, at ninety, and the feelings
 excited beyond the ordinary limit. but suppose one pass, as is
 permissible in philology, from the word itself to its softened synonym,
 then, instead of committing an ignoble assassination you make an
 ‘elimination;’ you merely and simply remove from your path the
 individual who is in your way, and that without shock or violence,
 without the display of the sufferings which, in the case of becoming a
 punishment, make martyr of the victim, and butcher, in every sense
 of the word, of him who inflicts them. then there will be blood, no
 groans, convulsions, and above all, consciousness of that horrid
 and compromising moment of accomplishing the act,—then one escapes the
 clutch of the human law, which says, ‘do not disturb society!’ this is
 the mode in which they manage these things, and succeed in eastern
 climes, where there are grave and phlegmatic persons who care very
 little for the questions of time in conjunctures of importance.”
 
“yet conscience remains,” remarked madame villefort in an agitated
 voice, and with stifled sigh.
 
“yes,” answered monte cristo “happily, yes, conscience does remain; and
 if it did not, how wretched we should be! after every action requiring
 exertion, it is conscience that saves us, for it supplies us with a
 thousand good excuses, of which we alone are judges; and these reasons,
 howsoever excellent in producing sleep, would avail us but very little
 before tribunal, when we were tried for our lives. thus richard iii.,
 for instance, was marvellously served by his conscience after the
 putting away of the two children of edward iv.; in fact, could say,
 ‘these two children of cruel and persecuting king, who have inherited
 the vices of their father, which i alone could perceive in their
 juvenile propensities—these two children are impediments in my way of
 promoting the happiness of the english people, whose unhappiness they
 (the children) would infallibly have caused.’ thus was lady macbeth
 served by her conscience, when she sought to give her son, and not her
 husband (whatever shakespeare may say), throne. ah, maternal love is
 great virtue, powerful motive—so powerful that it excuses a
 multitude of things, even if, after duncan’s death, lady macbeth had
 been at all pricked by her conscience.”
 
madame villefort listened with avidity to these appalling maxims and
 horrible paradoxes, delivered by the count with that ironical
 simplicity which was peculiar to him.
 
after moment’s silence, the lady inquired:
 
“do you know, my dear count,” she said, “that you are very terrible
 reasoner, and that you look at the world through somewhat distempered
 medium? have you really measured the world by scrutinies, or through
 alembics and crucibles? for you must indeed be great chemist, and the
 elixir you administered to my son, which recalled him to life almost
 instantaneously——”
 
30077m
 


“oh, do not place any reliance on that, madame; _one_ drop of that
 elixir sufficed to recall life to dying child, but three drops would
 have impelled the blood into his lungs in such way as to have
 produced most violent palpitations; six would have suspended his
 respiration, and caused syncope more serious than that in which was;
 ten would have destroyed him. you know, madame, how suddenly i snatched
 him from those phials which so imprudently touched?”
 
“is it then so terrible poison?”
 
“oh, no! in the first place, let us agree that the word poison does not
 exist, because in medicine use is made of the most violent poisons,
 which become, according as they are employed, most salutary remedies.”
 
“what, then, is it?”
 
“a skilful preparation of my friend’s the worthy abbé adelmonte, who
 taught the use of it.”
 
“oh,” observed madame villefort, “it must be an admirable
 anti-spasmodic.”
 
“perfect, madame, as you have seen,” replied the count; “and i
 frequently make use of it—with all possible prudence though, be it
 observed,” added with smile of intelligence.
 
“most assuredly,” responded madame villefort in the same tone. “as
 for me, so nervous, and so subject to fainting fits, i should require a
 doctor adelmonte to invent for some means of breathing freely and
 tranquillizing my mind, in the fear i have of dying some fine day of
 suffocation. in the meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in
 france, and your abbé is not probably disposed to make journey to
 paris on my account, i must continue to use monsieur planche’s
 anti-spasmodics; and mint and hoffman’s drops are among my favorite
 remedies. here are some lozenges which i have made up on purpose; they
 are compounded doubly strong.”
 
monte cristo opened the tortoise-shell box, which the lady presented to
 him, and inhaled the odor of the lozenges with the air of an amateur
 who thoroughly appreciated their composition.
 
“they are indeed exquisite,” said; “but as they are necessarily
 submitted to the process of deglutition—a function which it is
 frequently impossible for fainting person to accomplish—i prefer my
 own specific.”
 
“undoubtedly, and so should i prefer it, after the effects i have seen
 produced; but of course it is secret, and i am not so indiscreet as
 to ask it of you.”
 
“but i,” said monte cristo, rising as spoke—“i am gallant enough to
 offer it you.”
 
30079m
 


“how kind you are.”
 
“only remember one thing—a small dose is remedy, large one is
 poison. one drop will restore life, as you have seen; five or six will
 inevitably kill, and in way the more terrible inasmuch as, poured
 into glass of wine, it would not in the slightest degree affect its
 flavor. but i say more, madame; it is really as if i were
 prescribing for you.”
 
the clock struck half-past six, and lady was announced, friend of
 madame villefort, who came to dine with her.
 
“if i had had the honor of seeing you for the third or fourth time,
 count, instead of only for the second,” said madame villefort; “if i
 had had the honor of being your friend, instead of only having the
 happiness of being under an obligation to you, i should insist on
 detaining you to dinner, and not allow myself to be daunted by first
 refusal.”
 
“a thousand thanks, madame,” replied monte cristo “but i have an
 engagement which i cannot break. i have promised to escort to the
 académie greek princess of my acquaintance who has never seen your
 grand opera, and who relies on to conduct her thither.”
 
“adieu, then, sir, and do not forget the prescription.”
 
“ah, in truth, madame, to do that i must forget the hour’s conversation
 i have had with you, which is indeed impossible.”
 
monte cristo bowed, and left the house. madame villefort remained
 immersed in thought.
 
“he is very strange man,” she said, “and in my opinion is himself the
 adelmonte talks about.”
 
as to monte cristo the result had surpassed his utmost expectations.
 
“good,” said he, as went away; “this is fruitful soil, and i feel
 certain that the seed sown will not be cast on barren ground.”
 
next morning, faithful to his promise, sent the prescription
 requested.
 


chapter 53. robert diable
 
the pretext of an opera engagement was so much the more feasible, as
 there chanced to be on that very night more than ordinary attraction
 at the académie royale. levasseur, who had been suffering under severe
 illness, made his reappearance in the character of _bertram_, and, as
 usual, the announcement of the most admired production of the favorite
 composer of the day had attracted brilliant and fashionable audience.
 morcerf, like most other young men of rank and fortune, had his
 orchestra stall, with the certainty of always finding seat in at
 least dozen of the principal boxes occupied by persons of his
 acquaintance; had, moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus
 box. château-renaud rented stall beside his own, while beauchamp, as
 journalist, had unlimited range all over the theatre. it happened
 that on this particular night the minister’s box was placed at the
 disposal of lucien debray, who offered it to the comte morcerf, who
 again, upon his rejection of it by mercédès, sent it to danglars, with
 an intimation that should probably do himself the honor of joining
 the baroness and her daughter during the evening, in the event of their
 accepting the box in question. the ladies received the offer with too
 much pleasure to dream of refusal. to class of persons is the
 presentation of gratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the
 wealthy millionaire, who still hugs economy while boasting of carrying
 king’s ransom in his waistcoat pocket.
 
danglars had, however, protested against showing himself in a
 ministerial box, declaring that his political principles, and his
 parliamentary position as member of the opposition party would not
 permit him so to commit himself; the baroness had, therefore,
 despatched note to lucien debray, bidding him call for them, it being
 wholly impossible for her to go alone with eugénie to the opera.
 
there is gainsaying the fact that very unfavorable construction
 would have been put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone
 without escort, while the addition of third, in the person of her
 mother’s admitted lover, enabled mademoiselle danglars to defy malice
 and ill-nature. one must take the world as one finds it.
 
30083m
 


the curtain rose, as usual, to an almost empty house, it being one of
 the absurdities of parisian fashion never to appear at the opera until
 after the beginning of the performance, so that the first act is
 generally played without the slightest attention being paid to it, that
 part of the audience already assembled being too much occupied in
 observing the fresh arrivals, while nothing is heard but the noise of
 opening and shutting doors, and the buzz of conversation.
 
“surely,” said albert, as the door of box on the first circle opened,
 “that must be the countess g——.”
 
“and who is the countess g——?” inquired château-renaud.
 
“what question! now, do you know, baron, i have great mind to pick
 quarrel with you for asking it; as if all the world did not know who
 the countess g—— was.”
 
“ah, to be sure,” replied château-renaud; “the lovely venetian, is it
 not?”
 
“herself.” at this moment the countess perceived albert, and returned
 his salutation with smile.
 
“you know her, it seems?” said château-renaud.
 
“franz introduced to her at rome,” replied albert.
 
“well, then, will you do as much for in paris as franz did for you
 in rome?”
 
“with pleasure.”
 
there was cry of “shut up!” from the audience. this manifestation on
 the part of the spectators of their wish to be allowed to hear the
 music, produced not the slightest effect on the two young men, who
 continued their conversation.
 
“the countess was present at the races in the champ-de-mars,” said
 château-renaud.
 
“today?”
 
“yes.”
 
“bless me, i quite forgot the races. did you bet?”
 
“oh, merely paltry fifty louis.”
 
“and who was the winner?”
 
“nautilus. i staked on him.”
 
“but there were three races, were there not?”
 
“yes; there was the prize given by the jockey club—a gold cup, you
 know—and very singular circumstance occurred about that race.”
 
“what was it?”
 
“oh, shut up!” again interposed some of the audience.
 
“why, it was won by horse and rider utterly unknown on the course.”
 
“is that possible?”
 
“true as day. the fact was, nobody had observed horse entered by the
 name of vampa, or that of jockey styled job, when, at the last
 moment, splendid roan, mounted by jockey about as big as your fist,
 presented themselves at the starting-post. they were obliged to stuff
 at least twenty pounds weight of shot in the small rider’s pockets, to
 make him weight; but with all that outstripped ariel and barbare,
 against whom ran, by at least three whole lengths.”
 
“and was it not found out at last to whom the horse and jockey
 belonged?”
 
“no.”
 
“you say that the horse was entered under the name of vampa?”
 
“exactly; that was the title.”
 
“then,” answered albert, “i am better informed than you are, and know
 who the owner of that horse was.”
 
“shut up, there!” cried the pit in chorus. and this time the tone and
 manner in which the command was given, betokened such growing hostility
 that the two young men perceived, for the first time, that the mandate
 was addressed to them. leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized
 the various countenances around them, as though demanding some one
 person who would take upon himself the responsibility of what they
 deemed excessive impertinence; but as one responded to the
 challenge, the friends turned again to the front of the theatre, and
 affected to busy themselves with the stage. at this moment the door of
 the minister’s box opened, and madame danglars, accompanied by her
 daughter, entered, escorted by lucien debray, who assiduously conducted
 them to their seats.
 
“ha, ha,” said château-renaud, “here come some friends of yours,
 viscount! what are you looking at there? don’t you see they are trying
 to catch your eye?”
 
albert turned round, just in time to receive gracious wave of the fan
 from the baroness; as for mademoiselle eugénie, she scarcely vouchsafed
 to waste the glances of her large black eyes even upon the business of
 the stage.
 
“i tell you what, my dear fellow,” said château-renaud, “i cannot
 imagine what objection you can possibly have to mademoiselle
 danglars—that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhat
 inferior rank, which by the way i don’t think you care very much about.
 now, barring all that, i mean to say she is deuced fine girl!”
 
“handsome, certainly,” replied albert, “but not to my taste, which i
 confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, and more feminine.”
 
“ah, well,” exclaimed château-renaud, who because had seen his
 thirtieth summer fancied himself duly warranted in assuming sort of
 paternal air with his more youthful friend, “you young people are never
 satisfied; why, what would you have more? your parents have chosen you
 bride built on the model of diana, the huntress, and yet you are not
 content.”
 
“no, for that very resemblance affrights me; i should have liked
 something more in the manner of the venus of milo or capua; but this
 chase-loving diana, continually surrounded by her nymphs, gives a
 sort of alarm lest she should some day bring on the fate of actæon.”
 
and, indeed, it required but one glance at mademoiselle danglars to
 comprehend the justness of morcerf’s remark. she was beautiful, but her
 beauty was of too marked and decided character to please fastidious
 taste; her hair was raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhat
 rebellious; her eyes, of the same color as her hair, were surmounted by
 well-arched brows, whose great defect, however, consisted in an almost
 habitual frown, while her whole physiognomy wore that expression of
 firmness and decision so little in accordance with the gentler
 attributes of her sex—her nose was precisely what sculptor would have
 chosen for chiselled juno. her mouth, which might have been found
 fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly whiteness, rendered
 still more conspicuous by the brilliant carmine of her lips,
 contrasting vividly with her naturally pale complexion. but that which
 completed the almost masculine look morcerf found so little to his
 taste, was dark mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of
 nature generally are, placed just at the corner of her mouth; and the
 effect tended to increase the expression of self-dependence that
 characterized her countenance.
 
the rest of mademoiselle eugénie’s person was in perfect keeping with
 the head just described; she, indeed, reminded one of diana, as
 château-renaud observed, but her bearing was more haughty and resolute.
 
as regarded her attainments, the only fault to be found with them was
 the same that fastidious connoisseur might have found with her
 beauty, that they were somewhat too erudite and masculine for so young
 person. she was perfect linguist, first-rate artist, wrote
 poetry, and composed music; to the study of the latter she professed to
 be entirely devoted, following it with an indefatigable perseverance,
 assisted by schoolfellow,—a young woman without fortune whose talent
 promised to develop into remarkable powers as singer. it was rumored
 that she was an object of almost paternal interest to one of the
 principal composers of the day, who excited her to spare pains in
 the cultivation of her voice, which might hereafter prove source of
 wealth and independence. but this counsel effectually decided
 mademoiselle danglars never to commit herself by being seen in public
 with one destined for theatrical life; and acting upon this
 principle, the banker’s daughter, though perfectly willing to allow
 mademoiselle louise d’armilly (that was the name of the young virtuosa)
 to practice with her through the day, took especial care not to be seen
 in her company. still, though not actually received at the hôtel
 danglars in the light of an acknowledged friend, louise was treated
 with far more kindness and consideration than is usually bestowed on a
 governess.
 
the curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of madame
 danglars into her box, the band quitted the orchestra for the
 accustomed half-hour’s interval allowed between the acts, and the
 audience were left at liberty to promenade the salon or lobbies, or to
 pay and receive visits in their respective boxes.
 
morcerf and château-renaud were amongst the first to avail themselves
 of this permission. for an instant the idea struck madame danglars that
 this eagerness on the part of the young viscount arose from his
 impatience to join her party, and she whispered her expectations to her
 daughter, that albert was hurrying to pay his respects to them.
 mademoiselle eugénie, however, merely returned dissenting movement of
 the head, while, with cold smile, she directed the attention of her
 mother to an opposite box on the first circle, in which sat the
 countess g——, and where morcerf had just made his appearance.
 
30087m
 


“so we meet again, my travelling friend, do we?” cried the countess,
 extending her hand to him with all the warmth and cordiality of an old
 acquaintance; “it was really very good of you to recognize so
 quickly, and still more so to bestow your first visit on me.”
 
“be assured,” replied albert, “that if i had been aware of your arrival
 in paris, and had known your address, i should have paid my respects to
 you before this. allow to introduce my friend, baron de
 château-renaud, one of the few true gentlemen now to be found in
 france, and from whom i have just learned that you were spectator of
 the races in the champ-de-mars, yesterday.”
 
château-renaud bowed to the countess.
 
“so you were at the races, baron?” inquired the countess eagerly.
 
“yes, madame.”
 
“well, then,” pursued madame g—— with considerable animation, “you can
 probably tell who won the jockey club stakes?”
 
“i am sorry to say i cannot,” replied the baron; “and i was just asking
 the same question of albert.”
 
“are you very anxious to know, countess?” asked albert.
 
“to know what?”
 
“the name of the owner of the winning horse?”
 
“excessively; only imagine—but do tell me, viscount, whether you really
 are acquainted with it or no?”
 
“i beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relate some story,
 were you not? you said, ‘only imagine,’—and then paused. pray
 continue.”
 
“well, then, listen. you must know i felt so interested in the splendid
 roan horse, with his elegant little rider, so tastefully dressed in a
 pink satin jacket and cap, that i could not help praying for their
 success with as much earnestness as though the half of my fortune were
 at stake; and when i saw them outstrip all the others, and come to the
 winning-post in such gallant style, i actually clapped my hands with
 joy. imagine my surprise, when, upon returning home, the first object i
 met on the staircase was the identical jockey in the pink jacket! i
 concluded that, by some singular chance, the owner of the winning horse
 must live in the same hotel as myself; but, as i entered my apartments,
 i beheld the very gold cup awarded as prize to the unknown horse and
 rider. inside the cup was small piece of paper, on which were written
 these words—‘from lord ruthven to countess g——.’”
 
“precisely; i was sure of it,” said morcerf.
 
“sure of what?”
 
“that the owner of the horse was lord ruthven himself.”
 
“what lord ruthven do you mean?”
 
“why, our lord ruthven—the vampire of the salle argentina!”
 
“is it possible?” exclaimed the countess; “is here in paris?”
 
“to be sure,—why not?”
 
“and you visit him?—meet him at your own house and elsewhere?”
 
“i assure you is my most intimate friend, and m. château-renaud
 has also the honor of his acquaintance.”
 
“but why are you so sure of his being the winner of the jockey club
 prize?”
 
“was not the winning horse entered by the name of vampa?”
 
“what of that?”
 
“why, do you not recollect the name of the celebrated bandit by whom i
 was made prisoner?”
 
“oh, yes.”
 
“and from whose hands the count extricated in so wonderful a
 manner?”
 
“to be sure, i remember it all now.”
 
“he called himself vampa. you see, it’s evident where the count got the
 name.”
 
“but what could have been his motive for sending the cup to me?”
 
“in the first place, because i had spoken much of you to him, as you
 may believe; and in the second, because delighted to see a
 countrywoman take so lively an interest in his success.”
 
“i trust and hope you never repeated to the count all the foolish
 remarks we used to make about him?”
 
“i should not like to affirm upon oath that i have not. besides, his
 presenting you the cup under the name of lord ruthven——”
 
“oh, but that is dreadful! why, the man must owe fearful grudge.”
 
“does his action appear like that of an enemy?”
 
“no; certainly not.”
 
“well, then——”
 
“and so is in paris?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and what effect does produce?”
 
“why,” said albert, “he was talked about for week; then the
 coronation of the queen of england took place, followed by the theft of
 mademoiselle mars’s diamonds; and so people talked of something else.”
 
“my good fellow,” said château-renaud, “the count is your friend and
 you treat him accordingly. do not believe what albert is telling you,
 countess; so far from the sensation excited in the parisian circles by
 the appearance of the count of monte cristo having abated, i take upon
 myself to declare that it is as strong as ever. his first astounding
 act upon coming amongst us was to present pair of horses, worth
 32,000 francs, to madame danglars; his second, the almost miraculous
 preservation of madame villefort’s life; now it seems that has
 carried off the prize awarded by the jockey club. i therefore maintain,
 in spite of morcerf, that not only is the count the object of interest
 at this present moment, but also that will continue to be so for a
 month longer if pleases to exhibit an eccentricity of conduct which,
 after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence.”
 
“perhaps you are right,” said morcerf; “meanwhile, who is in the
 russian ambassador’s box?”
 
“which box do you mean?” asked the countess.
 
“the one between the pillars on the first tier—it seems to have been
 fitted up entirely afresh.”
 
“did you observe anyone during the first act?” asked château-renaud.
 
“where?”
 
“in that box.”
 
“no,” replied the countess, “it was certainly empty during the first
 act;” then, resuming the subject of their previous conversation, she
 said, “and so you really believe it was your mysterious count of monte
 cristo that gained the prize?”
 
“i am sure of it.”
 
“and who afterwards sent the cup to me?”
 
“undoubtedly.”
 
“but i don’t know him,” said the countess; “i have great mind to
 return it.”
 
“do such thing, i beg of you; would only send you another, formed
 of magnificent sapphire, or hollowed out of gigantic ruby. it is
 his way, and you must take him as you find him.”
 
at this moment the bell rang to announce the drawing up of the curtain
 for the second act. albert rose to return to his place.
 
“shall i see you again?” asked the countess.
 
“at the end of the next act, with your permission, i will come and
 inquire whether there is anything i can do for you in paris?”
 
“pray take notice,” said the countess, “that my present residence is 22
 rue rivoli, and that i am at home to my friends every saturday
 evening. so now, you are both forewarned.”
 
the young men bowed, and quitted the box. upon reaching their stalls,
 they found the whole of the audience in the parterre standing up and
 directing their gaze towards the box formerly possessed by the russian
 ambassador. man of from thirty-five to forty years of age, dressed in
 deep black, had just entered, accompanied by young woman dressed
 after the eastern style. the lady was surpassingly beautiful, while the
 rich magnificence of her attire drew all eyes upon her.
 
“hullo,” said albert; “it is monte cristo and his greek!”
 
the strangers were, indeed, other than the count and haydée. in a
 few moments the young girl had attracted the attention of the whole
 house, and even the occupants of the boxes leaned forward to scrutinize
 her magnificent diamonds.
 
the second act passed away during one continued buzz of voices—one deep
 whisper—intimating that some great and universally interesting event
 had occurred; all eyes, all thoughts, were occupied with the young and
 beautiful woman, whose gorgeous apparel and splendid jewels made most
 extraordinary spectacle.
 
upon this occasion an unmistakable sign from madame danglars intimated
 her desire to see albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the
 second act, and neither the politeness nor good taste of morcerf would
 permit his neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given. at the
 close of the act therefore went to the baroness.
 
having bowed to the two ladies, extended his hand to debray. by the
 baroness was most graciously welcomed, while eugénie received him
 with her accustomed coldness.
 
“my dear fellow,” said debray, “you have come in the nick of time.
 there is madame overwhelming with questions respecting the count;
 she insists upon it that i can tell her his birth, education, and
 parentage, where came from, and whither is going. being no
 disciple of cagliostro, i was wholly unable to do this; so, by way of
 getting out of the scrape, i said, ‘ask morcerf; has got the whole
 history of his beloved monte cristo at his fingers’ ends;’ whereupon
 the baroness signified her desire to see you.”
 
“is it not almost incredible,” said madame danglars, “that person
 having at least half million of secret-service money at his command,
 should possess so little information?”
 
“let assure you, madame,” said lucien, “that had i really the sum
 you mention at my disposal, i would employ it more profitably than in
 troubling myself to obtain particulars respecting the count of monte
 cristo, whose only merit in my eyes consists in his being twice as rich
 as nabob. however, i have turned the business over to morcerf, so
 pray settle it with him as may be most agreeable to you; for my own
 part, i care nothing about the count or his mysterious doings.”
 
30093m
 


“i am very sure nabob would have sent pair of horses worth
 32,000 francs, wearing on their heads four diamonds valued at 5,000
 francs each.”
 
“he seems to have mania for diamonds,” said morcerf, smiling, “and i
 verily believe that, like potemkin, keeps his pockets filled, for
 the sake of strewing them along the road, as tom thumb did his flint
 stones.”
 
“perhaps has discovered some mine,” said madame danglars. “i suppose
 you know has an order for unlimited credit on the baron’s banking
 establishment?”
 
“i was not aware of it,” replied albert, “but i can readily believe
 it.”
 
“and, further, that stated to m. danglars his intention of only
 staying year in paris, during which time proposed to spend six
 millions.
 
“he must be the shah of persia, travelling _incog_.”
 
“have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young woman, m. lucien?”
 inquired eugénie.
 
“i really never met with one woman so ready to do justice to the charms
 of another as yourself,” responded lucien, raising his lorgnette to his
 eye. “a most lovely creature, upon my soul!” was his verdict.
 
“who is this young person, m. morcerf?” inquired eugénie; “does
 anybody know?”
 
“mademoiselle,” said albert, replying to this direct appeal, “i can
 give you very exact information on that subject, as well as on most
 points relative to the mysterious person of whom we are now
 conversing—the young woman is greek.”
 
“so i should suppose by her dress; if you know more than that,
 everyone here is as well-informed as yourself.”
 
“i am extremely sorry you find so ignorant _cicerone_,” replied
 morcerf, “but i am reluctantly obliged to confess, i have nothing
 further to communicate—yes, stay, i do know one thing more, namely,
 that she is musician, for one day when i chanced to be breakfasting
 with the count, i heard the sound of guzla—it is impossible that it
 could have been touched by any other finger than her own.”
 
“then your count entertains visitors, does he?” asked madame danglars.
 
“indeed does, and in most lavish manner, i can assure you.”
 
“i must try and persuade m. danglars to invite him to ball or dinner,
 or something of the sort, that may be compelled to ask us in
 return.”
 
“what,” said debray, laughing; “do you really mean you would go to his
 house?”
 
“why not? my husband could accompany me.”
 
“but do you know this mysterious count is bachelor?”
 
“you have ample proof to the contrary, if you look opposite,” said the
 baroness, as she laughingly pointed to the beautiful greek.
 
“no, no!” exclaimed debray; “that girl is not his wife: told us
 himself she was his slave. do you not recollect, morcerf, his telling
 us so at your breakfast?”
 
“well, then,” said the baroness, “if slave she be, she has all the air
 and manner of princess.”
 
“of the ‘arabian nights’.”
 
“if you like; but tell me, my dear lucien, what it is that constitutes
 princess. why, diamonds—and she is covered with them.”
 
“to she seems overloaded,” observed eugénie; “she would look far
 better if she wore fewer, and we should then be able to see her finely
 formed throat and wrists.”
 
“see how the artist peeps out!” exclaimed madame danglars. “my poor
 eugénie, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts.”
 
“i admire all that is beautiful,” returned the young lady.
 
“what do you think of the count?” inquired debray; “he is not much
 amiss, according to my ideas of good looks.”
 
“the count,” repeated eugénie, as though it had not occurred to her to
 observe him sooner; “the count?—oh, is so dreadfully pale.”
 
“i quite agree with you,” said morcerf; “and the secret of that very
 pallor is what we want to find out. the countess g—— insists upon it
 that is vampire.”
 
“then the countess g—— has returned to paris, has she?” inquired the
 baroness.
 
“is that she, mamma?” asked eugénie; “almost opposite to us, with that
 profusion of beautiful light hair?”
 
“yes,” said madame danglars, “that is she. shall i tell you what you
 ought to do, morcerf?”
 
“command me, madame.”
 
“well, then, you should go and bring your count of monte cristo to us.”
 
“what for?” asked eugénie.
 
“what for? why, to converse with him, of course. have you really no
 desire to meet him?”
 
“none whatever,” replied eugénie.
 
“strange child,” murmured the baroness.
 
“he will very probably come of his own accord,” said morcerf. “there;
 do you see, madame, recognizes you, and bows.”
 
the baroness returned the salute in the most smiling and graceful
 manner.
 
“well,” said morcerf, “i may as well be magnanimous, and tear myself
 away to forward your wishes. adieu; i will go and try if there are any
 means of speaking to him.”
 
“go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan.”
 
“but i have never been presented.”
 
“presented to whom?”
 
“to the beautiful greek.”
 
“you say she is only slave?”
 
“while you assert that she is queen, or at least princess. no; i
 hope that when sees leave you, will come out.”
 
“that is possible—go.”
 
“i am going,” said albert, as made his parting bow.
 
just as was passing the count’s box, the door opened, and monte
 cristo came forth. after giving some directions to ali, who stood in
 the lobby, the count took albert’s arm. carefully closing the box door,
 ali placed himself before it, while crowd of spectators assembled
 round the nubian.
 
“upon my word,” said monte cristo, “paris is strange city, and the
 parisians very singular people. see that cluster of persons collected
 around poor ali, who is as much astonished as themselves; really one
 might suppose was the only nubian they had ever beheld. now i can
 promise you, that frenchman might show himself in public, either in
 tunis, constantinople, bagdad, or cairo, without being treated in that
 way.”
 
“that shows that the eastern nations have too much good sense to waste
 their time and attention on objects undeserving of either. however, as
 far as ali is concerned, i can assure you, the interest excites is
 merely from the circumstance of his being your attendant—you, who are
 at this moment the most celebrated and fashionable person in paris.”
 
“really? and what has procured so flattering distinction?”
 
“what? why, yourself, to be sure! you give away horses worth thousand
 louis; you save the lives of ladies of high rank and beauty; under the
 name of major black you run thoroughbreds ridden by tiny urchins not
 larger than marmots; then, when you have carried off the golden trophy
 of victory, instead of setting any value on it, you give it to the
 first handsome woman you think of!”
 
“and who has filled your head with all this nonsense?”
 
“why, in the first place, i heard it from madame danglars, who, by the
 by, is dying to see you in her box, or to have you seen there by
 others; secondly, i learned it from beauchamp’s journal; and thirdly,
 from my own imagination. why, if you sought concealment, did you call
 your horse vampa?”
 
“that was an oversight, certainly,” replied the count; “but tell me,
 does the count of morcerf never visit the opera? i have been looking
 for him, but without success.”
 
“he will be here tonight.”
 
“in what part of the house?”
 
“in the baroness’s box, i believe.”
 
“that charming young woman with her is her daughter?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i congratulate you.”
 
morcerf smiled.
 
“we will discuss that subject at length some future time,” said he.
 “but what do you think of the music?”
 
“what music?”
 
“why, the music you have been listening to.”
 
“oh, it is well enough as the production of human composer, sung by
 featherless bipeds, to quote the late diogenes.”
 
“from which it would seem, my dear count, that you can at pleasure
 enjoy the seraphic strains that proceed from the seven choirs of
 paradise?”
 
30097m
 


“you are right, in some degree; when i wish to listen to sounds more
 exquisitely attuned to melody than mortal ear ever yet listened to, i
 go to sleep.”
 
“then sleep here, my dear count. the conditions are favorable; what
 else was opera invented for?”
 
“no, thank you. your orchestra is too noisy. to sleep after the manner
 i speak of, absolute calm and silence are necessary, and then certain
 preparation——”
 
“i know—the famous hashish!”
 
“precisely. so, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to be regaled with
 music come and sup with me.”
 
“i have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting with you,” said
 morcerf.
 
“do you mean at rome?”
 
“i do.”
 
“ah, then, i suppose you heard haydée’s guzla; the poor exile
 frequently beguiles weary hour in playing over to the airs of her
 native land.”
 
morcerf did not pursue the subject, and monte cristo himself fell into
 silent reverie.
 
the bell rang at this moment for the rising of the curtain.
 
“you will excuse my leaving you,” said the count, turning in the
 direction of his box.
 
“what? are you going?”
 
“pray, say everything that is kind to countess g—— on the part of her
 friend the vampire.”
 
“and what message shall i convey to the baroness!”
 
“that, with her permission, i shall do myself the honor of paying my
 respects in the course of the evening.”
 
the third act had begun; and during its progress the count of morcerf,
 according to his promise, made his appearance in the box of madame
 danglars. the count of morcerf was not person to excite either
 interest or curiosity in place of public amusement; his presence,
 therefore, was wholly unnoticed, save by the occupants of the box in
 which had just seated himself.
 
the quick eye of monte cristo however, marked his coming; and slight
 though meaning smile passed over his lips. haydée, whose soul seemed
 centred in the business of the stage, like all unsophisticated natures,
 delighted in whatever addressed itself to the eye or ear.
 
30099m
 


the third act passed off as usual. mesdemoiselles noblet, julia, and
 leroux executed the customary pirouettes; robert duly challenged the
 prince of granada; and the royal father of the princess isabella,
 taking his daughter by the hand, swept round the stage with majestic
 strides, the better to display the rich folds of his velvet robe and
 mantle. after which the curtain again fell, and the spectators poured
 forth from the theatre into the lobbies and salon.
 
the count left his box, and moment later was saluting the baronne
 danglars, who could not restrain cry of mingled pleasure and
 surprise.
 
“you are welcome, count!” she exclaimed, as entered. “i have been
 most anxious to see you, that i might repeat orally the thanks writing
 can so ill express.”
 
“surely so trifling circumstance cannot deserve place in your
 remembrance. believe me, madame, i had entirely forgotten it.”
 
“but it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the very next day
 after your princely gift you saved the life of my dear friend, madame
 villefort, which was endangered by the very animals your generosity
 restored to me.”
 
30101m
 


“this time, at least, i do not deserve your thanks. it was ali, my
 nubian slave, who rendered this service to madame villefort.”
 
“was it ali,” asked the count of morcerf, “who rescued my from the
 hands of bandits?”
 
“no, count,” replied monte cristo taking the hand held out to him by
 the general; “in this instance i may fairly and freely accept your
 thanks; but you have already tendered them, and fully discharged your
 debt—if indeed there existed one—and i feel almost mortified to find
 you still reverting to the subject. may i beg of you, baroness, to
 honor with an introduction to your daughter?”
 
“oh, you are stranger—at least not by name,” replied madame
 danglars, “and the last two or three days we have really talked of
 nothing but you. eugénie,” continued the baroness, turning towards her
 daughter, “this is the count of monte cristo.”
 
the count bowed, while mademoiselle danglars bent her head slightly.
 
“you have charming young person with you tonight, count,” said
 eugénie. “is she your daughter?”
 
“no, mademoiselle,” said monte cristo, astonished at the coolness and
 freedom of the question. “she is poor unfortunate greek left under my
 care.”
 
“and what is her name?”
 
“haydée,” replied monte cristo.
 
“a greek?” murmured the count of morcerf.
 
“yes, indeed, count,” said madame danglars; “and tell me, did you ever
 see at the court of ali tepelini, whom you so gloriously and valiantly
 served, more exquisite beauty or richer costume?”
 
“did i hear rightly, monsieur,” said monte cristo “that you served at
 yanina?”
 
“i was inspector-general of the pasha’s troops,” replied morcerf; “and
 it is secret that i owe my fortune, such as it is, to the liberality
 of the illustrious albanese chief.”
 
“but look!” exclaimed madame danglars.
 
“where?” stammered morcerf.
 
“there,” said monte cristo placing his arms around the count, and
 leaning with him over the front of the box, just as haydée, whose eyes
 were occupied in examining the theatre in search of her guardian,
 perceived his pale features close to morcerf’s face. it was as if the
 young girl beheld the head of medusa. she bent forwards as though to
 assure herself of the reality of what she saw, then, uttering faint
 cry, threw herself back in her seat. the sound was heard by the people
 about ali, who instantly opened the box-door.
 
“why, count,” exclaimed eugénie, “what has happened to your ward? she
 seems to have been taken suddenly ill.
 
“very probably,” answered the count. “but do not be alarmed on her
 account. haydée’s nervous system is delicately organized, and she is
 peculiarly susceptible to the odors even of flowers—nay, there are some
 which cause her to faint if brought into her presence. however,”
 continued monte cristo, drawing small phial from his pocket, “i have
 an infallible remedy.”
 
so saying, bowed to the baroness and her daughter, exchanged a
 parting shake of the hand with debray and the count, and left madame
 danglars’ box. upon his return to haydée found her still very pale.
 as soon as she saw him she seized his hand; her own hands were moist
 and icy cold.
 
“who was it you were talking with over there?” she asked.
 
“with the count of morcerf,” answered monte cristo. “he tells he
 served your illustrious father, and that owes his fortune to him.”
 
“wretch!” exclaimed haydée, her eyes flashing with rage; “he sold my
 father to the turks, and the fortune boasts of was the price of his
 treachery! did not you know that, my dear lord?”
 
“something of this i heard in epirus,” said monte cristo; “but the
 particulars are still unknown to me. you shall relate them to me, my
 child. they are, doubt, both curious and interesting.”
 
“yes, yes; but let us go. i feel as though it would kill to remain
 long near that dreadful man.”
 
so saying, haydée arose, and wrapping herself in her burnouse of white
 cashmere embroidered with pearls and coral, she hastily quitted the box
 at the moment when the curtain was rising upon the fourth act.
 
“do you observe,” said the countess g—— to albert, who had returned to
 her side, “that man does nothing like other people; listens most
 devoutly to the third act of _robert diable_, and when the fourth
 begins, takes his departure.”
 


chapter 54. flurry in stocks
 
some days after this meeting, albert morcerf visited the count of
 monte cristo at his house in the champs-Élysées, which had already
 assumed that palace-like appearance which the count’s princely fortune
 enabled him to give even to his most temporary residences. came to
 renew the thanks of madame danglars which had been already conveyed to
 the count through the medium of letter, signed “baronne danglars,
 _née_ hermine servieux.”
 
albert was accompanied by lucien debray, who, joining in his friend’s
 conversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which the
 count’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. was
 convinced that lucien’s visit was due to double feeling of curiosity,
 the larger half of which sentiment emanated from the rue chaussée
 d’antin. in short, madame danglars, not being able personally to
 examine in detail the domestic economy and household arrangements of a
 man who gave away horses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera
 with greek slave wearing diamonds to the amount of million of
 money, had deputed those eyes, by which she was accustomed to see, to
 give her faithful account of the mode of life of this
 incomprehensible person. but the count did not appear to suspect that
 there could be the slightest connection between lucien’s visit and the
 curiosity of the baroness.
 
“you are in constant communication with the baron danglars?” the count
 inquired of albert morcerf.
 
“yes, count, you know what i told you?”
 
“all remains the same, then, in that quarter?”
 
“it is more than ever settled thing,” said lucien,—and, considering
 that this remark was all that was at that time called upon to make,
 adjusted the glass to his eye, and biting the top of his gold headed
 cane, began to make the tour of the apartment, examining the arms and
 the pictures.
 
“ah,” said monte cristo “i did not expect that the affair would be so
 promptly concluded.”
 
“oh, things take their course without our assistance. while we are
 forgetting them, they are falling into their appointed order; and when,
 again, our attention is directed to them, we are surprised at the
 progress they have made towards the proposed end. my father and m.
 danglars served together in spain, my father in the army and m.
 danglars in the commissariat department. it was there that my father,
 ruined by the revolution, and m. danglars, who never had possessed any
 patrimony, both laid the foundations of their different fortunes.”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo “i think m. danglars mentioned that in visit
 which i paid him; and,” continued he, casting side-glance at lucien,
 who was turning over the leaves of an album, “mademoiselle eugénie is
 pretty—i think i remember that to be her name.”
 
“very pretty, or rather, very beautiful,” replied albert, “but of that
 style of beauty which i do not appreciate; i am an ungrateful fellow.”
 
“you speak as if you were already her husband.”
 
“ah,” returned albert, in his turn looking around to see what lucien
 was doing.
 
“really,” said monte cristo, lowering his voice, “you do not appear to
 to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this marriage.”
 
“mademoiselle danglars is too rich for me,” replied morcerf, “and that
 frightens me.”
 
“bah,” exclaimed monte cristo, “that’s fine reason to give. are you
 not rich yourself?”
 
“my father’s income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and will give
 me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when i marry.”
 
“that, perhaps, might not be considered large sum, in paris
 especially,” said the count; “but everything does not depend on wealth,
 and it is fine thing to have good name, and to occupy high
 station in society. your name is celebrated, your position magnificent;
 and then the comte morcerf is soldier, and it is pleasing to see
 the integrity of bayard united to the poverty of duguesclin;
 disinterestedness is the brightest ray in which noble sword can
 shine. as for me, i consider the union with mademoiselle danglars a
 most suitable one; she will enrich you, and you will ennoble her.”
 
albert shook his head, and looked thoughtful.
 
“there is still something else,” said he.
 
“i confess,” observed monte cristo, “that i have some difficulty in
 comprehending your objection to young lady who is both rich and
 beautiful.”
 
“oh,” said morcerf, “this repugnance, if repugnance it may be called,
 is not all on my side.”
 
“whence can it arise, then? for you told your father desired the
 marriage.”
 
“it is my mother who dissents; she has clear and penetrating
 judgment, and does not smile on the proposed union. i cannot account
 for it, but she seems to entertain some prejudice against the
 danglars.”
 
30107m
 


“ah,” said the count, in somewhat forced tone, “that may be easily
 explained; the comtesse morcerf, who is aristocracy and refinement
 itself, does not relish the idea of being allied by your marriage with
 one of ignoble birth; that is natural enough.”
 
“i do not know if that is her reason,” said albert, “but one thing i do
 know, that if this marriage be consummated, it will render her quite
 miserable. there was to have been meeting six weeks ago in order to
 talk over and settle the affair; but i had such sudden attack of
 indisposition——”
 
“real?” interrupted the count, smiling.
 
“oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless,—at any rate they postponed
 the matter for two months. there is hurry, you know. i am not yet
 twenty-one, and eugénie is only seventeen; but the two months expire
 next week. it must be done. my dear count, you cannot imagine how my
 mind is harassed. how happy you are in being exempt from all this!”
 
“well, and why should not you be free, too? what prevents you from
 being so?”
 
“oh, it will be too great disappointment to my father if i do not
 marry mademoiselle danglars.”
 
“marry her then,” said the count, with significant shrug of the
 shoulders.
 
“yes,” replied morcerf, “but that will plunge my mother into positive
 grief.”
 
“then do not marry her,” said the count.
 
“well, i shall see. i will try and think over what is the best thing to
 be done; you will give your advice, will you not, and if possible
 extricate from my unpleasant position? i think, rather than give
 pain to my dear mother, i would run the risk of offending the count.”
 
monte cristo turned away; seemed moved by this last remark.
 
“ah,” said to debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chair at
 the farthest extremity of the salon, and who held pencil in his right
 hand and an account book in his left, “what are you doing there? are
 you making sketch after poussin?”
 
“oh, no,” was the tranquil response; “i am too fond of art to attempt
 anything of that sort. i am doing little sum in arithmetic.”
 
“in arithmetic?”
 
“yes; i am calculating—by the way, morcerf, that indirectly concerns
 you—i am calculating what the house of danglars must have gained by the
 last rise in haiti bonds; from 206 they have risen to 409 in three
 days, and the prudent banker had purchased at 206; therefore must
 have made 300,000 livres.”
 
“that is not his biggest scoop,” said morcerf; “did not make a
 million in spaniards this last year?”
 
“my dear fellow,” said lucien, “here is the count of monte cristo, who
 will say to you, as the italians do,—
 
“‘denaro santità,
 
metà della metà.’9
 

“when they tell such things, i only shrug my shoulders and say
 nothing.”
 
“but you were speaking of haitians?” said monte cristo.
 
“ah, haitians,—that is quite another thing! haitians are the _écarté_
 of french stock-jobbing. we may like bouillotte, delight in whist, be
 enraptured with boston, and yet grow tired of them all; but we always
 come back to _écarté_—it is not only game, it is _hors-d’œuvre_! m.
 danglars sold yesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs. had but
 waited till today, the price would have fallen to 205, and instead of
 gaining 300,000 francs, would have lost 20 or 25,000.”
 
“and what has caused the sudden fall from 409 to 206?” asked monte
 cristo. “i am profoundly ignorant of all these stock-jobbing
 intrigues.”
 
“because,” said albert, laughing, “one piece of news follows another,
 and there is often great dissimilarity between them.”
 
“ah,” said the count, “i see that m. danglars is accustomed to play at
 gaining or losing 300,000 francs in day; must be enormously rich.”
 
“it is not who plays!” exclaimed lucien; “it is madame danglars; she
 is indeed daring.”
 
“but you who are reasonable being, lucien, and who knows how little
 dependence is to be placed on the news, since you are at the
 fountain-head, surely you ought to prevent it,” said morcerf, with a
 smile.
 
“how can i, if her husband fails in controlling her?” asked lucien;
 “you know the character of the baroness—no one has any influence with
 her, and she does precisely what she pleases.”
 
“ah, if i were in your place——” said albert.
 
“well?”
 
“i would reform her; it would be rendering service to her future
 son-in-law.”
 
“how would you set about it?”
 
“ah, that would be easy enough—i would give her lesson.”
 
“a lesson?”
 
“yes. your position as secretary to the minister renders your authority
 great on the subject of political news; you never open your mouth but
 the stockbrokers immediately stenograph your words. cause her to lose a
 hundred thousand francs, and that would teach her prudence.”
 
“i do not understand,” stammered lucien.
 
“it is very clear, notwithstanding,” replied the young man, with an
 artlessness wholly free from affectation; “tell her some fine morning
 an unheard-of piece of intelligence—some telegraphic despatch, of which
 you alone are in possession; for instance, that henri iv. was seen
 yesterday at gabrielle’s. that would boom the market; she will buy
 heavily, and she will certainly lose when beauchamp announces the
 following day, in his gazette, ‘the report circulated by some usually
 well-informed persons that the king was seen yesterday at gabrielle’s
 house, is totally without foundation. we can positively assert that his
 majesty did not quit the pont-neuf.’”
 
lucien half smiled. monte cristo, although apparently indifferent, had
 not lost one word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had
 even read hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of the secretary.
 this embarrassment had completely escaped albert, but it caused lucien
 to shorten his visit; was evidently ill at ease. the count, in
 taking leave of him, said something in low voice, to which he
 answered, “willingly, count; i accept.” the count returned to young
 morcerf.
 
“do you not think, on reflection,” said to him, “that you have done
 wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law in the presence of m.
 debray?”
 
“my dear count,” said morcerf, “i beg of you not to apply that title so
 prematurely.”
 
“now, speaking without any exaggeration, is your mother really so very
 much averse to this marriage?”
 
“so much so that the baroness very rarely comes to the house, and my
 mother, has not, i think, visited madame danglars twice in her whole
 life.”
 
“then,” said the count, “i am emboldened to speak openly to you. m.
 danglars is my banker; m. villefort has overwhelmed with
 politeness in return for service which casual piece of good fortune
 enabled to render him. i predict from all this an avalanche of
 dinners and routs. now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
 beforehand with them, i have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting
 m. and madame danglars, and m. and madame villefort, to my
 country-house at auteuil. if i were to invite you and the count and
 countess of morcerf to this dinner, i should give it the appearance of
 being matrimonial meeting, or at least madame morcerf would look
 upon the affair in that light, especially if baron danglars did the
 honor to bring his daughter. in that case your mother would hold in
 aversion, and i do not at all wish that; on the contrary, i desire to
 stand high in her esteem.”
 
“indeed, count,” said morcerf, “i thank you sincerely for having used
 so much candor towards me, and i gratefully accept the exclusion which
 you propose. you say you desire my mother’s good opinion; i assure you
 it is already yours to very unusual extent.”
 
30111m
 


“do you think so?” said monte cristo, with interest.
 
“oh, i am sure of it; we talked of you an hour after you left us the
 other day. but to return to what we were saying. if my mother could
 know of this attention on your part—and i will venture to tell her—i am
 sure that she will be most grateful to you; it is true that my father
 will be equally angry.” the count laughed.
 
“well,” said to morcerf, “but i think your father will not be the
 only angry one; m. and madame danglars will think very
 ill-mannered person. they know that i am intimate with you—that you
 are, in fact; one of the oldest of my parisian acquaintances—and they
 will not find you at my house; they will certainly ask why i did not
 invite you. be sure to provide yourself with some previous engagement
 which shall have semblance of probability, and communicate the fact
 to by line in writing. you know that with bankers nothing but a
 written document will be valid.”
 
“i will do better than that,” said albert; “my mother is wishing to go
 to the sea-side—what day is fixed for your dinner?”
 
“saturday.”
 
“this is tuesday—well, tomorrow evening we leave, and the day after we
 shall be at tréport. really, count, you have delightful way of
 setting people at their ease.”
 
“indeed, you give more credit than i deserve; i only wish to do what
 will be agreeable to you, that is all.”
 
“when shall you send your invitations?”
 
“this very day.”
 
“well, i will immediately call on m. danglars, and tell him that my
 mother and myself must leave paris tomorrow. i have not seen you,
 consequently i know nothing of your dinner.”
 
“how foolish you are! have you forgotten that m. debray has just seen
 you at my house?”
 
“ah, true.”
 
“fix it this way. i have seen you, and invited you without any
 ceremony, when you instantly answered that it would be impossible for
 you to accept, as you were going to tréport.”
 
“well, then, that is settled; but you will come and call on my mother
 before tomorrow?”
 
“before tomorrow?—that will be difficult matter to arrange, besides,
 i shall just be in the way of all the preparations for departure.”
 
“well, you can do better. you were only charming man before, but, if
 you accede to my proposal, you will be adorable.”
 
“what must i do to attain such sublimity?”
 
“you are today free as air—come and dine with me; we shall be small
 party—only yourself, my mother, and i. you have scarcely seen my
 mother; you shall have an opportunity of observing her more closely.
 she is remarkable woman, and i only regret that there does not exist
 another like her, about twenty years younger; in that case, i assure
 you, there would very soon be countess and viscountess of morcerf. as
 to my father, you will not see him; is officially engaged, and dines
 with the chief referendary. we will talk over our travels; and you, who
 have seen the whole world, will relate your adventures—you shall tell
 us the history of the beautiful greek who was with you the other night
 at the opera, and whom you call your slave, and yet treat like a
 princess. we will talk italian and spanish. come, accept my invitation,
 and my mother will thank you.”
 
“a thousand thanks,” said the count, “your invitation is most gracious,
 and i regret exceedingly that it is not in my power to accept it. i am
 not so much at liberty as you suppose; on the contrary, i have most
 important engagement.”
 
“ah, take care, you were teaching just now how, in case of an
 invitation to dinner, one might creditably make an excuse. i require
 the proof of pre-engagement. i am not banker, like m. danglars, but
 i am quite as incredulous as is.”
 
“i am going to give you proof,” replied the count, and rang the
 bell.
 
“humph,” said morcerf, “this is the second time you have refused to
 dine with my mother; it is evident that you wish to avoid her.”
 
monte cristo started. “oh, you do not mean that,” said he; “besides,
 here comes the confirmation of my assertion.”
 
baptistin entered, and remained standing at the door.
 
“i had previous knowledge of your visit, had i?”
 
“indeed, you are such an extraordinary person, that i would not answer
 for it.”
 
“at all events, i could not guess that you would invite to dinner.”
 
“probably not.”
 
“well, listen, baptistin, what did i tell you this morning when i
 called you into my laboratory?”
 
“to close the door against visitors as soon as the clock struck five,”
 replied the valet.
 
“what then?”
 
“ah, my dear count,” said albert.
 
“no, no, i wish to do away with that mysterious reputation that you
 have given me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome to be always acting
 manfred. i wish my life to be free and open. go on, baptistin.”
 
“then to admit one except major bartolomeo cavalcanti and his son.”
 
“you hear—major bartolomeo cavalcanti—a man who ranks amongst the most
 ancient nobility of italy, whose name dante has celebrated in the tenth
 canto of _the inferno_, you remember it, do you not? then there is his
 son, andrea, charming young man, about your own age, viscount,
 bearing the same title as yourself, and who is making his entry into
 the parisian world, aided by his father’s millions. the major will
 bring his with him this evening, the _contino_, as we say in italy;
 confides him to my care. if proves himself worthy of it, i will
 do what i can to advance his interests. you will assist in the work,
 will you not?”
 
“most undoubtedly. this major cavalcanti is an old friend of yours,
 then?”
 
“by means. is perfect nobleman, very polite, modest, and
 agreeable, such as may be found constantly in italy, descendants of
 very ancient families. i have met him several times at florence,
 bologna and lucca, and has now communicated to the fact of his
 arrival in paris. the acquaintances one makes in travelling have sort
 of claim on one; they everywhere expect to receive the same attention
 which you once paid them by chance, as though the civilities of a
 passing hour were likely to awaken any lasting interest in favor of the
 man in whose society you may happen to be thrown in the course of your
 journey. this good major cavalcanti is come to take second view of
 paris, which only saw in passing through in the time of the empire,
 when was on his way to moscow. i shall give him good dinner, he
 will confide his to my care, i will promise to watch over him, i
 shall let him follow in whatever path his folly may lead him, and then
 i shall have done my part.”
 
“certainly; i see you are model mentor,” said albert “good-bye, we
 shall return on sunday. by the way, i have received news of franz.”
 
“have you? is still amusing himself in italy?”
 
“i believe so; however, regrets your absence extremely. says you
 were the sun of rome, and that without you all appears dark and cloudy;
 i do not know if does not even go so far as to say that it rains.”
 
“his opinion of is altered for the better, then?”
 
“no, still persists in looking upon you as the most incomprehensible
 and mysterious of beings.”
 
“he is charming young man,” said monte cristo “and i felt lively
 interest in him the very first evening of my introduction, when i met
 him in search of supper, and prevailed upon him to accept portion
 of mine. is, i think, the of general d’Épinay?”
 
“he is.”
 
“the same who was so shamefully assassinated in 1815?”
 
“by the bonapartists.”
 
“yes. really i like him extremely; is there not also matrimonial
 engagement contemplated for him?”
 
“yes, is to marry mademoiselle villefort.”
 
“indeed?”
 
30115m
 


“and you know i am to marry mademoiselle danglars,” said albert,
 laughing.
 
“you smile.”
 
“yes.”
 
“why do you do so?”
 
“i smile because there appears to to be about as much inclination
 for the consummation of the engagement in question as there is for my
 own. but really, my dear count, we are talking as much of women as they
 do of us; it is unpardonable.”
 
albert rose.
 
“are you going?”
 
“really, that is good idea!—two hours have i been boring you to death
 with my company, and then you, with the greatest politeness, ask if
 i am going. indeed, count, you are the most polished man in the world.
 and your servants, too, how very well behaved they are; there is quite
 style about them. monsieur baptistin especially; i could never get
 such man as that. my servants seem to imitate those you sometimes see
 in play, who, because they have only word or two to say, aquit
 themselves in the most awkward manner possible. therefore, if you part
 with m. baptistin, give the refusal of him.”
 
“by all means.”
 
“that is not all; give my compliments to your illustrious luccanese,
 cavalcante of the cavalcanti; and if by any chance should be wishing
 to establish his son, find him wife very rich, very noble on her
 mother’s side at least, and baroness in right of her father, i will
 help you in the search.”
 
“ah, ha; you will do as much as that, will you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, really, nothing is certain in this world.”
 
“oh, count, what service you might render me! i should like you a
 hundred times better if, by your intervention, i could manage to remain
 bachelor, even were it only for ten years.”
 
“nothing is impossible,” gravely replied monte cristo; and taking leave
 of albert, returned into the house, and struck the gong three times.
 bertuccio appeared.
 
“monsieur bertuccio, you understand that i intend entertaining company
 on saturday at auteuil.” bertuccio slightly started. “i shall require
 your services to see that all be properly arranged. it is beautiful
 house, or at all events may be made so.”
 
“there must be good deal done before it can deserve that title, your
 excellency, for the tapestried hangings are very old.”
 
“let them all be taken away and changed, then, with the exception of
 the sleeping-chamber which is hung with red damask; you will leave that
 exactly as it is.” bertuccio bowed. “you will not touch the garden
 either; as to the yard, you may do what you please with it; i should
 prefer that being altered beyond all recognition.”
 
“i will do everything in my power to carry out your wishes, your
 excellency. i should be glad, however, to receive your excellency’s
 commands concerning the dinner.”
 
“really, my dear m. bertuccio,” said the count, “since you have been in
 paris, you have become quite nervous, and apparently out of your
 element; you longer seem to understand me.”
 
“but surely your excellency will be so good as to inform whom you
 are expecting to receive?”
 
“i do not yet know myself, neither is it necessary that you should do
 so. ‘lucullus dines with lucullus,’ that is quite sufficient.”
 
bertuccio bowed, and left the room.
 


chapter 55. major cavalcanti
 
both the count and baptistin had told the truth when they announced to
 morcerf the proposed visit of the major, which had served monte cristo
 as pretext for declining albert’s invitation. seven o’clock had just
 struck, and m. bertuccio, according to the command which had been given
 him, had two hours before left for auteuil, when cab stopped at the
 door, and after depositing its occupant at the gate, immediately
 hurried away, as if ashamed of its employment. the visitor was about
 fifty-two years of age, dressed in one of the green surtouts,
 ornamented with black frogs, which have so long maintained their
 popularity all over europe. wore trousers of blue cloth, boots
 tolerably clean, but not of the brightest polish, and little too
 thick in the soles, buckskin gloves, hat somewhat resembling in shape
 those usually worn by the gendarmes, and black cravat striped with
 white, which, if the proprietor had not worn it of his own free will,
 might have passed for halter, so much did it resemble one. such was
 the picturesque costume of the person who rang at the gate, and
 demanded if it was not at no. 30 in the avenue des champs-Élysées that
 the count of monte cristo lived, and who, being answered by the porter
 in the affirmative, entered, closed the gate after him, and began to
 ascend the steps.
 
the small and angular head of this man, his white hair and thick gray
 moustaches, caused him to be easily recognized by baptistin, who had
 received an exact description of the expected visitor, and who was
 awaiting him in the hall. therefore, scarcely had the stranger time to
 pronounce his name before the count was apprised of his arrival. was
 ushered into simple and elegant drawing-room, and the count rose to
 meet him with smiling air.
 
“ah, my dear sir, you are most welcome; i was expecting you.”
 
“indeed,” said the italian, “was your excellency then aware of my
 visit?”
 
“yes; i had been told that i should see you today at seven o’clock.”
 
“then you have received full information concerning my arrival?”
 
“of course.”
 
“ah, so much the better, i feared this little precaution might have
 been forgotten.”
 
30119m
 


“what precaution?”
 
“that of informing you beforehand of my coming.”
 
“oh, no, it has not.”
 
“but you are sure you are not mistaken.”
 
“very sure.”
 
“it really was i whom your excellency expected at seven o’clock this
 evening?”
 
“i will prove it to you beyond doubt.”
 
“oh, no, never mind that,” said the italian; “it is not worth the
 trouble.”
 
“yes, yes,” said monte cristo. his visitor appeared slightly uneasy.
 “let see,” said the count; “are you not the marquis bartolomeo
 cavalcanti?”
 
“bartolomeo cavalcanti,” joyfully replied the italian; “yes, i am
 really he.”
 
“ex-major in the austrian service?”
 
“was i major?” timidly asked the old soldier.
 
“yes,” said monte cristo “you were major; that is the title the
 french give to the post which you filled in italy.”
 
“very good,” said the major, “i do not demand more, you understand——”
 
“your visit here today is not of your own suggestion, is it?” said
 monte cristo.
 
“no, certainly not.”
 
“you were sent by some other person?”
 
“yes.”
 
“by the excellent abbé busoni?”
 
“exactly so,” said the delighted major.
 
“and you have letter?”
 
“yes, there it is.”
 
“give it to me, then.” and monte cristo took the letter, which he
 opened and read. the major looked at the count with his large staring
 eyes, and then took survey of the apartment, but his gaze almost
 immediately reverted to the proprietor of the room.
 
“yes, yes, i see. ‘major cavalcanti, worthy patrician of lucca, a
 descendant of the cavalcanti of florence,’” continued monte cristo,
 reading aloud, “‘possessing an income of half million.’”
 
monte cristo raised his eyes from the paper, and bowed.
 
“half million,” said he, “magnificent!”
 
“half million, is it?” said the major.
 
“yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbé knows correctly
 the amount of all the largest fortunes in europe.”
 
“be it half million, then; but on my word of honor, i had idea
 that it was so much.”
 
“because you are robbed by your steward. you must make some reformation
 in that quarter.”
 
“you have opened my eyes,” said the italian gravely; “i will show the
 gentlemen the door.”
 
monte cristo resumed the perusal of the letter:
 
“‘and who only needs one thing more to make him happy.’”
 
“yes, indeed but one!” said the major with sigh.
 
“‘which is to recover lost and adored son.’”
 
“a lost and adored son!”
 
“‘stolen away in his infancy, either by an enemy of his noble family or
 by the gypsies.’”
 
“at the age of five years!” said the major with deep sigh, and
 raising his eye to heaven.
 
“unhappy father,” said monte cristo. the count continued:
 
“‘i have given him renewed life and hope, in the assurance that you
 have the power of restoring the whom has vainly sought for
 fifteen years.’”
 
the major looked at the count with an indescribable expression of
 anxiety.
 
“i have the power of so doing,” said monte cristo. the major recovered
 his self-possession.
 
“so, then,” said he, “the letter was true to the end?”
 
“did you doubt it, my dear monsieur bartolomeo?”
 
“no, indeed; certainly not; good man, man holding religious office,
 as does the abbé busoni, could not condescend to deceive or play off a
 joke; but your excellency has not read all.”
 
“ah, true,” said monte cristo “there is postscript.”
 
“yes, yes,” repeated the major, “yes—there—is—a—postscript.”
 
“‘in order to save major cavalcanti the trouble of drawing on his
 banker, i send him draft for 2,000 francs to defray his travelling
 expenses, and credit on you for the further sum of 48,000 francs, which
 you still owe me.’”
 
the major awaited the conclusion of the postscript, apparently with
 great anxiety.
 
“very good,” said the count.
 
“he said ‘very good,’” muttered the major, “then—sir——” replied he.
 
“then what?” asked monte cristo.
 
“then the postscript——”
 
“well; what of the postscript?”
 
“then the postscript is as favorably received by you as the rest of the
 letter?”
 
“certainly; the abbé busoni and myself have small account open
 between us. i do not remember if it is exactly 48,000 francs, which i
 am still owing him, but i dare say we shall not dispute the difference.
 you attached great importance, then, to this postscript, my dear
 monsieur cavalcanti?”
 
“i must explain to you,” said the major, “that, fully confiding in the
 signature of the abbé busoni, i had not provided myself with any other
 funds; so that if this resource had failed me, i should have found
 myself very unpleasantly situated in paris.”
 
“is it possible that man of your standing should be embarrassed
 anywhere?” said monte cristo.
 
“why, really i know one,” said the major.
 
“but then you yourself are known to others?”
 
“yes, i am known, so that——”
 
“proceed, my dear monsieur cavalcanti.”
 
“so that you will remit to these 48,000 francs?”
 
“certainly, at your first request.” the major’s eyes dilated with
 pleasing astonishment. “but sit down,” said monte cristo; “really i do
 not know what i have been thinking of—i have positively kept you
 standing for the last quarter of an hour.”
 
“don’t mention it.” the major drew an armchair towards him, and
 proceeded to seat himself.
 
“now,” said the count, “what will you take—a glass of sherry, port, or
 alicante?”
 
“alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine.”
 
“i have some that is very good. you will take biscuit with it, will
 you not?”
 
“yes, i will take biscuit, as you are so obliging.”
 
monte cristo rang; baptistin appeared. the count advanced to meet him.
 
“well?” said in low voice.
 
“the young man is here,” said the valet chambre in the same tone.
 
“into what room did you take him?”
 
“into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency’s orders.”
 
“that’s right; now bring the alicante and some biscuits.”
 
baptistin left the room.
 
“really,” said the major, “i am quite ashamed of the trouble i am
 giving you.”
 
“pray don’t mention such thing,” said the count. baptistin re-entered
 with glasses, wine, and biscuits. the count filled one glass, but in
 the other only poured few drops of the ruby-colored liquid. the
 bottle was covered with spiders’ webs, and all the other signs which
 indicate the age of wine more truly than do wrinkles on man’s face.
 the major made wise choice; took the full glass and biscuit. the
 count told baptistin to leave the plate within reach of his guest, who
 began by sipping the alicante with an expression of great satisfaction,
 and then delicately steeped his biscuit in the wine.
 
30123m
 


“so, sir, you lived at lucca, did you? you were rich, noble, held in
 great esteem—had all that could render man happy?”
 
“all,” said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit, “positively
 all.”
 
“and yet there was one thing wanting in order to complete your
 happiness?”
 
“only one thing,” said the italian.
 
“and that one thing, your lost child.”
 
“ah,” said the major, taking second biscuit, “that consummation of my
 happiness was indeed wanting.” the worthy major raised his eyes to
 heaven and sighed.
 
“let hear, then,” said the count, “who this deeply regretted son
 was; for i always understood you were bachelor.”
 
“that was the general opinion, sir,” said the major, “and i——”
 
“yes,” replied the count, “and you confirmed the report. youthful
 indiscretion, i suppose, which you were anxious to conceal from the
 world at large?”
 
the major recovered himself, and resumed his usual calm manner, at the
 same time casting his eyes down, either to give himself time to compose
 his countenance, or to assist his imagination, all the while giving an
 under-look at the count, the protracted smile on whose lips still
 announced the same polite curiosity.
 
“yes,” said the major, “i did wish this fault to be hidden from every
 eye.”
 
“not on your own account, surely,” replied monte cristo; “for man is
 above that sort of thing?”
 
“oh, no, certainly not on my own account,” said the major with smile
 and shake of the head.
 
“but for the sake of the mother?” said the count.
 
“yes, for the mother’s sake—his poor mother!” cried the major, taking a
 third biscuit.
 
“take some more wine, my dear cavalcanti,” said the count, pouring out
 for him second glass of alicante; “your emotion has quite overcome
 you.”
 
“his poor mother,” murmured the major, trying to get the lachrymal
 gland in operation, so as to moisten the corner of his eye with false
 tear.
 
“she belonged to one of the first families in italy, i think, did she
 not?”
 
“she was of noble family of fiesole, count.”
 
“and her name was——”
 
“do you desire to know her name——?”
 
“oh,” said monte cristo “it would be quite superfluous for you to tell
 me, for i already know it.”
 
“the count knows everything,” said the italian, bowing.
 
“oliva corsinari, was it not?”
 
“oliva corsinari!”
 
“a marchioness?”
 
“a marchioness!”
 
“and you married her at last, notwithstanding the opposition of her
 family?”
 
“yes, that was the way it ended.”
 
“and you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?” said monte
 cristo.
 
“what papers?”
 
“the certificate of your marriage with oliva corsinari, and the
 register of your child’s birth.”
 
“the register of my child’s birth?”
 
“the register of the birth of andrea cavalcanti—of your son; is not his
 name andrea?”
 
“i believe so,” said the major.
 
“what? you believe so?”
 
“i dare not positively assert it, as has been lost for so long a
 time.”
 
“well, then,” said monte cristo “you have all the documents with you?”
 
“your excellency, i regret to say that, not knowing it was necessary to
 come provided with these papers, i neglected to bring them.”
 
“that is unfortunate,” returned monte cristo.
 
“were they, then, so necessary?”
 
“they were indispensable.”
 
the major passed his hand across his brow. “ah, _perbacco_,
 indispensable, were they?”
 
“certainly they were; supposing there were to be doubts raised as to
 the validity of your marriage or the legitimacy of your child?”
 
“true,” said the major, “there might be doubts raised.”
 
“in that case your would be very unpleasantly situated.”
 
“it would be fatal to his interests.”
 
“it might cause him to fail in some desirable matrimonial alliance.”
 
“_o peccato!_”
 
“you must know that in france they are very particular on these points;
 it is not sufficient, as in italy, to go to the priest and say, ‘we
 love each other, and want you to marry us.’ marriage is civil affair
 in france, and in order to marry in an orthodox manner you must have
 papers which undeniably establish your identity.”
 
“that is the misfortune! you see i have not these necessary papers.”
 
“fortunately, i have them, though,” said monte cristo.
 
“you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you have them?”
 
“i have them.”
 
“ah, indeed?” said the major, who, seeing the object of his journey
 frustrated by the absence of the papers, feared also that his
 forgetfulness might give rise to some difficulty concerning the 48,000
 francs—“ah, indeed, that is fortunate circumstance; yes, that really
 is lucky, for it never occurred to to bring them.”
 
“i do not at all wonder at it—one cannot think of everything; but,
 happily, the abbé busoni thought for you.”
 
“he is an excellent person.”
 
“he is extremely prudent and thoughtful.”
 
“he is an admirable man,” said the major; “and sent them to you?”
 
“here they are.”
 
the major clasped his hands in token of admiration.
 
“you married oliva corsinari in the church of san paolo del
 monte-cattini; here is the priest’s certificate.”
 
“yes indeed, there it is truly,” said the italian, looking on with
 astonishment.
 
“and here is andrea cavalcanti’s baptismal register, given by the curé
 of saravezza.”
 
“all quite correct.”
 
“take these documents, then; they do not concern me. you will give them
 to your son, who will, of course, take great care of them.”
 
“i should think so, indeed! if were to lose them——”
 
“well, and if were to lose them?” said monte cristo.
 
“in that case,” replied the major, “it would be necessary to write to
 the curé for duplicates, and it would be some time before they could be
 obtained.”
 
“it would be difficult matter to arrange,” said monte cristo.
 
“almost an impossibility,” replied the major.
 
“i am very glad to see that you understand the value of these papers.”
 
“i regard them as invaluable.”
 
“now,” said monte cristo “as to the mother of the young man——”
 
“as to the mother of the young man——” repeated the italian, with
 anxiety.
 
“as regards the marchesa corsinari——”
 
“really,” said the major, “difficulties seem to thicken upon us; will
 she be wanted in any way?”
 
“no, sir,” replied monte cristo; “besides, has she not——”
 
“yes, sir,” said the major, “she has——”
 
30127m
 


“paid the last debt of nature?”
 
“alas, yes,” returned the italian.
 
“i knew that,” said monte cristo; “she has been dead these ten years.”
 
“and i am still mourning her loss,” exclaimed the major, drawing from
 his pocket checked handkerchief, and alternately wiping first the
 left and then the right eye.
 
“what would you have?” said monte cristo; “we are all mortal. now, you
 understand, my dear monsieur cavalcanti, that it is useless for you to
 tell people in france that you have been separated from your for
 fifteen years. stories of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all
 in vogue in this part of the world, and would not be believed. you sent
 him for his education to college in one of the provinces, and now you
 wish him to complete his education in the parisian world. that is the
 reason which has induced you to leave via reggio, where you have lived
 since the death of your wife. that will be sufficient.”
 
“you think so?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“very well, then.”
 
“if they should hear of the separation——”
 
“ah, yes; what could i say?”
 
“that an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies of your family——”
 
“by the corsinari?”
 
“precisely. had stolen away this child, in order that your name might
 become extinct.”
 
“that is reasonable, since is an only son.”
 
“well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newly awakened
 remembrances be forgotten. you have, doubtless, already guessed that i
 was preparing surprise for you?”
 
“an agreeable one?” asked the italian.
 
“ah, i see the eye of father is more to be deceived than his
 heart.”
 
“hum!” said the major.
 
“someone has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessed that was
 here.”
 
“that who was here?”
 
“your child—your son—your andrea!”
 
“i did guess it,” replied the major with the greatest possible
 coolness. “then is here?”
 
“he is,” said monte cristo; “when the valet chambre came in just
 now, told of his arrival.”
 
“ah, very well, very well,” said the major, clutching the buttons of
 his coat at each exclamation.
 
“my dear sir,” said monte cristo, “i understand your emotion; you must
 have time to recover yourself. i will, in the meantime, go and prepare
 the young man for this much-desired interview, for i presume that is
 not less impatient for it than yourself.”
 
“i should quite imagine that to be the case,” said cavalcanti.
 
“well, in quarter of an hour shall be with you.”
 
“you will bring him, then? you carry your goodness so far as even to
 present him to yourself?”
 
“no; i do not wish to come between father and son. your interview
 will be private. but do not be uneasy; even if the powerful voice of
 nature should be silent, you cannot well mistake him; will enter by
 this door. is fine young man, of fair complexion—a little too
 fair, perhaps—pleasing in manners; but you will see and judge for
 yourself.”
 
“by the way,” said the major, “you know i have only the 2,000 francs
 which the abbé busoni sent me; this sum i have expended upon travelling
 expenses, and——”
 
“and you want money; that is matter of course, my dear m. cavalcanti.
 well, here are 8,000 francs on account.”
 
the major’s eyes sparkled brilliantly.
 
“it is 40,000 francs which i now owe you,” said monte cristo.
 
“does your excellency wish for receipt?” said the major, at the same
 time slipping the money into the inner pocket of his coat.
 
“for what?” said the count.
 
“i thought you might want it to show the abbé busoni.”
 
“well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall give a
 receipt in full. between honest men such excessive precaution is, i
 think, quite unnecessary.”
 
“yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people.”
 
“one word more,” said monte cristo.
 
“say on.”
 
“you will permit to make one remark?”
 
“certainly; pray do so.”
 
“then i should advise you to leave off wearing that style of dress.”
 
“indeed,” said the major, regarding himself with an air of complete
 satisfaction.
 
“yes. it may be worn at via reggio; but that costume, however elegant
 in itself, has long been out of fashion in paris.”
 
“that’s unfortunate.”
 
“oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress; you can
 easily resume it when you leave paris.”
 
“but what shall i wear?”
 
“what you find in your trunks.”
 
“in my trunks? i have but one portmanteau.”
 
“i dare say you have nothing else with you. what is the use of boring
 one’s self with so many things? besides an old soldier always likes to
 march with as little baggage as possible.”
 
“that is just the case—precisely so.”
 
“but you are man of foresight and prudence, therefore you sent your
 luggage on before you. it has arrived at the hôtel des princes, rue de
 richelieu. it is there you are to take up your quarters.”
 
“then, in these trunks——”
 
“i presume you have given orders to your valet chambre to put in all
 you are likely to need,—your plain clothes and your uniform. on grand
 occasions you must wear your uniform; that will look very well. do not
 forget your crosses. they still laugh at them in france, and yet always
 wear them, for all that.”
 
“very well, very well,” said the major, who was in ecstasy at the
 attention paid him by the count.
 
“now,” said monte cristo, “that you have fortified yourself against all
 painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear m. cavalcanti, to meet
 your lost andrea.”
 
saying which monte cristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry,
 leaving the major fascinated beyond expression with the delightful
 reception which had received at the hands of the count.
 


chapter 56. andrea cavalcanti
 
the count of monte cristo entered the adjoining room, which baptistin
 had designated as the drawing-room, and found there young man, of
 graceful demeanor and elegant appearance, who had arrived in cab
 about half an hour previously. baptistin had not found any difficulty
 in recognizing the person who presented himself at the door for
 admittance. was certainly the tall young man with light hair, red
 beard, black eyes, and brilliant complexion, whom his master had so
 particularly described to him. when the count entered the room the
 young man was carelessly stretched on sofa, tapping his boot with the
 gold-headed cane which held in his hand. on perceiving the count he
 rose quickly.
 
“the count of monte cristo, i believe?” said he.
 
“yes, sir, and i think i have the honor of addressing count andrea
 cavalcanti?”
 
“count andrea cavalcanti,” repeated the young man, accompanying his
 words with bow.
 
“you are charged with letter of introduction addressed to me, are you
 not?” said the count.
 
“i did not mention that, because the signature seemed to so
 strange.”
 
“the letter signed ‘sinbad the sailor,’ is it not?”
 
“exactly so. now, as i have never known any sinbad, with the exception
 of the one celebrated in the _thousand and one nights_——”
 
“well, it is one of his descendants, and great friend of mine; is
 very rich englishman, eccentric almost to insanity, and his real name
 is lord wilmore.”
 
“ah, indeed? then that explains everything that is extraordinary,” said
 andrea. “he is, then, the same englishman whom i met—at—ah—yes, indeed.
 well, monsieur, i am at your service.”
 
“if what you say be true,” replied the count, smiling, “perhaps you
 will be kind enough to give some account of yourself and your
 family?”
 
“certainly, i will do so,” said the young man, with quickness which
 gave proof of his ready invention. “i am (as you have said) the count
 andrea cavalcanti, of major bartolomeo cavalcanti, descendant of
 the cavalcanti whose names are inscribed in the golden book at
 florence. our family, although still rich (for my father’s income
 amounts to half million), has experienced many misfortunes, and i
 myself was, at the age of five years, taken away by the treachery of my
 tutor, so that for fifteen years i have not seen the author of my
 existence. since i have arrived at years of discretion and become my
 own master, i have been constantly seeking him, but all in vain. at
 length i received this letter from your friend, which states that my
 father is in paris, and authorizes to address myself to you for
 information respecting him.”
 
“really, all you have related to is exceedingly interesting,” said
 monte cristo, observing the young man with gloomy satisfaction; “and
 you have done well to conform in everything to the wishes of my friend
 sinbad; for your father is indeed here, and is seeking you.”
 
the count from the moment of first entering the drawing-room, had not
 once lost sight of the expression of the young man’s countenance; he
 had admired the assurance of his look and the firmness of his voice;
 but at these words, so natural in themselves, “your father is indeed
 here, and is seeking you,” young andrea started, and exclaimed, “my
 father? is my father here?”
 
“most undoubtedly,” replied monte cristo; “your father, major
 bartolomeo cavalcanti.” the expression of terror which, for the moment,
 had overspread the features of the young man, had now disappeared.
 
“ah, yes, that is the name, certainly. major bartolomeo cavalcanti. and
 you really mean to say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?”
 
“yes, sir; and i can even add that i have only just left his company.
 the history which related to of his lost touched to the
 quick; indeed, his griefs, hopes, and fears on that subject might
 furnish material for most touching and pathetic poem. at length, he
 one day received letter, stating that the abductors of his now
 offered to restore him, or at least to give notice where might be
 found, on condition of receiving large sum of money, by way of
 ransom. your father did not hesitate an instant, and the sum was sent
 to the frontier of piedmont, with passport signed for italy. you were
 in the south of france, i think?”
 
“yes,” replied andrea, with an embarrassed air, “i was in the south of
 france.”
 
“a carriage was to await you at nice?”
 
“precisely so; and it conveyed from nice to genoa, from genoa to
 turin, from turin to chambéry, from chambéry to pont-de-beauvoisin, and
 from pont-de-beauvoisin to paris.”
 
30133m
 


“indeed? then your father ought to have met with you on the road, for
 it is exactly the same route which himself took, and that is how we
 have been able to trace your journey to this place.”
 
“but,” said andrea, “if my father had met me, i doubt if would have
 recognized me; i must be somewhat altered since last saw me.”
 
“oh, the voice of nature,” said monte cristo.
 
“true,” interrupted the young man, “i had not looked upon it in that
 light.”
 
“now,” replied monte cristo “there is only one source of uneasiness
 left in your father’s mind, which is this—he is anxious to know how you
 have been employed during your long absence from him, how you have been
 treated by your persecutors, and if they have conducted themselves
 towards you with all the deference due to your rank. finally, is
 anxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escape the bad
 moral influence to which you have been exposed, and which is infinitely
 more to be dreaded than any physical suffering; wishes to discover
 if the fine abilities with which nature had endowed you have been
 weakened by want of culture; and, in short, whether you consider
 yourself capable of resuming and retaining in the world the high
 position to which your rank entitles you.”
 
“sir!” exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, “i hope false
 report——”
 
“as for myself, i first heard you spoken of by my friend wilmore, the
 philanthropist. i believe found you in some unpleasant position, but
 do not know of what nature, for i did not ask, not being inquisitive.
 your misfortunes engaged his sympathies, so you see you must have been
 interesting. told that was anxious to restore you to the
 position which you had lost, and that would seek your father until
 found him. did seek, and has found him, apparently, since is
 here now; and, finally, my friend apprised of your coming, and gave
 few other instructions relative to your future fortune. i am quite
 aware that my friend wilmore is peculiar, but is sincere, and as
 rich as gold mine, consequently, may indulge his eccentricities
 without any fear of their ruining him, and i have promised to adhere to
 his instructions. now, sir, pray do not be offended at the question i
 am about to put to you, as it comes in the way of my duty as your
 patron. i would wish to know if the misfortunes which have happened to
 you—misfortunes entirely beyond your control, and which in degree
 diminish my regard for you—i would wish to know if they have not, in
 some measure, contributed to render you stranger to the world in
 which your fortune and your name entitle you to make conspicuous
 figure?”
 
“sir,” returned the young man, with reassurance of manner, “make your
 mind easy on this score. those who took from my father, and who
 always intended, sooner or later, to sell again to my original
 proprietor, as they have now done, calculated that, in order to make
 the most of their bargain, it would be politic to leave in
 possession of all my personal and hereditary worth, and even to
 increase the value, if possible. i have, therefore, received very
 good education, and have been treated by these kidnappers very much as
 the slaves were treated in asia minor, whose masters made them
 grammarians, doctors, and philosophers, in order that they might fetch
 higher price in the roman market.”
 
monte cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if had not
 expected so much from m. andrea cavalcanti.
 
“besides,” continued the young man, “if there did appear some defect in
 education, or offence against the established forms of etiquette, i
 suppose it would be excused, in consideration of the misfortunes which
 accompanied my birth, and followed through my youth.”
 
“well,” said monte cristo in an indifferent tone, “you will do as you
 please, count, for you are the master of your own actions, and are the
 person most concerned in the matter, but if i were you, i would not
 divulge word of these adventures. your history is quite romance,
 and the world, which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely
 mistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, even though they
 be gilded like yourself. this is the kind of difficulty which i wished
 to represent to you, my dear count. you would hardly have recited your
 touching history before it would go forth to the world, and be deemed
 unlikely and unnatural. you would be longer lost child found, but
 you would be looked upon as an upstart, who had sprung up like a
 mushroom in the night. you might excite little curiosity, but it is
 not everyone who likes to be made the centre of observation and the
 subject of unpleasant remark.”
 
“i agree with you, monsieur,” said the young man, turning pale, and, in
 spite of himself, trembling beneath the scrutinizing look of his
 companion, “such consequences would be extremely unpleasant.”
 
“nevertheless, you must not exaggerate the evil,” said monte cristo,
 “for by endeavoring to avoid one fault you will fall into another. you
 must resolve upon one simple and single line of conduct, and for man
 of your intelligence, this plan is as easy as it is necessary; you must
 form honorable friendships, and by that means counteract the prejudice
 which may attach to the obscurity of your former life.”
 
andrea visibly changed countenance.
 
“i would offer myself as your surety and friendly adviser,” said monte
 cristo, “did i not possess moral distrust of my best friends, and a
 sort of inclination to lead others to doubt them too; therefore, in
 departing from this rule, i should (as the actors say) be playing a
 part quite out of my line, and should, therefore, run the risk of being
 hissed, which would be an act of folly.”
 
“however, your excellency,” said andrea, “in consideration of lord
 wilmore, by whom i was recommended to you——”
 
“yes, certainly,” interrupted monte cristo; “but lord wilmore did not
 omit to inform me, my dear m. andrea, that the season of your youth was
 rather stormy one. ah,” said the count, watching andrea’s
 countenance, “i do not demand any confession from you; it is precisely
 to avoid that necessity that your father was sent for from lucca. you
 shall soon see him. is little stiff and pompous in his manner, and
 is disfigured by his uniform; but when it becomes known that has
 been for eighteen years in the austrian service, all that will be
 pardoned. we are not generally very severe with the austrians. in
 short, you will find your father very presentable person, i assure
 you.”
 
“ah, sir, you have given confidence; it is so long since we were
 separated, that i have not the least remembrance of him, and, besides,
 you know that in the eyes of the world large fortune covers all
 defects.”
 
“he is millionaire—his income is 500,000 francs.”
 
“then,” said the young man, with anxiety, “i shall be sure to be placed
 in an agreeable position.”
 
“one of the most agreeable possible, my dear sir; will allow you an
 income of 50,000 livres per annum during the whole time of your stay in
 paris.”
 
“then in that case i shall always choose to remain there.”
 
“you cannot control circumstances, my dear sir; ‘man proposes, and god
 disposes.’” andrea sighed.
 
“but,” said he, “so long as i do remain in paris, and nothing forces me
 to quit it, do you mean to tell that i may rely on receiving the sum
 you just now mentioned to me?”
 
“you may.”
 
“shall i receive it from my father?” asked andrea, with some
 uneasiness.
 
“yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but lord wilmore
 will be the security for the money. has, at the request of your
 father, opened an account of 5,000 francs month at m. danglars’,
 which is one of the safest banks in paris.”
 
“and does my father mean to remain long in paris?” asked andrea.
 
“only few days,” replied monte cristo. “his service does not allow
 him to absent himself more than two or three weeks together.”
 
“ah, my dear father!” exclaimed andrea, evidently charmed with the idea
 of his speedy departure.
 
“therefore,” said monte cristo feigning to mistake his
 meaning—“therefore i will not, for another instant, retard the pleasure
 of your meeting. are you prepared to embrace your worthy father?”
 
“i hope you do not doubt it.”
 
30137m
 


“go, then, into the drawing-room, my young friend, where you will find
 your father awaiting you.”
 
andrea made low bow to the count, and entered the adjoining room.
 monte cristo watched him till disappeared, and then touched spring
 in panel made to look like picture, which, in sliding partly from
 the frame, discovered to view small opening, so cleverly contrived
 that it revealed all that was passing in the drawing-room now occupied
 by cavalcanti and andrea. the young man closed the door behind him, and
 advanced towards the major, who had risen when heard steps
 approaching him.
 
“ah, my dear father!” said andrea in loud voice, in order that the
 count might hear him in the next room, “is it really you?”
 
“how do you do, my dear son?” said the major gravely.
 
“after so many years of painful separation,” said andrea, in the same
 tone of voice, and glancing towards the door, “what happiness it is
 to meet again!”
 
“indeed it is, after so long separation.”
 
“will you not embrace me, sir?” said andrea.
 
30139m
 


“if you wish it, my son,” said the major; and the two men embraced each
 other after the fashion of actors on the stage; that is to say, each
 rested his head on the other’s shoulder.
 
“then we are once more reunited?” said andrea.
 
“once more,” replied the major.
 
“never more to be separated?”
 
“why, as to that—i think, my dear son, you must be by this time so
 accustomed to france as to look upon it almost as second country.”
 
“the fact is,” said the young man, “that i should be exceedingly
 grieved to leave it.”
 
“as for me, you must know i cannot possibly live out of lucca;
 therefore i shall return to italy as soon as i can.”
 
“but before you leave france, my dear father, i hope you will put in
 possession of the documents which will be necessary to prove my
 descent.”
 
“certainly; i am come expressly on that account; it has cost much
 trouble to find you, but i had resolved on giving them into your hands,
 and if i had to recommence my search, it would occupy all the few
 remaining years of my life.”
 
“where are these papers, then?”
 
“here they are.”
 
andrea seized the certificate of his father’s marriage and his own
 baptismal register, and after having opened them with all the eagerness
 which might be expected under the circumstances, read them with a
 facility which proved that was accustomed to similar documents, and
 with an expression which plainly denoted an unusual interest in the
 contents. when had perused the documents, an indefinable expression
 of pleasure lighted up his countenance, and looking at the major with a
 most peculiar smile, said, in very excellent tuscan:
 
“then there is longer any such thing, in italy as being condemned to
 the galleys?”
 
the major drew himself up to his full height.
 
“why?—what do you mean by that question?”
 
“i mean that if there were, it would be impossible to draw up with
 impunity two such deeds as these. in france, my dear sir, half such a
 piece of effrontery as that would cause you to be quickly despatched to
 toulon for five years, for change of air.”
 
“will you be good enough to explain your meaning?” said the major,
 endeavoring as much as possible to assume an air of the greatest
 majesty.
 
“my dear m. cavalcanti,” said andrea, taking the major by the arm in a
 confidential manner, “how much are you paid for being my father?”
 
the major was about to speak, when andrea continued, in low voice:
 
“nonsense, i am going to set you an example of confidence, they give me
 50,000 francs year to be your son; consequently, you can understand
 that it is not at all likely i shall ever deny my parent.”
 
the major looked anxiously around him.
 
“make yourself easy, we are quite alone,” said andrea; “besides, we are
 conversing in italian.”
 
“well, then,” replied the major, “they paid 50,000 francs down.”
 
“monsieur cavalcanti,” said andrea, “do you believe in fairy tales?”
 
“i used not to do so, but i really feel now almost obliged to have
 faith in them.”
 
“you have, then, been induced to alter your opinion; you have had some
 proofs of their truth?” the major drew from his pocket handful of
 gold.
 
“most palpable proofs,” said he, “as you may perceive.”
 
“you think, then, that i may rely on the count’s promises?”
 
“certainly i do.”
 
“you are sure will keep his word with me?”
 
“to the letter, but at the same time, remember, we must continue to
 play our respective parts. i, as tender father——”
 
“and i as dutiful son, as they choose that i shall be descended from
 you.”
 
“whom do you mean by they?”
 
“_ma foi_, i can hardly tell, but i was alluding to those who wrote the
 letter; you received one, did you not?”
 
“yes.”
 
“from whom?”
 
“from certain abbé busoni.”
 
“have you any knowledge of him?”
 
“no, i have never seen him.”
 
“what did say in the letter?”
 
“you will promise not to betray me?”
 
“rest assured of that; you well know that our interests are the same.”
 
“then read for yourself;” and the major gave letter into the young
 man’s hand. andrea read in low voice:
 
“‘you are poor; miserable old age awaits you. would you like to
 become rich, or at least independent? set out immediately for paris,
 and demand of the count of monte cristo, avenue des champs-Élysées, no.
 30, the whom you had by the marchesa corsinari, and who was taken
 from you at five years of age. this is named andrea cavalcanti. in
 order that you may not doubt the kind intention of the writer of this
 letter, you will find enclosed an order for 2,400 francs, payable in
 florence, at signor gozzi’s; also letter of introduction to the count
 of monte cristo, on whom i give you draft of 48,000 francs. remember
 to go to the count on the 26th may at seven o’clock in the evening.
 

“(signed) ‘abbé busoni.’”
 

“it is the same.”
 
“what do you mean?” said the major.
 
“i was going to say that i received letter almost to the same
 effect.”
 
“you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“from the abbé busoni?”
 
“no.”
 
“from whom, then?”
 
“from an englishman, called lord wilmore, who takes the name of sinbad
 the sailor.”
 
“and of whom you have more knowledge than i of the abbé busoni?”
 
“you are mistaken; there i am ahead of you.”
 
“you have seen him, then?”
 
“yes, once.”
 
“where?”
 
“ah, that is just what i cannot tell you; if i did, i should make you
 as wise as myself, which it is not my intention to do.”
 
“and what did the letter contain?”
 
“read it.”
 
“‘you are poor, and your future prospects are dark and gloomy. do you
 wish for name? should you like to be rich, and your own master?’”
 

“_parbleu!_” said the young man; “was it possible there could be two
 answers to such question?”
 
“‘take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the porte de
 gênes, as you enter nice; pass through turin, chambéry, and
 pont-de-beauvoisin. go to the count of monte cristo, avenue des
 champs-Élysées, on the 26th of may, at seven o’clock in the evening,
 and demand of him your father. you are the of the marchese
 cavalcanti and the marchesa oliva corsinari. the marquis will give you
 some papers which will certify this fact, and authorize you to appear
 under that name in the parisian world. as to your rank, an annual
 income of 50,000 livres will enable you to support it admirably. i
 enclose draft for 5,000 livres, payable on m. ferrea, banker at nice,
 and also letter of introduction to the count of monte cristo, whom i
 have directed to supply all your wants.
 

“‘sinbad the sailor.’”
 

“humph,” said the major; “very good. you have seen the count, you say?”
 
“i have only just left him.”
 
“and has conformed to all that the letter specified?”
 
“he has.”
 
“do you understand it?”
 
“not in the least.”
 
“there is dupe somewhere.”
 
“at all events, it is neither you nor i.”
 
“certainly not.”
 
“well, then——”
 
“why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?”
 
“no; i agree with you there. we must play the game to the end, and
 consent to be blindfolded.”
 
“ah, you shall see; i promise you i will sustain my part to
 admiration.”
 
“i never once doubted your doing so.” monte cristo chose this moment
 for re-entering the drawing-room. on hearing the sound of his
 footsteps, the two men threw themselves in each other’s arms, and while
 they were in the midst of this embrace, the count entered.
 
“well, marquis,” said monte cristo, “you appear to be in way
 disappointed in the whom your good fortune has restored to you.”
 
“ah, your excellency, i am overwhelmed with delight.”
 
“and what are your feelings?” said monte cristo, turning to the young
 man.
 
“as for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness.”
 
“happy father, happy son!” said the count.
 
“there is only one thing which grieves me,” observed the major, “and
 that is the necessity for my leaving paris so soon.”
 
“ah, my dear m. cavalcanti, i trust you will not leave before i have
 had the honor of presenting you to some of my friends.”
 
“i am at your service, sir,” replied the major.
 
“now, sir,” said monte cristo, addressing andrea, “make your
 confession.”
 
“to whom?”
 
“tell m. cavalcanti something of the state of your finances.”
 
“_ma foi!_ monsieur, you have touched upon tender chord.”
 
“do you hear what says, major?”
 
“certainly i do.”
 
“but do you understand?”
 
“i do.”
 
“your says requires money.”
 
“well, what would you have do?” said the major.
 
“you should furnish him with some of course,” replied monte cristo.
 
“i?”
 
“yes, you,” said the count, at the same time advancing towards andrea,
 and slipping packet of bank-notes into the young man’s hand.
 
“what is this?”
 
“it is from your father.”
 
“from my father?”
 
“yes; did you not tell him just now that you wanted money? well, then,
 deputes to give you this.”
 
“am i to consider this as part of my income on account?”
 
“no, it is for the first expenses of your settling in paris.”
 
“ah, how good my dear father is!”
 
“silence,” said monte cristo; “he does not wish you to know that it
 comes from him.”
 
“i fully appreciate his delicacy,” said andrea, cramming the notes
 hastily into his pocket.
 
“and now, gentlemen, i wish you good-morning,” said monte cristo.
 
“and when shall we have the honor of seeing you again, your
 excellency?” asked cavalcanti.
 
“ah,” said andrea, “when may we hope for that pleasure?”
 
“on saturday, if you will—yes.—let see—saturday—i am to dine at my
 country house, at auteuil, on that day, rue fontaine, no. 28.
 several persons are invited, and among others, m. danglars, your
 banker. i will introduce you to him, for it will be necessary should
 know you, as is to pay your money.”
 
“full dress?” said the major, half aloud.
 
“oh, yes, certainly,” said the count; “uniform, cross, knee-breeches.”
 
“and how shall i be dressed?” demanded andrea.
 
30145m
 


“oh, very simply; black trousers, patent leather boots, white
 waistcoat, either black or blue coat, and long cravat. go to blin
 or véronique for your clothes. baptistin will tell you where, if you do
 not know their address. the less pretension there is in your attire,
 the better will be the effect, as you are rich man. if you mean to
 buy any horses, get them of devedeux, and if you purchase phaeton, go
 to baptiste for it.”
 
“at what hour shall we come?” asked the young man.
 
“about half-past six.”
 
“we will be with you at that time,” said the major. the two cavalcanti
 bowed to the count, and left the house. monte cristo went to the
 window, and saw them crossing the street, arm in arm.
 
“there go two miscreants;” said he, “it is pity they are not really
 related!” then, after an instant of gloomy reflection, “come, i will go
 to see the morrels,” said he; “i think that disgust is even more
 sickening than hatred.”
 
30147m
 



chapter 57. in the lucern patch
 
our readers must now allow us to transport them again to the enclosure
 surrounding m. villefort’s house, and, behind the gate, half
 screened from view by the large chestnut-trees, which on all sides
 spread their luxuriant branches, we shall find some people of our
 acquaintance. this time maximilian was the first to arrive. was
 intently watching for shadow to appear among the trees, and awaiting
 with anxiety the sound of light step on the gravel walk.
 
at length, the long-desired sound was heard, and instead of one figure,
 as had expected, perceived that two were approaching him. the
 delay had been occasioned by visit from madame danglars and eugénie,
 which had been prolonged beyond the time at which valentine was
 expected. that she might not appear to fail in her promise to
 maximilian, she proposed to mademoiselle danglars that they should take
 walk in the garden, being anxious to show that the delay, which was
 doubtless cause of vexation to him, was not occasioned by any neglect
 on her part. the young man, with the intuitive perception of lover,
 quickly understood the circumstances in which she was involuntarily
 placed, and was comforted. besides, although she avoided coming
 within speaking distance, valentine arranged so that maximilian could
 see her pass and repass, and each time she went by, she managed,
 unperceived by her companion, to cast an expressive look at the young
 man, which seemed to say, “have patience! you see it is not my fault.”
 
and maximilian was patient, and employed himself in mentally
 contrasting the two girls,—one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a
 figure gracefully bending like weeping willow; the other brunette,
 with fierce and haughty expression, and as straight as poplar. it
 is unnecessary to state that, in the eyes of the young man, valentine
 did not suffer by the contrast. in about half an hour the girls went
 away, and maximilian understood that mademoiselle danglars’ visit had
 at last come to an end. in few minutes valentine re-entered the
 garden alone. for fear that anyone should be observing her return, she
 walked slowly; and instead of immediately directing her steps towards
 the gate, she seated herself on bench, and, carefully casting her
 eyes around, to convince herself that she was not watched, she
 presently arose, and proceeded quickly to join maximilian.
 
“good-evening, valentine,” said well-known voice.
 
“good-evening, maximilian; i know i have kept you waiting, but you saw
 the cause of my delay.”
 
“yes, i recognized mademoiselle danglars. i was not aware that you were
 so intimate with her.”
 
“who told you we were intimate, maximilian?”
 
“no one, but you appeared to be so. from the manner in which you walked
 and talked together, one would have thought you were two school-girls
 telling your secrets to each other.”
 
“we were having confidential conversation,” returned valentine; “she
 was owning to her repugnance to the marriage with m. morcerf; and
 i, on the other hand, was confessing to her how wretched it made to
 think of marrying m. d’Épinay.”
 
“dear valentine!”
 
“that will account to you for the unreserved manner which you observed
 between and eugénie, as in speaking of the man whom i could not
 love, my thoughts involuntarily reverted to him on whom my affections
 were fixed.”
 
“ah, how good you are to say so, valentine! you possess quality which
 can never belong to mademoiselle danglars. it is that indefinable charm
 which is to woman what perfume is to the flower and flavor to the
 fruit, for the beauty of either is not the only quality we seek.”
 
“it is your love which makes you look upon everything in that light.”
 
“no, valentine, i assure you such is not the case. i was observing you
 both when you were walking in the garden, and, on my honor, without at
 all wishing to depreciate the beauty of mademoiselle danglars, i cannot
 understand how any man can really love her.”
 
“the fact is, maximilian, that i was there, and my presence had the
 effect of rendering you unjust in your comparison.”
 
“no; but tell me—it is question of simple curiosity, and which was
 suggested by certain ideas passing in my mind relative to mademoiselle
 danglars——”
 
“i dare say it is something disparaging which you are going to say. it
 only proves how little indulgence we may expect from your sex,”
 interrupted valentine.
 
“you cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judges of each
 other.”
 
“if we are so, it is because we generally judge under the influence of
 excitement. but return to your question.”
 
30151m
 


“does mademoiselle danglars object to this marriage with m. morcerf
 on account of loving another?”
 
“i told you i was not on terms of strict intimacy with eugénie.”
 
“yes, but girls tell each other secrets without being particularly
 intimate; own, now, that you did question her on the subject. ah, i see
 you are smiling.”
 
“if you are already aware of the conversation that passed, the wooden
 partition which interposed between us and you has proved but slight
 security.”
 
“come, what did she say?”
 
“she told that she loved one,” said valentine; “that she disliked
 the idea of being married; that she would infinitely prefer leading an
 independent and unfettered life; and that she almost wished her father
 might lose his fortune, that she might become an artist, like her
 friend, mademoiselle louise d’armilly.”
 
“ah, you see——”
 
“well, what does that prove?” asked valentine.
 
“nothing,” replied maximilian.
 
“then why did you smile?”
 
“why, you know very well that you are reflecting on yourself,
 valentine.”
 
“do you want to go away?”
 
“ah, no, no. but do not let us lose time; you are the subject on which
 i wish to speak.”
 
“true, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutes more to pass
 together.”
 
“_ma foi!_” said maximilian, in consternation.
 
“yes, you are right; i am but poor friend to you. what life i cause
 you to lead, poor maximilian, you who are formed for happiness! i
 bitterly reproach myself, i assure you.”
 
“well, what does it signify, valentine, so long as i am satisfied, and
 feel that even this long and painful suspense is amply repaid by five
 minutes of your society, or two words from your lips? and i have also a
 deep conviction that heaven would not have created two hearts,
 harmonizing as ours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, to
 separate us at last.”
 
“those are kind and cheering words. you must hope for us both,
 maximilian; that will make at least partly happy.”
 
“but why must you leave so soon?”
 
“i do not know particulars. i can only tell you that madame de
 villefort sent to request my presence, as she had communication to
 make on which part of my fortune depended. let them take my fortune,
 i am already too rich; and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will
 leave in peace and quietness. you would love as much if i were
 poor, would you not, maximilian?”
 
“oh, i shall always love you. what should i care for either riches or
 poverty, if my valentine was near me, and i felt certain that one
 could deprive of her? but do you not fear that this communication
 may relate to your marriage?”
 
“i do not think that is the case.”
 
“however it may be, valentine, you must not be alarmed. i assure you
 that, as long as i live, i shall never love anyone else!”
 
“do you think to reassure when you say that, maximilian?”
 
“pardon me, you are right. i am brute. but i was going to tell you
 that i met m. morcerf the other day.”
 
“well?”
 
“monsieur franz is his friend, you know.”
 
“what then?”
 
“monsieur morcerf has received letter from franz, announcing his
 immediate return.” valentine turned pale, and leaned her hand against
 the gate.
 
“ah heavens, if it were that! but no, the communication would not come
 through madame villefort.”
 
“why not?”
 
“because—i scarcely know why—but it has appeared as if madame de
 villefort secretly objected to the marriage, although she did not
 choose openly to oppose it.”
 
“is it so? then i feel as if i could adore madame villefort.”
 
“do not be in such hurry to do that,” said valentine, with sad
 smile.
 
“if she objects to your marrying m. d’Épinay, she would be all the more
 likely to listen to any other proposition.”
 
“no, maximilian, it is not suitors to which madame villefort
 objects, it is marriage itself.”
 
“marriage? if she dislikes that so much, why did she ever marry
 herself?”
 
“you do not understand me, maximilian. about year ago, i talked of
 retiring to convent. madame villefort, in spite of all the remarks
 which she considered it her duty to make, secretly approved of the
 proposition, my father consented to it at her instigation, and it was
 only on account of my poor grandfather that i finally abandoned the
 project. you can form idea of the expression of that old man’s eye
 when looks at me, the only person in the world whom loves, and, i
 had almost said, by whom is beloved in return. when learned my
 resolution, i shall never forget the reproachful look which cast on
 me, and the tears of utter despair which chased each other down his
 lifeless cheeks. ah, maximilian, i experienced, at that moment, such
 remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, i
 exclaimed,—‘forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear grandfather; they may
 do what they will with me, i will never leave you.’ when i had ceased
 speaking, thankfully raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering
 word. ah, maximilian, i may have much to suffer, but i feel as if my
 grandfather’s look at that moment would more than compensate for all.”
 
“dear valentine, you are perfect angel, and i am sure i do not know
 what i—sabring right and left among the bedouins—can have done to merit
 your being revealed to me, unless, indeed, heaven took into
 consideration the fact that the victims of my sword were infidels. but
 tell what interest madame villefort can have in your remaining
 unmarried?”
 
“did i not tell you just now that i was rich, maximilian—too rich? i
 possess nearly 50,000 livres in right of my mother; my grandfather and
 my grandmother, the marquis and marquise saint-méran, will leave me
 as much, and m. noirtier evidently intends making his heir. my
 brother edward, who inherits nothing from his mother, will, therefore,
 be poor in comparison with me. now, if i had taken the veil, all this
 fortune would have descended to my father, and, in reversion, to his
 son.”
 
“ah, how strange it seems that such young and beautiful woman should
 be so avaricious.”
 
“it is not for herself that she is so, but for her son, and what you
 regard as vice becomes almost virtue when looked at in the light of
 maternal love.”
 
“but could you not compromise matters, and give up portion of your
 fortune to her son?”
 
“how could i make such proposition, especially to woman who always
 professes to be so entirely disinterested?”
 
“valentine, i have always regarded our love in the light of something
 sacred; consequently, i have covered it with the veil of respect, and
 hid it in the innermost recesses of my soul. human being, not even
 my sister, is aware of its existence. valentine, will you permit to
 make confidant of friend and reveal to him the love i bear you?”
 
valentine started. “a friend, maximilian; and who is this friend? i
 tremble to give my permission.”
 
“listen, valentine. have you never experienced for anyone that sudden
 and irresistible sympathy which made you feel as if the object of it
 had been your old and familiar friend, though, in reality, it was the
 first time you had ever met? nay, further, have you never endeavored to
 recall the time, place, and circumstances of your former intercourse,
 and failing in this attempt, have almost believed that your spirits
 must have held converse with each other in some state of being anterior
 to the present, and that you are only now occupied in reminiscence of
 the past?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, that is precisely the feeling which i experienced when i first
 saw that extraordinary man.”
 
“extraordinary, did you say?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you have known him for some time, then?”
 
“scarcely longer than eight or ten days.”
 
“and do you call man your friend whom you have only known for eight
 or ten days? ah, maximilian, i had hoped you set higher value on the
 title of friend.”
 
“your logic is most powerful, valentine, but say what you will, i can
 never renounce the sentiment which has instinctively taken possession
 of my mind. i feel as if it were ordained that this man should be
 associated with all the good which the future may have in store for me,
 and sometimes it really seems as if his eye was able to see what was to
 come, and his hand endowed with the power of directing events according
 to his own will.”
 
“he must be prophet, then,” said valentine, smiling.
 
“indeed,” said maximilian, “i have often been almost tempted to
 attribute to him the gift of prophecy; at all events, has a
 wonderful power of foretelling any future good.”
 
“ah,” said valentine in mournful tone, “do let see this man,
 maximilian; may tell whether i shall ever be loved sufficiently
 to make amends for all i have suffered.”
 
“my poor girl, you know him already.”
 
“i know him?”
 
“yes; it was who saved the life of your step-mother and her son.”
 
“the count of monte cristo?”
 
“the same.”
 
“ah,” cried valentine, “he is too much the friend of madame de
 villefort ever to be mine.”
 
“the friend of madame villefort! it cannot be; surely, valentine,
 you are mistaken?”
 
“no, indeed, i am not; for i assure you, his power over our household
 is almost unlimited. courted by my step-mother, who regards him as the
 epitome of human wisdom; admired by my father, who says has never
 before heard such sublime ideas so eloquently expressed; idolized by
 edward, who, notwithstanding his fear of the count’s large black eyes,
 runs to meet him the moment arrives, and opens his hand, in which he
 is sure to find some delightful present,—m. monte cristo appears to
 exert mysterious and almost uncontrollable influence over all the
 members of our family.”
 
“if such be the case, my dear valentine, you must yourself have felt,
 or at all events will soon feel, the effects of his presence. meets
 albert morcerf in italy—it is to rescue him from the hands of the
 banditti; introduces himself to madame danglars—it is that may
 give her royal present; your step-mother and her pass before his
 door—it is that his nubian may save them from destruction. this man
 evidently possesses the power of influencing events, both as regards
 men and things. i never saw more simple tastes united to greater
 magnificence. his smile is so sweet when addresses me, that i forget
 it ever can be bitter to others. ah, valentine, tell me, if ever
 looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, you
 will be happy.”
 
“me?” said the young girl, “he never even glances at me; on the
 contrary, if i accidentally cross his path, appears rather to avoid
 me. ah, is not generous, neither does possess that supernatural
 penetration which you attribute to him, for if did, would have
 perceived that i was unhappy; and if had been generous, seeing me
 sad and solitary, would have used his influence to my advantage, and
 since, as you say, resembles the sun, would have warmed my heart
 with one of his life-giving rays. you say loves you, maximilian; how
 do you know that does? all would pay deference to an officer like
 you, with fierce moustache and long sabre, but they think they may
 crush poor weeping girl with impunity.”
 
“ah, valentine, i assure you you are mistaken.”
 
“if it were otherwise—if treated diplomatically—that is to say,
 like man who wishes, by some means or other, to obtain footing in
 the house, so that may ultimately gain the power of dictating to its
 occupants—he would, if it had been but once, have honored with the
 smile which you extol so loudly; but no, saw that i was unhappy, he
 understood that i could be of use to him, and therefore paid no
 attention to whatever. who knows but that, in order to please madame
 villefort and my father, may not persecute by every means in
 his power? it is not just that should despise so, without any
 reason. ah, forgive me,” said valentine, perceiving the effect which
 her words were producing on maximilian: “i have done wrong, for i have
 given utterance to thoughts concerning that man which i did not even
 know existed in my heart. i do not deny the influence of which you
 speak, or that i have not myself experienced it, but with it has
 been productive of evil rather than good.”
 
“well, valentine,” said morrel with sigh, “we will not discuss the
 matter further. i will not make confidant of him.”
 
“alas!” said valentine, “i see that i have given you pain. i can only
 say how sincerely i ask pardon for having grieved you. but, indeed, i
 am not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction. tell what this
 count of monte cristo has done for you.”
 
30157m
 


“i own that your question embarrasses me, valentine, for i cannot say
 that the count has rendered any ostensible service. still, as i have
 already told you, i have an instinctive affection for him, the source
 of which i cannot explain to you. has the sun done anything for me? no;
 warms with his rays, and it is by his light that i see
 you—nothing more. has such and such perfume done anything for me? no;
 its odor charms one of my senses—that is all i can say when i am asked
 why i praise it. my friendship for him is as strange and unaccountable
 as his for me. secret voice seems to whisper to that there must be
 something more than chance in this unexpected reciprocity of
 friendship. in his most simple actions, as well as in his most secret
 thoughts, i find relation to my own. you will perhaps smile at me
 when i tell you that, ever since i have known this man, i have
 involuntarily entertained the idea that all the good fortune which has
 befallen originated from him. however, i have managed to live thirty
 years without this protection, you will say; but i will endeavor a
 little to illustrate my meaning. invited to dine with him on
 saturday, which was very natural thing for him to do. well, what have
 i learned since? that your mother and m. villefort are both coming
 to this dinner. i shall meet them there, and who knows what future
 advantages may result from the interview? this may appear to you to be
 unusual combination of circumstances; nevertheless, i perceive some
 hidden plot in the arrangement—something, in fact, more than is
 apparent on casual view of the subject. i believe that this singular
 man, who appears to fathom the motives of everyone, has purposely
 arranged for to meet m. and madame villefort, and sometimes, i
 confess, i have gone so far as to try to read in his eyes whether he
 was in possession of the secret of our love.”
 
“my good friend,” said valentine, “i should take you for visionary,
 and should tremble for your reason, if i were always to hear you talk
 in strain similar to this. is it possible that you can see anything
 more than the merest chance in this meeting? pray reflect little. my
 father, who never goes out, has several times been on the point of
 refusing this invitation; madame villefort, on the contrary, is
 burning with the desire of seeing this extraordinary nabob in his own
 house, therefore, she has with great difficulty prevailed on my father
 to accompany her. no, no; it is as i have said, maximilian,—there is no
 one in the world of whom i can ask help but yourself and my
 grandfather, who is little better than corpse—no support to cling to
 but my mother in heaven!”
 
“i see that you are right, logically speaking,” said maximilian; “but
 the gentle voice which usually has such power over fails to convince
 today.”
 
“i feel the same as regards yourself.” said valentine; “and i own that,
 if you have stronger proof to give me——”
 
“i have another,” replied maximilian; “but i fear you will deem it even
 more absurd than the first.”
 
“so much the worse,” said valentine, smiling.
 
“it is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind. my ten years of service
 have also confirmed my ideas on the subject of sudden inspirations, for
 i have several times owed my life to mysterious impulse which
 directed to move at once either to the right or to the left, in
 order to escape the ball which killed the comrade fighting by my side,
 while it left unharmed.”
 
“dear maximilian, why not attribute your escape to my constant prayers
 for your safety? when you are away, i longer pray for myself, but
 for you.”
 
30159m
 


“yes, since you have known me,” said morrel, smiling; “but that cannot
 apply to the time previous to our acquaintance, valentine.”
 
“you are very provoking, and will not give credit for anything; but
 let hear this second proof, which you yourself own to be absurd.”
 
“well, look through this opening, and you will see the beautiful new
 horse which i rode here.”
 
“ah! what beautiful creature!” cried valentine; “why did you not
 bring him close to the gate, so that i could talk to him and pat him?”
 
“he is, as you see, very valuable animal,” said maximilian. “you know
 that my means are limited, and that i am what would be designated man
 of moderate pretensions. well, i went to horse dealer’s, where i saw
 this magnificent horse, which i have named médéah. i asked the price;
 they told it was 4,500 francs. i was, therefore, obliged to give it
 up, as you may imagine, but i own i went away with rather heavy
 heart, for the horse had looked at affectionately, had rubbed his
 head against and, when i mounted him, had pranced in the most
 delightful way imaginable, so that i was altogether fascinated with
 him. the same evening some friends of mine visited me,—m. de
 château-renaud, m. debray, and five or six other choice spirits, whom
 you do not know, even by name. they proposed game of _bouillotte_. i
 never play, for i am not rich enough to afford to lose, or sufficiently
 poor to desire to gain. but i was at my own house, you understand, so
 there was nothing to be done but to send for the cards, which i did.
 
“just as they were sitting down to table, m. monte cristo arrived.
 took his seat amongst them; they played, and i won. i am almost
 ashamed to say that my gains amounted to 5,000 francs. we separated at
 midnight. i could not defer my pleasure, so i took cabriolet and
 drove to the horse dealer’s. feverish and excited, i rang at the door.
 the person who opened it must have taken for madman, for i rushed
 at once to the stable. médéah was standing at the rack, eating his hay.
 i immediately put on the saddle and bridle, to which operation lent
 himself with the best grace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs
 into the hands of the astonished dealer, i proceeded to fulfil my
 intention of passing the night in riding in the champs-Élysées. as i
 rode by the count’s house i perceived light in one of the windows,
 and fancied i saw the shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain.
 now, valentine, i firmly believe that knew of my wish to possess
 this horse, and that lost expressly to give the means of
 procuring him.”
 
“my dear maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you will not love
 even long. man who accustoms himself to live in such world of
 poetry and imagination must find far too little excitement in common,
 every-day sort of attachment such as ours. but they are calling me. do
 you hear?”
 
“ah, valentine,” said maximilian, “give but one finger through this
 opening in the grating, one finger, the littlest finger of all, that i
 may have the happiness of kissing it.”
 
“maximilian, we said we would be to each other as two voices, two
 shadows.”
 
“as you will, valentine.”
 
“shall you be happy if i do what you wish?”
 
“oh, yes!”
 
valentine mounted on bench, and passed not only her finger but her
 whole hand through the opening. maximilian uttered cry of delight,
 and, springing forwards, seized the hand extended towards him, and
 imprinted on it fervent and impassioned kiss. the little hand was
 then immediately withdrawn, and the young man saw valentine hurrying
 towards the house, as though she were almost terrified at her own
 sensations.
 


chapter 58. m. noirtier villefort
 
we will now relate what was passing in the house of the king’s attorney
 after the departure of madame danglars and her daughter, and during the
 time of the conversation between maximilian and valentine, which we
 have just detailed.
 
m. villefort entered his father’s room, followed by madame de
 villefort. both of the visitors, after saluting the old man and
 speaking to barrois, faithful servant, who had been twenty-five years
 in his service, took their places on either side of the paralytic.
 
m. noirtier was sitting in an armchair, which moved upon casters, in
 which was wheeled into the room in the morning, and in the same way
 drawn out again at night. was placed before large glass, which
 reflected the whole apartment, and so, without any attempt to move,
 which would have been impossible, could see all who entered the room
 and everything which was going on around him. m. noirtier, although
 almost as immovable as corpse, looked at the new-comers with quick
 and intelligent expression, perceiving at once, by their ceremonious
 courtesy, that they were come on business of an unexpected and official
 character.
 
sight and hearing were the only senses remaining, and they, like two
 solitary sparks, remained to animate the miserable body which seemed
 fit for nothing but the grave; it was only, however, by means of one of
 these senses that could reveal the thoughts and feelings that still
 occupied his mind, and the look by which gave expression to his
 inner life was like the distant gleam of candle which traveller
 sees by night across some desert place, and knows that living being
 dwells beyond the silence and obscurity.
 
noirtier’s hair was long and white, and flowed over his shoulders;
 while in his eyes, shaded by thick black lashes, was concentrated, as
 it often happens with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the
 others, all the activity, address, force, and intelligence which were
 formerly diffused over his whole body; and so although the movement of
 the arm, the sound of the voice, and the agility of the body, were
 wanting, the speaking eye sufficed for all. commanded with it; it
 was the medium through which his thanks were conveyed. in short, his
 whole appearance produced on the mind the impression of corpse with
 living eyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observe the
 expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up these organs, while the
 rest of the rigid and marble-like features were utterly deprived of the
 power of participation. three persons only could understand this
 language of the poor paralytic; these were villefort, valentine, and
 the old servant of whom we have already spoken. but as villefort saw
 his father but seldom, and then only when absolutely obliged, and as he
 never took any pains to please or gratify him when was there, all
 the old man’s happiness was centred in his granddaughter. valentine, by
 means of her love, her patience, and her devotion, had learned to read
 in noirtier’s look all the varied feelings which were passing in his
 mind. to this dumb language, which was so unintelligible to others, she
 answered by throwing her whole soul into the expression of her
 countenance, and in this manner were the conversations sustained
 between the blooming girl and the helpless invalid, whose body could
 scarcely be called living one, but who, nevertheless, possessed a
 fund of knowledge and penetration, united with will as powerful as
 ever although clogged by body rendered utterly incapable of obeying
 its impulses.
 
valentine had solved the problem, and was able easily to understand his
 thoughts, and to convey her own in return, and, through her untiring
 and devoted assiduity, it was seldom that, in the ordinary transactions
 of every-day life, she failed to anticipate the wishes of the living,
 thinking mind, or the wants of the almost inanimate body.
 
as to the servant, had, as we have said, been with his master for
 five-and-twenty years, therefore knew all his habits, and it was
 seldom that noirtier found it necessary to ask for anything, so prompt
 was in administering to all the necessities of the invalid.
 
villefort did not need the help of either valentine or the domestic in
 order to carry on with his father the strange conversation which was
 about to begin. as we have said, perfectly understood the old man’s
 vocabulary, and if did not use it more often, it was only
 indifference and _ennui_ which prevented him from so doing. he
 therefore allowed valentine to go into the garden, sent away barrois,
 and after having seated himself at his father’s right hand, while
 madame villefort placed herself on the left, addressed him thus:
 
“i trust you will not be displeased, sir, that valentine has not come
 with us, or that i dismissed barrois, for our conference will be one
 which could not with propriety be carried on in the presence of either.
 madame villefort and i have communication to make to you.”
 
noirtier’s face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble,
 while, on the contrary, villefort’s eye was endeavoring to penetrate
 into the inmost recesses of the old man’s heart.
 
“this communication,” continued the procureur, in that cold and
 decisive tone which seemed at once to preclude all discussion, “will,
 we are sure, meet with your approbation.”
 
the eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy of expression which
 prevented his from obtaining any knowledge of the feelings which
 were passing in his mind; listened, nothing more.
 
“sir,” resumed villefort, “we are thinking of marrying valentine.” had
 the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could not have shown less
 emotion at this news than was now to be traced there. “the marriage
 will take place in less than three months,” said villefort.
 
noirtier’s eye still retained its inanimate expression.
 
madame villefort now took her part in the conversation and added:
 
“we thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who have
 always entertained great affection for valentine; it therefore only
 now remains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she
 is destined. it is one of the most desirable connections which could
 possibly be formed; possesses fortune, high rank in society, and
 every personal qualification likely to render valentine supremely
 happy,—his name, moreover, cannot be wholly unknown to you. it is m.
 franz quesnel, baron d’Épinay.”
 
while his wife was speaking, villefort had narrowly watched the old
 man’s countenance. when madame villefort pronounced the name of
 franz, the pupil of m. noirtier’s eye began to dilate, and his eyelids
 trembled with the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an
 individual about to speak, and darted lightning glance at madame
 villefort and his son. the procureur, who knew the political hatred
 which had formerly existed between m. noirtier and the elder d’Épinay,
 well understood the agitation and anger which the announcement had
 produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, immediately resumed
 the narrative begun by his wife.
 
“sir,” said he, “you are aware that valentine is about to enter her
 nineteenth year, which renders it important that she should lose no
 time in forming suitable alliance. nevertheless, you have not been
 forgotten in our plans, and we have fully ascertained beforehand that
 valentine’s future husband will consent, not to live in this house, for
 that might not be pleasant for the young people, but that you should
 live with them; so that you and valentine, who are so attached to each
 other, would not be separated, and you would be able to pursue exactly
 the same course of life which you have hitherto done, and thus, instead
 of losing, you will be gainer by the change, as it will secure to you
 two children instead of one, to watch over and comfort you.”
 
30165m
 


noirtier’s look was furious; it was very evident that something
 desperate was passing in the old man’s mind, for cry of anger and
 grief rose in his throat, and not being able to find vent in utterance,
 appeared almost to choke him, for his face and lips turned quite purple
 with the struggle. villefort quietly opened window, saying, “it is
 very warm, and the heat affects m. noirtier.” then returned to his
 place, but did not sit down.
 
“this marriage,” added madame villefort, “is quite agreeable to the
 wishes of m. d’Épinay and his family; besides, had relations
 nearer than an uncle and aunt, his mother having died at his birth, and
 his father having been assassinated in 1815, that is to say, when he
 was but two years old; it naturally followed that the child was
 permitted to choose his own pursuits, and has, therefore, seldom
 acknowledged any other authority but that of his own will.”
 
“that assassination was mysterious affair,” said villefort, “and the
 perpetrators have hitherto escaped detection, although suspicion has
 fallen on the head of more than one person.”
 
noirtier made such an effort that his lips expanded into smile.
 
“now,” continued villefort, “those to whom the guilt really belongs, by
 whom the crime was committed, on whose heads the justice of man may
 probably descend here, and the certain judgment of god hereafter, would
 rejoice in the opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a
 peace-offering as valentine on the of him whose life they so
 ruthlessly destroyed.” noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotion
 more than could have been deemed possible with such an enfeebled and
 shattered frame.
 
“yes, i understand,” was the reply contained in his look; and this look
 expressed feeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound
 contempt. villefort fully understood his father’s meaning, and answered
 by slight shrug of his shoulders. then motioned to his wife to
 take leave.
 
“now sir,” said madame villefort, “i must bid you farewell. would
 you like to send edward to you for short time?”
 
it had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by
 closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he
 had some desire or feeling to express, raised them to heaven. if he
 wanted valentine, closed his right eye only, and if barrois, the
 left. at madame villefort’s proposition instantly winked his
 eyes.
 
provoked by complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, “then shall i
 send valentine to you?” the old man closed his eyes eagerly, thereby
 intimating that such was his wish.
 
m. and madame villefort bowed and left the room, giving orders that
 valentine should be summoned to her grandfather’s presence, and feeling
 sure that she would have much to do to restore calmness to the
 perturbed spirit of the invalid. valentine, with color still
 heightened by emotion, entered the room just after her parents had
 quitted it. one look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfather
 was suffering, and that there was much on his mind which was wishing
 to communicate to her.
 
“dear grandpapa,” cried she, “what has happened? they have vexed you,
 and you are angry?”
 
the paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent.
 
“who has displeased you? is it my father?”
 
“no.”
 
“madame villefort?”
 
“no.”
 
“me?” the former sign was repeated.
 
“are you displeased with me?” cried valentine in astonishment. m.
 noirtier again closed his eyes.
 
“and what have i done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry with
 me?” cried valentine.
 
there was answer, and she continued:
 
“i have not seen you all day. has anyone been speaking to you against
 me?”
 
“yes,” said the old man’s look, with eagerness.
 
“let think moment. i do assure you, grandpapa—ah—m. and madame de
 villefort have just left this room, have they not?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and it was they who told you something which made you angry? what was
 it then? may i go and ask them, that i may have the opportunity of
 making my peace with you?”
 
“no, no,” said noirtier’s look.
 
“ah, you frighten me. what can they have said?” and she again tried to
 think what it could be.
 
“ah, i know,” said she, lowering her voice and going close to the old
 man. “they have been speaking of my marriage,—have they not?”
 
“yes,” replied the angry look.
 
“i understand; you are displeased at the silence i have preserved on
 the subject. the reason of it was, that they had insisted on my keeping
 the matter secret, and begged not to tell you anything of it. they
 did not even acquaint with their intentions, and i only discovered
 them by chance, that is why i have been so reserved with you, dear
 grandpapa. pray forgive me.”
 
but there was look calculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say
 was, “it is not only your reserve which afflicts me.”
 
“what is it, then?” asked the young girl. “perhaps you think i shall
 abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that i shall forget you when i am
 married?”
 
“no.”
 
“they told you, then, that m. d’Épinay consented to our all living
 together?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then why are you still vexed and grieved?” the old man’s eyes beamed
 with an expression of gentle affection.
 
“yes, i understand,” said valentine; “it is because you love me.” the
 old man assented.
 
“and you are afraid i shall be unhappy?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you do not like m. franz?” the eyes repeated several times, “no, no,
 no.”
 
“then you are vexed with the engagement?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, listen,” said valentine, throwing herself on her knees, and
 putting her arm round her grandfather’s neck, “i am vexed, too, for i
 do not love m. franz d’Épinay.”
 
an expression of intense joy illumined the old man’s eyes.
 
“when i wished to retire into convent, you remember how angry you
 were with me?” tear trembled in the eye of the invalid. “well,”
 continued valentine, “the reason of my proposing it was that i might
 escape this hateful marriage, which drives to despair.” noirtier’s
 breathing came thick and short.
 
“then the idea of this marriage really grieves you too? ah, if you
 could but help me—if we could both together defeat their plan! but you
 are unable to oppose them,—you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will
 is so firm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as i am
 myself. alas, you, who would have been such powerful protector to me
 in the days of your health and strength, can now only sympathize in my
 joys and sorrows, without being able to take any active part in them.
 however, this is much, and calls for gratitude and heaven has not taken
 away all my blessings when it leaves your sympathy and kindness.”
 
at these words there appeared in noirtier’s eye an expression of such
 deep meaning that the young girl thought she could read these words
 there: “you are mistaken; i can still do much for you.”
 
“do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?” said valentine.
 
“yes.” noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed on between him
 and valentine when wanted anything.
 
“what is it you want, dear grandpapa?” said valentine, and she
 endeavored to recall to mind all the things which would be likely to
 need; and as the ideas presented themselves to her mind, she repeated
 them aloud, then,—finding that all her efforts elicited nothing but a
 constant _“no,”_—she said, “come, since this plan does not answer, i
 will have recourse to another.”
 
she then recited all the letters of the alphabet from down to n. when
 she arrived at that letter the paralytic made her understand that she
 had spoken the initial letter of the thing wanted.
 
“ah,” said valentine, “the thing you desire begins with the letter n;
 it is with n that we have to do, then. well, let see, what can you
 want that begins with n? na—ne—ni—no——”
 
“yes, yes, yes,” said the old man’s eye.
 
“ah, it is no, then?”
 
“yes.”
 
valentine fetched dictionary, which she placed on desk before
 noirtier; she opened it, and, seeing that the old man’s eye was
 thoroughly fixed on its pages, she ran her finger quickly up and down
 the columns. during the six years which had passed since noirtier first
 fell into this sad state, valentine’s powers of invention had been too
 often put to the test not to render her expert in devising expedients
 for gaining knowledge of his wishes, and the constant practice had so
 perfected her in the art that she guessed the old man’s meaning as
 quickly as if himself had been able to seek for what wanted. at
 the word _notary_, noirtier made sign to her to stop.
 
30169m
 


“notary,” said she, “do you want notary, dear grandpapa?” the old man
 again signified that it was notary desired.
 
“you would wish notary to be sent for then?” said valentine.
 
“yes.”
 
“shall my father be informed of your wish?”
 
“yes.”
 
“do you wish the notary to be sent for immediately?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then they shall go for him directly, dear grandpapa. is that all you
 want?”
 
“yes.” valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tell
 monsieur or madame villefort that they were requested to come to m.
 noirtier’s room.
 
“are you satisfied now?” inquired valentine.
 
“yes.”
 
“i am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discover that.” and the
 young girl smiled on her grandfather, as if had been child. m. de
 villefort entered, followed by barrois.
 
“what do you want for, sir?” demanded of the paralytic.
 
“sir,” said valentine, “my grandfather wishes for notary.” at this
 strange and unexpected demand m. villefort and his father exchanged
 looks.
 
“yes,” motioned the latter, with firmness which seemed to declare
 that with the help of valentine and his old servant, who both knew what
 his wishes were, was quite prepared to maintain the contest.
 
“do you wish for notary?” asked villefort.
 
“yes.”
 
“what to do?”
 
noirtier made answer.
 
“what do you want with notary?” again repeated villefort. the
 invalid’s eye remained fixed, by which expression intended to
 intimate that his resolution was unalterable.
 
“is it to do us some ill turn? do you think it is worth while?” said
 villefort.
 
“still,” said barrois, with the freedom and fidelity of an old servant,
 “if m. noirtier asks for notary, i suppose really wishes for a
 notary; therefore i shall go at once and fetch one.” barrois
 acknowledged master but noirtier, and never allowed his desires in
 any way to be contradicted.
 
30171m
 


“yes, i do want notary,” motioned the old man, shutting his eyes with
 look of defiance, which seemed to say, “and i should like to see the
 person who dares to refuse my request.”
 
“you shall have notary, as you absolutely wish for one, sir,” said
 villefort; “but i shall explain to him your state of health, and make
 excuses for you, for the scene cannot fail of being most ridiculous
 one.”
 
“never mind that,” said barrois; “i shall go and fetch notary,
 nevertheless.” and the old servant departed triumphantly on his
 mission.
 


chapter 59. the will
 
as soon as barrois had left the room, noirtier looked at valentine with
 malicious expression that said many things. the young girl perfectly
 understood the look, and so did villefort, for his countenance became
 clouded, and knitted his eyebrows angrily. took seat, and
 quietly awaited the arrival of the notary. noirtier saw him seat
 himself with an appearance of perfect indifference, at the same time
 giving side look at valentine, which made her understand that she
 also was to remain in the room. three-quarters of an hour after,
 barrois returned, bringing the notary with him.
 
“sir,” said villefort, after the first salutations were over, “you were
 sent for by m. noirtier, whom you see here. all his limbs have become
 completely paralysed, has lost his voice also, and we ourselves find
 much trouble in endeavoring to catch some fragments of his meaning.”
 
noirtier cast an appealing look on valentine, which look was at once so
 earnest and imperative, that she answered immediately.
 
“sir,” said she, “i perfectly understand my grandfather’s meaning at
 all times.”
 
“that is quite true,” said barrois; “and that is what i told the
 gentleman as we walked along.”
 
“permit me,” said the notary, turning first to villefort and then to
 valentine—“permit to state that the case in question is just one of
 those in which public officer like myself cannot proceed to act
 without thereby incurring dangerous responsibility. the first thing
 necessary to render an act valid is, that the notary should be
 thoroughly convinced that has faithfully interpreted the will and
 wishes of the person dictating the act. now i cannot be sure of the
 approbation or disapprobation of client who cannot speak, and as the
 object of his desire or his repugnance cannot be clearly proved to me,
 on account of his want of speech, my services here would be quite
 useless, and cannot be legally exercised.”
 
the notary then prepared to retire. an imperceptible smile of triumph
 was expressed on the lips of the procureur. noirtier looked at
 valentine with an expression so full of grief, that she arrested the
 departure of the notary.
 
“sir,” said she, “the language which i speak with my grandfather may be
 easily learnt, and i can teach you in few minutes, to understand it
 almost as well as i can myself. will you tell what you require, in
 order to set your conscience quite at ease on the subject?”
 
“in order to render an act valid, i must be certain of the approbation
 or disapprobation of my client. illness of body would not affect the
 validity of the deed, but sanity of mind is absolutely requisite.”
 
“well, sir, by the help of two signs, with which i will acquaint you
 presently, you may ascertain with perfect certainty that my grandfather
 is still in the full possession of all his mental faculties. m.
 noirtier, being deprived of voice and motion, is accustomed to convey
 his meaning by closing his eyes when wishes to signify ‘yes,’ and to
 wink when means ‘no.’ you now know quite enough to enable you to
 converse with m. noirtier;—try.”
 
noirtier gave valentine such look of tenderness and gratitude that it
 was comprehended even by the notary himself.
 
“you have heard and understood what your granddaughter has been saying,
 sir, have you?” asked the notary. noirtier closed his eyes.
 
“and you approve of what she said—that is to say, you declare that the
 signs which she mentioned are really those by means of which you are
 accustomed to convey your thoughts?”
 
“yes.”
 
“it was you who sent for me?”
 
“yes.”
 
“to make your will?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and you do not wish to go away without fulfilling your original
 intentions?” the old man winked violently.
 
“well, sir,” said the young girl, “do you understand now, and is your
 conscience perfectly at rest on the subject?”
 
but before the notary could answer, villefort had drawn him aside.
 
“sir,” said he, “do you suppose for moment that man can sustain a
 physical shock, such as m. noirtier has received, without any detriment
 to his mental faculties?”
 
“it is not exactly that, sir,” said the notary, “which makes uneasy,
 but the difficulty will be in wording his thoughts and intentions, so
 as to be able to get his answers.”
 
“you must see that to be an utter impossibility,” said villefort.
 valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and noirtier fixed
 his eye so earnestly on valentine that she felt bound to answer to the
 look.
 
“sir,” said she, “that need not make you uneasy, however difficult it
 may at first sight appear to be. i can discover and explain to you my
 grandfather’s thoughts, so as to put an end to all your doubts and
 fears on the subject. i have now been six years with m. noirtier, and
 let him tell you if ever once, during that time, has entertained a
 thought which was unable to make understand.”
 
“no,” signed the old man.
 
“let us try what we can do, then,” said the notary. “you accept this
 young lady as your interpreter, m. noirtier?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, sir, what do you require of me, and what document is it that you
 wish to be drawn up?”
 
valentine named all the letters of the alphabet until she came to w. at
 this letter the eloquent eye of noirtier gave her notice that she was
 to stop.
 
“it is very evident that it is the letter w which m. noirtier wants,”
 said the notary.
 
“wait,” said valentine; and, turning to her grandfather, she repeated,
 “wa—we—wi——” the old man stopped her at the last syllable. valentine
 then took the dictionary, and the notary watched her while she turned
 over the pages.
 
she passed her finger slowly down the columns, and when she came to the
 word “will,” m. noirtier’s eye bade her stop.
 
“will,” said the notary; “it is very evident that m. noirtier is
 desirous of making his will.”
 
“yes, yes, yes,” motioned the invalid.
 
“really, sir, you must allow that this is most extraordinary,” said the
 astonished notary, turning to m. villefort.
 
“yes,” said the procureur, “and i think the will promises to be yet
 more extraordinary, for i cannot see how it is to be drawn up without
 the intervention of valentine, and she may, perhaps, be considered as
 too much interested in its contents to allow of her being suitable
 interpreter of the obscure and ill-defined wishes of her grandfather.”
 
“no, no, no,” replied the eye of the paralytic.
 
“what?” said villefort, “do you mean to say that valentine is not
 interested in your will?”
 
“no.”
 
“sir,” said the notary, whose interest had been greatly excited, and
 who had resolved on publishing far and wide the account of this
 extraordinary and picturesque scene, “what appeared so impossible to me
 an hour ago, has now become quite easy and practicable, and this may be
 perfectly valid will, provided it be read in the presence of seven
 witnesses, approved by the testator, and sealed by the notary in the
 presence of the witnesses. as to the time, it will not require very
 much more than the generality of wills. there are certain forms
 necessary to be gone through, and which are always the same. as to the
 details, the greater part will be furnished afterwards by the state in
 which we find the affairs of the testator, and by yourself, who, having
 had the management of them, can doubtless give full information on the
 subject. but besides all this, in order that the instrument may not be
 contested, i am anxious to give it the greatest possible authenticity,
 therefore, one of my colleagues will help me, and, contrary to custom,
 will assist in the dictation of the testament. are you satisfied, sir?”
 continued the notary, addressing the old man.
 
30175m
 


“yes,” looked the invalid, his eye beaming with delight at the ready
 interpretation of his meaning.
 
“what is going to do?” thought villefort, whose position demanded
 much reserve, but who was longing to know what his father’s intentions
 were. left the room to give orders for another notary to be sent,
 but barrois, who had heard all that passed, had guessed his master’s
 wishes, and had already gone to fetch one. the procureur then told his
 wife to come up. in the course of quarter of an hour everyone had
 assembled in the chamber of the paralytic; the second notary had also
 arrived.
 
few words sufficed for mutual understanding between the two
 officers of the law. they read to noirtier the formal copy of will,
 in order to give him an idea of the terms in which such documents are
 generally couched; then, in order to test the capacity of the testator,
 the first notary said, turning towards him:
 
“when an individual makes his will, it is generally in favor or in
 prejudice of some person.”
 
“yes.”
 
“have you an exact idea of the amount of your fortune?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i will name to you several sums which will increase by gradation; you
 will stop when i reach the one representing the amount of your own
 possessions?”
 
“yes.”
 
there was kind of solemnity in this interrogation. never had the
 struggle between mind and matter been more apparent than now, and if it
 was not sublime, it was, at least, curious spectacle. they had
 formed circle round the invalid; the second notary was sitting at a
 table, prepared for writing, and his colleague was standing before the
 testator in the act of interrogating him on the subject to which we
 have alluded.
 
“your fortune exceeds 300,000 francs, does it not?” asked he. noirtier
 made sign that it did.
 
“do you possess 400,000 francs?” inquired the notary. noirtier’s eye
 remained immovable.
 
“500,000?” the same expression continued.
 
“600,000—700,000—800,000—900,000?”
 
noirtier stopped him at the last-named sum.
 
“you are then in possession of 900,000 francs?” asked the notary.
 
“yes.”
 
“in landed property?”
 
“no.”
 
“in stock?”
 
“yes.”
 
“the stock is in your own hands?”
 
the look which m. noirtier cast on barrois showed that there was
 something wanting which knew where to find. the old servant left the
 room, and presently returned, bringing with him small casket.
 
“do you permit us to open this casket?” asked the notary. noirtier gave
 his assent.
 
they opened it, and found 900,000 francs in bank scrip. the first
 notary handed over each note, as examined it, to his colleague.
 
the total amount was found to be as m. noirtier had stated.
 
“it is all as has said; it is very evident that the mind still
 retains its full force and vigor.” then, turning towards the paralytic,
 said, “you possess, then, 900,000 francs of capital, which,
 according to the manner in which you have invested it, ought to bring
 in an income of about 40,000 livres?”
 
“yes.”
 
“to whom do you desire to leave this fortune?”
 
“oh!” said madame villefort, “there is not much doubt on that
 subject. m. noirtier tenderly loves his granddaughter, mademoiselle de
 villefort; it is she who has nursed and tended him for six years, and
 has, by her devoted attention, fully secured the affection, i had
 almost said the gratitude, of her grandfather, and it is but just that
 she should reap the fruit of her devotion.”
 
the eye of noirtier clearly showed by its expression that was not
 deceived by the false assent given by madame villefort’s words and
 manner to the motives which she supposed him to entertain.
 
“is it, then, to mademoiselle valentine villefort that you leave
 these 900,000 francs?” demanded the notary, thinking had only to
 insert this clause, but waiting first for the assent of noirtier, which
 it was necessary should be given before all the witnesses of this
 singular scene.
 
valentine, when her name was made the subject of discussion, had
 stepped back, to escape unpleasant observation; her eyes were cast
 down, and she was crying. the old man looked at her for an instant with
 an expression of the deepest tenderness, then, turning towards the
 notary, significantly winked his eye in token of dissent.
 
“what,” said the notary, “do you not intend making mademoiselle
 valentine villefort your residuary legatee?”
 
“no.”
 
“you are not making any mistake, are you?” said the notary; “you really
 mean to declare that such is not your intention?”
 
“no,” repeated noirtier; “no.”
 
valentine raised her head, struck dumb with astonishment. it was not so
 much the conviction that she was disinherited that caused her grief,
 but her total inability to account for the feelings which had provoked
 her grandfather to such an act. but noirtier looked at her with so much
 affectionate tenderness that she exclaimed:
 
“oh, grandpapa, i see now that it is only your fortune of which you
 deprive me; you still leave the love which i have always enjoyed.”
 
“ah, yes, most assuredly,” said the eyes of the paralytic, for he
 closed them with an expression which valentine could not mistake.
 
“thank you, thank you,” murmured she. the old man’s declaration that
 valentine was not the destined inheritor of his fortune had excited the
 hopes of madame villefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and
 said:
 
“then, doubtless, dear m. noirtier, you intend leaving your fortune to
 your grandson, edward villefort?”
 
the winking of the eyes which answered this speech was most decided and
 terrible, and expressed feeling almost amounting to hatred.
 
“no?” said the notary; “then, perhaps, it is to your son, m. de
 villefort?”
 
“no.” the two notaries looked at each other in mute astonishment and
 inquiry as to what were the real intentions of the testator. villefort
 and his wife both grew red, one from shame, the other from anger.
 
“what have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?” said valentine; “you no
 longer seem to love any of us?”
 
the old man’s eyes passed rapidly from villefort and his wife, and
 rested on valentine with look of unutterable fondness.
 
“well,” said she; “if you love me, grandpapa, try and bring that love
 to bear upon your actions at this present moment. you know well
 enough to be quite sure that i have never thought of your fortune;
 besides, they say i am already rich in right of my mother—too rich,
 even. explain yourself, then.”
 
noirtier fixed his intelligent eyes on valentine’s hand.
 
“my hand?” said she.
 
“yes.”
 
“her hand!” exclaimed everyone.
 
“oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that my father’s mind is
 really impaired,” said villefort.
 
“ah,” cried valentine suddenly, “i understand. it is my marriage you
 mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?”
 
“yes, yes, yes,” signed the paralytic, casting on valentine look of
 joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning.
 
30179m
 


“you are angry with us all on account of this marriage, are you not?”
 
“yes?”
 
“really, this is too absurd,” said villefort.
 
“excuse me, sir,” replied the notary; “on the contrary, the meaning of
 m. noirtier is quite evident to me, and i can quite easily connect the
 train of ideas passing in his mind.”
 
“you do not wish to marry m. franz d’Épinay?” observed valentine.
 
“i do not wish it,” said the eye of her grandfather.
 
“and you disinherit your granddaughter,” continued the notary, “because
 she has contracted an engagement contrary to your wishes?”
 
“yes.”
 
“so that, but for this marriage, she would have been your heir?”
 
“yes.”
 
there was profound silence. the two notaries were holding a
 consultation as to the best means of proceeding with the affair.
 valentine was looking at her grandfather with smile of intense
 gratitude, and villefort was biting his lips with vexation, while
 madame villefort could not succeed in repressing an inward feeling
 of joy, which, in spite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance.
 
“but,” said villefort, who was the first to break the silence, “i
 consider that i am the best judge of the propriety of the marriage in
 question. i am the only person possessing the right to dispose of my
 daughter’s hand. it is my wish that she should marry m. franz
 d’Épinay—and she shall marry him.”
 
valentine sank weeping into chair.
 
“sir,” said the notary, “how do you intend disposing of your fortune in
 case mademoiselle villefort still determines on marrying m. franz?”
 the old man gave answer.
 
“you will, of course, dispose of it in some way or other?”
 
“yes.”
 
“in favor of some member of your family?”
 
“no.”
 
“do you intend devoting it to charitable purposes, then?” pursued the
 notary.
 
“yes.”
 
“but,” said the notary, “you are aware that the law does not allow a
 to be entirely deprived of his patrimony?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you only intend, then, to dispose of that part of your fortune which
 the law allows you to subtract from the inheritance of your son?”
 noirtier made answer.
 
“do you still wish to dispose of all?”
 
“yes.”
 
“but they will contest the will after your death?”
 
“no.”
 
“my father knows me,” replied villefort; “he is quite sure that his
 wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, understands that in my
 position i cannot plead against the poor.” the eye of noirtier beamed
 with triumph.
 
“what do you decide on, sir?” asked the notary of villefort.
 
“nothing, sir; it is resolution which my father has taken and i know
 never alters his mind. i am quite resigned. these 900,000 francs
 will go out of the family in order to enrich some hospital; but it is
 ridiculous thus to yield to the caprices of an old man, and i shall,
 therefore, act according to my conscience.”
 
having said this, villefort quitted the room with his wife, leaving his
 father at liberty to do as pleased. the same day the will was made,
 the witnesses were brought, it was approved by the old man, sealed in
 the presence of all and given in charge to m. deschamps, the family
 notary.
 


chapter 60. the telegraph
 
m. and madame villefort found on their return that the count of
 monte cristo, who had come to visit them in their absence, had been
 ushered into the drawing-room, and was still awaiting them there.
 madame villefort, who had not yet sufficiently recovered from her
 late emotion to allow of her entertaining visitors so immediately,
 retired to her bedroom, while the procureur, who could better depend
 upon himself, proceeded at once to the salon.
 
although m. villefort flattered himself that, to all outward view,
 had completely masked the feelings which were passing in his mind,
 did not know that the cloud was still lowering on his brow, so much
 so that the count, whose smile was radiant, immediately noticed his
 sombre and thoughtful air.
 
“_ma foi!_” said monte cristo, after the first compliments were over,
 “what is the matter with you, m. villefort? have i arrived at the
 moment when you were drawing up an indictment for capital crime?”
 
villefort tried to smile.
 
“no, count,” replied, “i am the only victim in this case. it is i
 who lose my cause, and it is ill-luck, obstinacy, and folly which have
 caused it to be decided against me.”
 
“to what do you refer?” said monte cristo with well-feigned interest.
 “have you really met with some great misfortune?”
 
“oh, no, monsieur,” said villefort with bitter smile; “it is only a
 loss of money which i have sustained—nothing worth mentioning, i assure
 you.”
 
“true,” said monte cristo, “the loss of sum of money becomes almost
 immaterial with fortune such as you possess, and to one of your
 philosophic spirit.”
 
“it is not so much the loss of the money that vexes me,” said
 villefort, “though, after all, 900,000 francs are worth regretting; but
 i am the more annoyed with this fate, chance, or whatever you please to
 call the power which has destroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may
 blast the prospects of my child also, as it is all occasioned by an old
 man relapsed into second childhood.”
 
30183m
 


“what do you say?” said the count; “900,000 francs? it is indeed sum
 which might be regretted even by philosopher. and who is the cause of
 all this annoyance?”
 
“my father, as i told you.”
 
“m. noirtier? but i thought you told had become entirely
 paralyzed, and that all his faculties were completely destroyed?”
 
“yes, his bodily faculties, for can neither move nor speak,
 nevertheless thinks, acts, and wills in the manner i have described.
 i left him about five minutes ago, and is now occupied in dictating
 his will to two notaries.”
 
“but to do this must have spoken?”
 
“he has done better than that—he has made himself understood.”
 
“how was such thing possible?”
 
“by the help of his eyes, which are still full of life, and, as you
 perceive, possess the power of inflicting mortal injury.”
 
“my dear,” said madame villefort, who had just entered the room,
 “perhaps you exaggerate the evil.”
 
“good-morning, madame,” said the count, bowing.
 


madame villefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her most
 gracious smiles.
 
“what is this that m. villefort has been telling me?” demanded monte
 cristo “and what incomprehensible misfortune——”
 
“incomprehensible is the word!” interrupted the procureur, shrugging
 his shoulders. “it is an old man’s caprice!”
 
“and is there means of making him revoke his decision?”
 
“yes,” said madame villefort; “and it is still entirely in the power
 of my husband to cause the will, which is now in prejudice of
 valentine, to be altered in her favor.”
 
the count, who perceived that m. and madame villefort were beginning
 to speak in parables, appeared to pay attention to the conversation,
 and feigned to be busily engaged in watching edward, who was
 mischievously pouring some ink into the bird’s water-glass.
 
“my dear,” said villefort, in answer to his wife, “you know i have
 never been accustomed to play the patriarch in my family, nor have i
 ever considered that the fate of universe was to be decided by my
 nod. nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be respected in
 my family, and that the folly of an old man and the caprice of child
 should not be allowed to overturn project which i have entertained
 for so many years. the baron d’Épinay was my friend, as you know, and
 an alliance with his is the most suitable thing that could possibly
 be arranged.”
 
“do you think,” said madame villefort, “that valentine is in league
 with him? she has always been opposed to this marriage, and i should
 not be at all surprised if what we have just seen and heard is nothing
 but the execution of plan concerted between them.”
 
“madame,” said villefort, “believe me, fortune of 900,000 francs is
 not so easily renounced.”
 
“she could, nevertheless, make up her mind to renounce the world, sir,
 since it is only about year ago that she herself proposed entering a
 convent.”
 
“never mind,” replied villefort; “i say that this marriage _shall_ be
 consummated.”
 
“notwithstanding your father’s wishes to the contrary?” said madame de
 villefort, selecting new point of attack. “that is serious thing.”
 
monte cristo, who pretended not to be listening, heard however, every
 word that was said.
 
30185m
 


“madame,” replied villefort “i can truly say that i have always
 entertained high respect for my father, because, to the natural
 feeling of relationship was added the consciousness of his moral
 superiority. the name of father is sacred in two senses; should be
 reverenced as the author of our being and as master whom we ought to
 obey. but, under the present circumstances, i am justified in doubting
 the wisdom of an old man who, because hated the father, vents his
 anger on the son. it would be ridiculous in to regulate my conduct
 by such caprices. i shall still continue to preserve the same respect
 toward m. noirtier; i will suffer, without complaint, the pecuniary
 deprivation to which has subjected me; but i shall remain firm in my
 determination, and the world shall see which party has reason on his
 side. consequently i shall marry my daughter to the baron franz
 d’Épinay, because i consider it would be proper and eligible match
 for her to make, and, in short, because i choose to bestow my
 daughter’s hand on whomever i please.”
 
“what?” said the count, the approbation of whose eye villefort had
 frequently solicited during this speech. “what? do you say that m.
 noirtier disinherits mademoiselle villefort because she is going to
 marry m. baron franz d’Épinay?”
 
“yes, sir, that is the reason,” said villefort, shrugging his
 shoulders.
 
“the apparent reason, at least,” said madame villefort.
 
“the _real_ reason, madame, i can assure you; i know my father.”
 
“but i want to know in what way m. d’Épinay can have displeased your
 father more than any other person?”
 
“i believe i know m. franz d’Épinay,” said the count; “is not the
 of general quesnel, who was created baron d’Épinay by charles
 x.?”
 
“the same,” said villefort.
 
“well, but is charming young man, according to my ideas.”
 
“he is, which makes believe that it is only an excuse of m. noirtier
 to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are always so selfish in
 their affection,” said madame villefort.
 
“but,” said monte cristo “do you not know any cause for this hatred?”
 
“ah, _ma foi!_ who is to know?”
 
“perhaps it is some political difference?”
 
“my father and the baron d’Épinay lived in the stormy times of which i
 only saw the ending,” said villefort.
 
“was not your father bonapartist?” asked monte cristo; “i think i
 remember that you told something of that kind.”
 
“my father has been jacobin more than anything else,” said villefort,
 carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of prudence; “and the
 senator’s robe, which napoleon cast on his shoulders, only served to
 disguise the old man without in any degree changing him. when my father
 conspired, it was not for the emperor, it was against the bourbons; for
 m. noirtier possessed this peculiarity, never projected any utopian
 schemes which could never be realized, but strove for possibilities,
 and applied to the realization of these possibilities the terrible
 theories of the mountain,—theories that never shrank from any means
 that were deemed necessary to bring about the desired result.”
 
“well,” said monte cristo, “it is just as i thought; it was politics
 which brought noirtier and m. d’Épinay into personal contact. although
 general d’Épinay served under napoleon, did not still retain
 royalist sentiments? and was not the person who was assassinated one
 evening on leaving bonapartist meeting to which had been invited
 on the supposition that favored the cause of the emperor?”
 
villefort looked at the count almost with terror.
 
“am i mistaken, then?” said monte cristo.
 
“no, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated,” said madame
 villefort; “and it was to prevent the renewal of old feuds that m.
 villefort formed the idea of uniting in the bonds of affection the
 two children of these inveterate enemies.”
 
“it was sublime and charitable thought,” said monte cristo, “and the
 whole world should applaud it. it would be noble to see mademoiselle
 noirtier villefort assuming the title of madame franz d’Épinay.”
 
villefort shuddered and looked at monte cristo as if wished to read
 in his countenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he
 had just uttered. but the count completely baffled the procureur, and
 prevented him from discovering anything beneath the never-varying smile
 was so constantly in the habit of assuming.
 
“although,” said villefort, “it will be serious thing for valentine
 to lose her grandfather’s fortune, i do not think that m. d’Épinay will
 be frightened at this pecuniary loss. will, perhaps, hold in
 greater esteem than the money itself, seeing that i sacrifice
 everything in order to keep my word with him. besides, knows that
 valentine is rich in right of her mother, and that she will, in all
 probability, inherit the fortune of m. and madame saint-méran, her
 mother’s parents, who both love her tenderly.”
 
“and who are fully as well worth loving and tending as m. noirtier,”
 said madame villefort; “besides, they are to come to paris in about
 month, and valentine, after the affront she has received, need not
 consider it necessary to continue to bury herself alive by being shut
 up with m. noirtier.”
 
the count listened with satisfaction to this tale of wounded self-love
 and defeated ambition.
 
“but it seems to me,” said monte cristo, “and i must begin by asking
 your pardon for what i am about to say, that if m. noirtier disinherits
 mademoiselle villefort because she is going to marry man whose
 father detested, cannot have the same cause of complaint against
 this dear edward.”
 
“true,” said madame villefort, with an intonation of voice which it
 is impossible to describe; “is it not unjust—shamefully unjust? poor
 edward is as much m. noirtier’s grandchild as valentine, and yet, if
 she had not been going to marry m. franz, m. noirtier would have left
 her all his money; and supposing valentine to be disinherited by her
 grandfather, she will still be three times richer than he.”
 
the count listened and said more.
 
“count,” said villefort, “we will not entertain you any longer with our
 family misfortunes. it is true that my patrimony will go to endow
 charitable institutions, and my father will have deprived of my
 lawful inheritance without any reason for doing so, but i shall have
 the satisfaction of knowing that i have acted like man of sense and
 feeling. m. d’Épinay, to whom i had promised the interest of this sum,
 shall receive it, even if i endure the most cruel privations.”
 
“however,” said madame villefort, returning to the one idea which
 incessantly occupied her mind, “perhaps it would be better to explain
 this unlucky affair to m. d’Épinay, in order to give him the
 opportunity of himself renouncing his claim to the hand of mademoiselle
 villefort.”
 
“ah, that would be great pity,” said villefort.
 
“a great pity,” said monte cristo.
 
“undoubtedly,” said villefort, moderating the tones of his voice, “a
 marriage once concerted and then broken off, throws sort of discredit
 on young lady; then again, the old reports, which i was so anxious to
 put an end to, will instantly gain ground. no, it will all go well; m.
 d’Épinay, if is an honorable man, will consider himself more than
 ever pledged to mademoiselle villefort, unless were actuated by a
 decided feeling of avarice, but that is impossible.”
 
“i agree with m. villefort,” said monte cristo, fixing his eyes on
 madame villefort; “and if i were sufficiently intimate with him to
 allow of giving my advice, i would persuade him, since i have been told
 m. d’Épinay is coming back, to settle this affair at once beyond all
 possibility of revocation. i will answer for the success of project
 which will reflect so much honor on m. villefort.”
 
the procureur arose, delighted with the proposition, but his wife
 slightly changed color.
 
“well, that is all that i wanted, and i will be guided by counsellor
 such as you are,” said he, extending his hand to monte cristo.
 “therefore let everyone here look upon what has passed today as if it
 had not happened, and as though we had never thought of such thing as
 change in our original plans.”
 
“sir,” said the count, “the world, unjust as it is, will be pleased
 with your resolution; your friends will be proud of you, and m.
 d’Épinay, even if took mademoiselle villefort without any dowry,
 which will not do, would be delighted with the idea of entering a
 family which could make such sacrifices in order to keep promise and
 fulfil duty.”
 
at the conclusion of these words, the count rose to depart.
 
“are you going to leave us, count?” said madame villefort.
 
“i am sorry to say i must do so, madame, i only came to remind you of
 your promise for saturday.”
 
“did you fear that we should forget it?”
 
“you are very good, madame, but m. villefort has so many important
 and urgent occupations.”
 
“my husband has given his word, sir,” said madame villefort; “you
 have just seen him resolve to keep it when has everything to lose,
 and surely there is more reason for his doing so where has
 everything to gain.”
 
“and,” said villefort, “is it at your house in the champs-Élysées that
 you receive your visitors?”
 
“no,” said monte cristo, “which is precisely the reason which renders
 your kindness more meritorious,—it is in the country.”
 
“in the country?”
 
“yes.”
 
“where is it, then? near paris, is it not?”
 
“very near, only half league from the barriers,—it is at auteuil.”
 
“at auteuil?” said villefort; “true, madame villefort told you
 lived at auteuil, since it was to your house that she was taken. and in
 what part of auteuil do you reside?”
 
“rue fontaine.”
 
“rue fontaine!” exclaimed villefort in an agitated tone; “at what
 number?”
 
“no. 28.”
 
“then,” cried villefort, “was it you who bought m. saint-méran’s
 house!”
 
“did it belong to m. saint-méran?” demanded monte cristo.
 
“yes,” replied madame villefort; “and, would you believe it,
 count——”
 
“believe what?”
 
“you think this house pretty, do you not?”
 
“i think it charming.”
 
“well, my husband would never live in it.”
 
“indeed?” returned monte cristo, “that is prejudice on your part, m.
 villefort, for which i am quite at loss to account.”
 
“i do not like auteuil, sir,” said the procureur, making an evident
 effort to appear calm.
 
“but i hope you will not carry your antipathy so far as to deprive me
 of the pleasure of your company, sir,” said monte cristo.
 
“no, count,—i hope—i assure you i shall do my best,” stammered
 villefort.
 
“oh,” said monte cristo, “i allow of excuse. on saturday, at six
 o’clock. i shall be expecting you, and if you fail to come, i shall
 think—for how do i know to the contrary?—that this house, which has
 remained uninhabited for twenty years, must have some gloomy tradition
 or dreadful legend connected with it.”
 
“i will come, count,—i will be sure to come,” said villefort eagerly.
 
“thank you,” said monte cristo; “now you must permit to take my
 leave of you.”
 
“you said before that you were obliged to leave us, monsieur,” said
 madame villefort, “and you were about to tell us why when your
 attention was called to some other subject.”
 
“indeed madame,” said monte cristo: “i scarcely know if i dare tell you
 where i am going.”
 
“nonsense; say on.”
 
“well, then, it is to see thing on which i have sometimes mused for
 hours together.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“a telegraph. so now i have told my secret.”
 
“a telegraph?” repeated madame villefort.
 
“yes, telegraph. i had often seen one placed at the end of road on
 hillock, and in the light of the sun its black arms, bending in every
 direction, always reminded of the claws of an immense beetle, and i
 assure you it was never without emotion that i gazed on it, for i could
 not help thinking how wonderful it was that these various signs should
 be made to cleave the air with such precision as to convey to the
 distance of three hundred leagues the ideas and wishes of man sitting
 at table at one end of the line to another man similarly placed at
 the opposite extremity, and all this effected by simple act of
 volition on the part of the sender of the message. i began to think of
 genii, sylphs, gnomes, in short, of all the ministers of the occult
 sciences, until i laughed aloud at the freaks of my own imagination.
 now, it never occurred to to wish for nearer inspection of these
 large insects, with their long black claws, for i always feared to find
 under their stone wings some little human genius fagged to death with
 cabals, factions, and government intrigues. but one fine day i learned
 that the mover of this telegraph was only poor wretch, hired for
 twelve hundred francs year, and employed all day, not in studying the
 heavens like an astronomer, or in gazing on the water like an angler,
 or even in enjoying the privilege of observing the country around him,
 but all his monotonous life was passed in watching his white-bellied,
 black-clawed fellow insect, four or five leagues distant from him. at
 length i felt desire to study this living chrysalis more closely, and
 to endeavor to understand the secret part played by these insect-actors
 when they occupy themselves simply with pulling different pieces of
 string.”
 
30191m
 


“and are you going there?”
 
“i am.”
 
“what telegraph do you intend visiting? that of the home department, or
 of the observatory?”
 
“oh, no; i should find there people who would force to understand
 things of which i would prefer to remain ignorant, and who would try to
 explain to me, in spite of myself, mystery which even they do not
 understand. _ma foi!_ i should wish to keep my illusions concerning
 insects unimpaired; it is quite enough to have those dissipated which i
 had formed of my fellow-creatures. i shall, therefore, not visit either
 of these telegraphs, but one in the open country where i shall find a
 good-natured simpleton, who knows more than the machine is
 employed to work.”
 
“you are singular man,” said villefort.
 
“what line would you advise to study?”
 
“the one that is most in use just at this time.”
 
“the spanish one, you mean, i suppose?”
 
“yes; should you like letter to the minister that they might explain
 to you——”
 
“no,” said monte cristo; “since, as i told you before, i do not wish to
 comprehend it. the moment i understand it there will longer exist a
 telegraph for me; it will be nothing more than sign from m. duchâtel,
 or from m. montalivet, transmitted to the prefect of bayonne, mystified
 by two greek words, _têle_, _graphein_. it is the insect with black
 claws, and the awful word which i wish to retain in my imagination in
 all its purity and all its importance.”
 
“go then; for in the course of two hours it will be dark, and you will
 not be able to see anything.”
 
“_ma foi!_ you frighten me. which is the nearest way? bayonne?”
 
“yes; the road to bayonne.”
 
“and afterwards the road to châtillon?”
 
“yes.”
 
“by the tower of montlhéry, you mean?”
 
“yes.”
 
“thank you. good-bye. on saturday i will tell you my impressions
 concerning the telegraph.”
 
at the door the count was met by the two notaries, who had just
 completed the act which was to disinherit valentine, and who were
 leaving under the conviction of having done thing which could not
 fail of redounding considerably to their credit.
 


chapter 61. how gardener may get rid of the dormice that eat his
 peaches
 
not on the same night as had stated, but the next morning, the count
 of monte cristo went out by the barrière d’enfer, taking the road to
 orléans. leaving the village of linas, without stopping at the
 telegraph, which flourished its great bony arms as passed, the count
 reached the tower of montlhéry, situated, as everyone knows, upon the
 highest point of the plain of that name. at the foot of the hill the
 count dismounted and began to ascend by little winding path, about
 eighteen inches wide; when reached the summit found himself
 stopped by hedge, upon which green fruit had succeeded to red and
 white flowers.
 
monte cristo looked for the entrance to the enclosure, and was not long
 in finding little wooden gate, working on willow hinges, and fastened
 with nail and string. the count soon mastered the mechanism, the gate
 opened, and then found himself in little garden, about twenty feet
 long by twelve wide, bounded on one side by part of the hedge, which
 contained the ingenious contrivance we have called gate, and on the
 other by the old tower, covered with ivy and studded with wall-flowers.
 
one would have thought in looking at this old, weather-beaten,
 floral-decked tower (which might be likened to an elderly dame dressed
 up to receive her grandchildren at birthday feast) that it would have
 been capable of telling strange things, if,—in addition to the menacing
 ears which the proverb says all walls are provided with,—it had also a
 voice.
 
the garden was crossed by path of red gravel, edged by border of
 thick box, of many years’ growth, and of tone and color that would
 have delighted the heart of delacroix, our modern rubens. this path was
 formed in the shape of the figure of 8, thus, in its windings, making a
 walk of sixty feet in garden of only twenty.
 
never had flora, the fresh and smiling goddess of gardeners, been
 honored with purer or more scrupulous worship than that which was
 paid to her in this little enclosure. in fact, of the twenty rose-trees
 which formed the _parterre_, not one bore the mark of the slug, nor
 were there evidences anywhere of the clustering aphis which is so
 destructive to plants growing in damp soil. and yet it was not
 because the damp had been excluded from the garden; the earth, black as
 soot, the thick foliage of the trees betrayed its presence; besides,
 had natural humidity been wanting, it could have been immediately
 supplied by artificial means, thanks to tank of water, sunk in one of
 the corners of the garden, and upon which were stationed frog and a
 toad, who, from antipathy, doubt, always remained on the two
 opposite sides of the basin. there was not blade of grass to be seen
 in the paths, or weed in the flower-beds; fine lady ever trained
 and watered her geraniums, her cacti, and her rhododendrons, in her
 porcelain _jardinière_ with more pains than this hitherto unseen
 gardener bestowed upon his little enclosure.
 
monte cristo stopped after having closed the gate and fastened the
 string to the nail, and cast look around.
 
“the man at the telegraph,” said he, “must either engage gardener or
 devote himself passionately to agriculture.”
 
suddenly struck against something crouching behind wheelbarrow
 filled with leaves; the something rose, uttering an exclamation of
 astonishment, and monte cristo found himself facing man about fifty
 years old, who was plucking strawberries, which was placing upon
 grape leaves. had twelve leaves and about as many strawberries,
 which, on rising suddenly, let fall from his hand.
 
“you are gathering your crop, sir?” said monte cristo, smiling.
 
30193m
 


“excuse me, sir,” replied the man, raising his hand to his cap; “i am
 not up there, i know, but i have only just come down.”
 
“do not let interfere with you in anything, my friend,” said the
 count; “gather your strawberries, if, indeed, there are any left.”
 
“i have ten left,” said the man, “for here are eleven, and i had
 twenty-one, five more than last year. but i am not surprised; the
 spring has been warm this year, and strawberries require heat, sir.
 this is the reason that, instead of the sixteen i had last year, i have
 this year, you see, eleven, already plucked—twelve, thirteen, fourteen,
 fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen. ah, i miss three, they were here
 last night, sir—i am sure they were here—i counted them. it must be the
 of mère simon who has stolen them; i saw him strolling about here
 this morning. ah, the young rascal—stealing in garden—he does not
 know where that may lead him to.”
 
“certainly, it is wrong,” said monte cristo, “but you should take into
 consideration the youth and greediness of the delinquent.”
 
“of course,” said the gardener, “but that does not make it the less
 unpleasant. but, sir, once more i beg pardon; perhaps you are an
 officer that i am detaining here.” and glanced timidly at the
 count’s blue coat.
 
30197m
 


“calm yourself, my friend,” said the count, with the smile which he
 made at will either terrible or benevolent, and which now expressed
 only the kindliest feeling; “i am not an inspector, but traveller,
 brought here by curiosity half repents of, since causes you to
 lose your time.”
 
“ah, my time is not valuable,” replied the man with melancholy smile.
 “still it belongs to government, and i ought not to waste it; but,
 having received the signal that i might rest for an hour” (here he
 glanced at the sun-dial, for there was everything in the enclosure of
 montlhéry, even sun-dial), “and having ten minutes before me, and my
 strawberries being ripe, when day longer—by-the-by, sir, do you think
 dormice eat them?”
 
“indeed, i should think not,” replied monte cristo; “dormice are bad
 neighbors for us who do not eat them preserved, as the romans did.”
 
“what? did the romans eat them?” said the gardener—“ate dormice?”
 
“i have read so in petronius,” said the count.
 
“really? they can’t be nice, though they do say ‘as fat as dormouse.’
 it is not wonder they are fat, sleeping all day, and only waking to
 eat all night. listen. last year i had four apricots—they stole one, i
 had one nectarine, only one—well, sir, they ate half of it on the wall;
 splendid nectarine—i never ate better.”
 
“you ate it?”
 
“that is to say, the half that was left—you understand; it was
 exquisite, sir. ah, those gentlemen never choose the worst morsels;
 like mère simon’s son, who has not chosen the worst strawberries. but
 this year,” continued the horticulturist, “i’ll take care it shall not
 happen, even if i should be forced to sit by the whole night to watch
 when the strawberries are ripe.”
 
monte cristo had seen enough. every man has devouring passion in his
 heart, as every fruit has its worm; that of the telegraph man was
 horticulture. began gathering the grape-leaves which screened the
 sun from the grapes, and won the heart of the gardener.
 
“did you come here, sir, to see the telegraph?” said.
 
“yes, if it isn’t contrary to the rules.”
 
“oh, no,” said the gardener; “not in the least, since there is no
 danger that anyone can possibly understand what we are saying.”
 
“i have been told,” said the count, “that you do not always yourselves
 understand the signals you repeat.”
 
“that is true, sir, and that is what i like best,” said the man,
 smiling.
 
“why do you like that best?”
 
“because then i have responsibility. i am machine then, and
 nothing else, and so long as i work, nothing more is required of me.”
 
“is it possible,” said monte cristo to himself, “that i can have met
 with man that has ambition? that would spoil my plans.”
 
“sir,” said the gardener, glancing at the sun-dial, “the ten minutes
 are almost up; i must return to my post. will you go up with me?”
 
“i follow you.”
 
monte cristo entered the tower, which was divided into three stories.
 the tower contained implements, such as spades, rakes, watering-pots,
 hung against the wall; this was all the furniture. the second was the
 man’s conventional abode, or rather sleeping-place; it contained few
 poor articles of household furniture—a bed, table, two chairs, a
 stone pitcher—and some dry herbs, hung up to the ceiling, which the
 count recognized as sweet peas, and of which the good man was
 preserving the seeds; had labelled them with as much care as if he
 had been master botanist in the jardin des plantes.
 
“does it require much study to learn the art of telegraphing?” asked
 monte cristo.
 
“the study does not take long; it was acting as supernumerary that
 was so tedious.”
 
“and what is the pay?”
 
“a thousand francs, sir.”
 
“it is nothing.”
 
“no; but then we are lodged, as you perceive.”
 
monte cristo looked at the room. they passed to the third story; it was
 the telegraph room. monte cristo looked in turn at the two iron handles
 by which the machine was worked. “it is very interesting,” said,
 “but it must be very tedious for lifetime.”
 
“yes. at first my neck was cramped with looking at it, but at the end
 of year i became used to it; and then we have our hours of
 recreation, and our holidays.”
 
“holidays?”
 
“yes.”
 
“when?”
 
“when we have fog.”
 
“ah, to be sure.”
 
“those are indeed holidays to me; i go into the garden, i plant, i
 prune, i trim, i kill the insects all day long.”
 
“how long have you been here?”
 
“ten years, and five as supernumerary make fifteen.”
 
“you are——”
 
“fifty-five years old.”
 
“how long must you have served to claim the pension?”
 
“oh, sir, twenty-five years.”
 
“and how much is the pension?”
 
“a hundred crowns.”
 
“poor humanity!” murmured monte cristo.
 
“what did you say, sir?” asked the man.
 
“i was saying it was very interesting.”
 
“what was?”
 
“all you were showing me. and you really understand none of these
 signals?”
 
“none at all.”
 
“and have you never tried to understand them?”
 
“never. why should i?”
 
“but still there are some signals only addressed to you.”
 
“certainly.”
 
“and do you understand them?”
 
“they are always the same.”
 
“and they mean——”
 
“‘_nothing new; you have an hour;_’ or ‘_tomorrow_.’”
 
“this is simple enough,” said the count; “but look, is not your
 correspondent putting itself in motion?”
 
“ah, yes; thank you, sir.”
 
“and what is it saying—anything you understand?”
 
“yes; it asks if i am ready.”
 
“and you reply?”
 
“by the same sign, which, at the same time, tells my right-hand
 correspondent that i am ready, while it gives notice to my left-hand
 correspondent to prepare in his turn.”
 
“it is very ingenious,” said the count.
 
“you will see,” said the man proudly; “in five minutes will speak.”
 
“i have, then, five minutes,” said monte cristo to himself; “it is more
 time than i require. my dear sir, will you allow to ask you a
 question?”
 
“what is it, sir?”
 
“you are fond of gardening?”
 
“passionately.”
 
“and you would be pleased to have, instead of this terrace of twenty
 feet, an enclosure of two acres?”
 
“sir, i should make terrestrial paradise of it.”
 
“you live badly on your thousand francs?”
 
“badly enough; but yet i do live.”
 
“yes; but you have wretchedly small garden.”
 
“true, the garden is not large.”
 
“and, then, such as it is, it is filled with dormice, who eat
 everything.”
 
“ah, they are my scourges.”
 
“tell me, should you have the misfortune to turn your head while your
 right-hand correspondent was telegraphing——”
 
“i should not see him.”
 
“then what would happen?”
 
“i could not repeat the signals.”
 
“and then?”
 
“not having repeated them, through negligence, i should be fined.”
 
“how much?”
 
“a hundred francs.”
 
“the tenth of your income—that would be fine work.”
 
“ah!” said the man.
 
“has it ever happened to you?” said monte cristo.
 
“once, sir, when i was grafting rose-tree.”
 
“well, suppose you were to alter signal, and substitute another?”
 
“ah, that is another case; i should be turned off, and lose my
 pension.”
 
“three hundred francs?”
 
“a hundred crowns, yes, sir; so you see that i am not likely to do any
 of these things.”
 
“not even for fifteen years’ wages? come, it is worth thinking about?”
 
“for fifteen thousand francs?”
 
“yes.”
 
“sir, you alarm me.”
 
“nonsense.”
 
“sir, you are tempting me?”
 
“just so; fifteen thousand francs, do you understand?”
 
“sir, let see my right-hand correspondent.”
 
“on the contrary, do not look at him, but at this.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“what? do you not know these bits of paper?”
 
“bank-notes!”
 
“exactly; there are fifteen of them.”
 
“and whose are they?”
 
“yours, if you like.”
 
“mine?” exclaimed the man, half-suffocated.
 
“yes; yours—your own property.”
 
“sir, my right-hand correspondent is signalling.”
 
“let him signal.”
 
“sir, you have distracted me; i shall be fined.”
 
“that will cost you hundred francs; you see it is your interest to
 take my bank-notes.”
 
“sir, my right-hand correspondent redoubles his signals; is
 impatient.”
 
“never mind—take these;” and the count placed the packet in the man’s
 hands. “now this is not all,” said; “you cannot live upon your
 fifteen thousand francs.”
 
“i shall still have my place.”
 
“no, you will lose it, for you are going to alter your correspondent’s
 message.”
 
“oh, sir, what are you proposing?”
 
“a jest.”
 
“sir, unless you force me——”
 
“i think i can effectually force you;” and monte cristo drew another
 packet from his pocket. “here are ten thousand more francs,” said,
 “with the fifteen thousand already in your pocket, they will make
 twenty-five thousand. with five thousand you can buy pretty little
 house with two acres of land; the remaining twenty thousand will bring
 you in thousand francs year.”
 
“a garden with two acres of land!”
 
“and thousand francs year.”
 
“oh, heavens!”
 
“come, take them,” and monte cristo forced the bank-notes into his
 hand.
 
“what am i to do?”
 
“nothing very difficult.”
 
“but what is it?”
 
“to repeat these signs.” monte cristo took paper from his pocket,
 upon which were drawn three signs, with numbers to indicate the order
 in which they were to be worked.
 
“there, you see it will not take long.”
 
“yes; but——”
 
“do this, and you will have nectarines and all the rest.”
 
the shot told; red with fever, while the large drops fell from his
 brow, the man executed, one after the other, the three signs given by
 the count, in spite of the frightful contortions of the right-hand
 correspondent, who, not understanding the change, began to think the
 gardener had gone mad. as to the left-hand one, conscientiously
 repeated the same signals, which were finally transmitted to the
 minister of the interior.
 
“now you are rich,” said monte cristo.
 
“yes,” replied the man, “but at what price!”
 
“listen, friend,” said monte cristo. “i do not wish to cause you any
 remorse; believe me, then, when i swear to you that you have wronged no
 man, but on the contrary have benefited mankind.”
 
the man looked at the bank-notes, felt them, counted them, turned pale,
 then red, then rushed into his room to drink glass of water, but he
 had time to reach the water-jug, and fainted in the midst of his
 dried herbs. five minutes after the new telegram reached the minister,
 debray had the horses put to his carriage, and drove to danglars’
 house.
 
“has your husband any spanish bonds?” asked of the baroness.
 
“i think so, indeed! has six millions’ worth.”
 
“he must sell them at whatever price.”
 
“why?”
 
“because don carlos has fled from bourges, and has returned to spain.”
 
30203m
 


“how do you know?” debray shrugged his shoulders.
 
“the idea of asking how i hear the news,” said.
 
the baroness did not wait for repetition; she ran to her husband, who
 immediately hastened to his agent, and ordered him to sell at any
 price. when it was seen that danglars sold, the spanish funds fell
 directly. danglars lost five hundred thousand francs; but rid
 himself of all his spanish shares. the same evening the following was
 read in _le messager_:
 
“[by telegraph.] the king, don carlos, has escaped the vigilance of his
 guardians at bourges, and has returned to spain by the catalonian
 frontier. barcelona has risen in his favor.”
 
all that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight of danglars,
 who had sold his shares, and of the luck of the stock-jobber, who only
 lost five hundred thousand francs by such blow. those who had kept
 their shares, or bought those of danglars, looked upon themselves as
 ruined, and passed very bad night. next morning _le moniteur_
 contained the following:
 
“it was without any foundation that _le messager_ yesterday announced
 the flight of don carlos and the revolt of barcelona. the king (don
 carlos) has not left bourges, and the peninsula is in the enjoyment of
 profound peace. telegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to
 the fog, was the cause of this error.”
 
the funds rose one per cent higher than before they had fallen. this,
 reckoning his loss, and what had missed gaining, made the difference
 of million to danglars.
 
“good,” said monte cristo to morrel, who was at his house when the news
 arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which danglars had been
 the victim, “i have just made discovery for twenty-five thousand
 francs, for which i would have paid hundred thousand.”
 
“what have you discovered?” asked morrel.
 
“i have just discovered how gardener may get rid of the dormice that
 eat his peaches.”
 


chapter 62. ghosts
 
at first sight, the exterior of the house at auteuil gave no
 indications of splendor, nothing one would expect from the destined
 residence of the magnificent count of monte cristo; but this simplicity
 was according to the will of its master, who positively ordered nothing
 to be altered outside. the splendor was within. indeed, almost before
 the door opened, the scene changed.
 
m. bertuccio had outdone himself in the taste displayed in furnishing,
 and in the rapidity with which it was executed. it is told that the duc
 d’antin removed in single night whole avenue of trees that annoyed
 louis xiv.; in three days m. bertuccio planted an entirely bare court
 with poplars, large spreading sycamores to shade the different parts of
 the house, and in the foreground, instead of the usual paving-stones,
 half hidden by the grass, there extended lawn but that morning laid
 down, and upon which the water was yet glistening. for the rest, the
 orders had been issued by the count; himself had given plan to
 bertuccio, marking the spot where each tree was to be planted, and the
 shape and extent of the lawn which was to take the place of the
 paving-stones.
 
thus the house had become unrecognizable, and bertuccio himself
 declared that scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by framework
 of trees. the overseer would not have objected, while was about it,
 to have made some improvements in the garden, but the count had
 positively forbidden it to be touched. bertuccio made amends, however,
 by loading the antechambers, staircases, and mantle-pieces with
 flowers.
 
what, above all, manifested the shrewdness of the steward, and the
 profound science of the master, the one in carrying out the ideas of
 the other, was that this house which appeared only the night before so
 sad and gloomy, impregnated with that sickly smell one can almost fancy
 to be the smell of time, had in single day acquired the aspect of
 life, was scented with its master’s favorite perfumes, and had the very
 light regulated according to his wish. when the count arrived, had
 under his touch his books and arms, his eyes rested upon his favorite
 pictures; his dogs, whose caresses loved, welcomed him in the
 antechamber; the birds, whose songs delighted him, cheered him with
 their music; and the house, awakened from its long sleep, like the
 sleeping beauty in the wood, lived, sang, and bloomed like the houses
 we have long cherished, and in which, when we are forced to leave them,
 we leave part of our souls.
 
the servants passed gayly along the fine courtyard; some, belonging to
 the kitchens, gliding down the stairs, restored but the previous day,
 as if they had always inhabited the house; others filling the
 coach-houses, where the equipages, encased and numbered, appeared to
 have been installed for the last fifty years; and in the stables the
 horses replied with neighs to the grooms, who spoke to them with much
 more respect than many servants pay their masters.
 
the library was divided into two parts on either side of the wall, and
 contained upwards of two thousand volumes; one division was entirely
 devoted to novels, and even the volume which had been published but the
 day before was to be seen in its place in all the dignity of its red
 and gold binding.
 
on the other side of the house, to match with the library, was the
 conservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, that bloomed in china jars;
 and in the midst of the greenhouse, marvellous alike to sight and
 smell, was billiard-table which looked as if it had been abandoned
 during the past hour by players who had left the balls on the cloth.
 
one chamber alone had been respected by the magnificent bertuccio.
 before this room, to which you could ascend by the grand, and go out by
 the back staircase, the servants passed with curiosity, and bertuccio
 with terror.
 
at five o’clock precisely, the count arrived before the house at
 auteuil, followed by ali. bertuccio was awaiting this arrival with
 impatience, mingled with uneasiness; hoped for some compliments,
 while, at the same time, feared to have frowns. monte cristo
 descended into the courtyard, walked all over the house, without giving
 any sign of approbation or pleasure, until entered his bedroom,
 situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then approached a
 little piece of furniture, made of rosewood, which had noticed at a
 previous visit.
 
“that can only be to hold gloves,” said.
 
“will your excellency deign to open it?” said the delighted bertuccio,
 “and you will find gloves in it.”
 
elsewhere the count found everything required—smelling-bottles,
 cigars, knick-knacks.
 
30207m
 


“good,” said; and m. bertuccio left enraptured, so great, so
 powerful, and real was the influence exercised by this man over all who
 surrounded him.
 
at precisely six o’clock the clatter of horses’ hoofs was heard at the
 entrance door; it was our captain of spahis, who had arrived on médéah.
 “i am sure i am the first,” cried morrel; “i did it on purpose to have
 you minute to myself, before everyone came. julie and emmanuel have a
 thousand things to tell you. ah, really this is magnificent! but tell
 me, count, will your people take care of my horse?”
 
“do not alarm yourself, my dear maximilian—they understand.”
 
“i mean, because wants petting. if you had seen at what pace he
 came—like the wind!”
 
“i should think so,—a horse that cost 5,000 francs!” said monte cristo,
 in the tone which father would use towards son.
 
“do you regret them?” asked morrel, with his open laugh.
 
“i? certainly not,” replied the count. “no; i should only regret if the
 horse had not proved good.”
 
“it is so good, that i have distanced m. château-renaud, one of the
 best riders in france, and m. debray, who both mount the minister’s
 arabians; and close on their heels are the horses of madame danglars,
 who always go at six leagues an hour.”
 
“then they follow you?” asked monte cristo.
 
“see, they are here.” and at the same minute carriage with smoking
 horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen, arrived at the gate,
 which opened before them. the carriage drove round, and stopped at the
 steps, followed by the horsemen.
 
the instant debray had touched the ground, was at the carriage-door.
 offered his hand to the baroness, who, descending, took it with a
 peculiarity of manner imperceptible to everyone but monte cristo. but
 nothing escaped the count’s notice, and observed little note,
 passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice, from the
 hand of madame danglars to that of the minister’s secretary.
 
after his wife the banker descended, as pale as though had issued
 from his tomb instead of his carriage.
 
madame danglars threw rapid and inquiring glance which could only be
 interpreted by monte cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle,
 and across the front of the house, then, repressing slight emotion,
 which must have been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her
 color, she ascended the steps, saying to morrel:
 
“sir, if you were friend of mine, i should ask you if you would sell
 your horse.”
 
morrel smiled with an expression very like grimace, and then turned
 round to monte cristo, as if to ask him to extricate him from his
 embarrassment. the count understood him.
 
“ah, madame,” said, “why did you not make that request of me?”
 
“with you, sir,” replied the baroness, “one can wish for nothing, one
 is so sure to obtain it. if it were so with m. morrel——”
 
“unfortunately,” replied the count, “i am witness that m. morrel cannot
 give up his horse, his honor being engaged in keeping it.”
 
“how so?”
 
“he laid wager would tame médéah in the space of six months. you
 understand now that if were to get rid of the animal before the time
 named, would not only lose his bet, but people would say was
 afraid; and brave captain of spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify
 pretty woman, which is, in my opinion, one of the most sacred
 obligations in the world.”
 
“you see my position, madame,” said morrel, bestowing grateful smile
 on monte cristo.
 
“it seems to me,” said danglars, in his coarse tone, ill-concealed by a
 forced smile, “that you have already got horses enough.”
 
madame danglars seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed,
 but, to the surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it,
 and said nothing. monte cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and
 showed her two immense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants,
 of size and delicacy that nature alone could produce. the baroness
 was astonished.
 
“why,” said she, “you could plant one of the chestnut-trees in the
 tuileries inside! how can such enormous jars have been manufactured?”
 
“ah! madame,” replied monte cristo, “you must not ask of us, the
 manufacturers of fine porcelain, such question. it is the work of
 another age, constructed by the genii of earth and water.”
 
“how so?—at what period can that have been?”
 
“i do not know; i have only heard that an emperor of china had an oven
 built expressly, and that in this oven twelve jars like this were
 successively baked. two broke, from the heat of the fire; the other ten
 were sunk three hundred fathoms deep into the sea. the sea, knowing
 what was required of her, threw over them her weeds, encircled them
 with coral, and encrusted them with shells; the whole was cemented by
 two hundred years beneath these almost impervious depths, for a
 revolution carried away the emperor who wished to make the trial, and
 only left the documents proving the manufacture of the jars and their
 descent into the sea. at the end of two hundred years the documents
 were found, and they thought of bringing up the jars. divers descended
 in machines, made expressly on the discovery, into the bay where they
 were thrown; but of ten three only remained, the rest having been
 broken by the waves. i am fond of these jars, upon which, perhaps,
 misshapen, frightful monsters have fixed their cold, dull eyes, and in
 which myriads of small fish have slept, seeking refuge from the
 pursuit of their enemies.”
 
meanwhile, danglars, who had cared little for curiosities, was
 mechanically tearing off the blossoms of splendid orange-tree, one
 after another. when had finished with the orange-tree, began at
 the cactus; but this, not being so easily plucked as the orange-tree,
 pricked him dreadfully. shuddered, and rubbed his eyes as though
 awaking from dream.
 
“sir,” said monte cristo to him, “i do not recommend my pictures to
 you, who possess such splendid paintings; but, nevertheless, here are
 two by hobbema, paul potter, mieris, two by gerard douw, raphael,
 dyck, zurbaran, and two or three by murillo, worth looking at.”
 
“stay,” said debray; “i recognize this hobbema.”
 
“ah, indeed!”
 
“yes; it was proposed for the museum.”
 
“which, i believe, does not contain one?” said monte cristo.
 
“no; and yet they refused to buy it.”
 
“why?” said château-renaud.
 
“you pretend not to know,—because government was not rich enough.”
 
“ah, pardon me,” said château-renaud; “i have heard of these things
 every day during the last eight years, and i cannot understand them
 yet.”
 
“you will, by and by,” said debray.
 
“i think not,” replied château-renaud.
 
“major bartolomeo cavalcanti and count andrea cavalcanti,” announced
 baptistin.
 
black satin stock, fresh from the maker’s hands, gray moustaches, a
 bold eye, major’s uniform, ornamented with three medals and five
 crosses—in fact, the thorough bearing of an old soldier—such was the
 appearance of major bartolomeo cavalcanti, that tender father with whom
 we are already acquainted. close to him, dressed in entirely new
 clothes, advanced smilingly count andrea cavalcanti, the dutiful son,
 whom we also know. the three young people were talking together. on the
 entrance of the new-comers, their eyes glanced from father to son, and
 then, naturally enough, rested on the latter, whom they began
 criticising.
 
“cavalcanti!” said debray.
 
“a fine name,” said morrel.
 
“yes,” said château-renaud, “these italians are well named and badly
 dressed.”
 
“you are fastidious, château-renaud,” replied debray; “those clothes
 are well cut and quite new.”
 
“that is just what i find fault with. that gentleman appears to be well
 dressed for the first time in his life.”
 
“who are those gentlemen?” asked danglars of monte cristo.
 
“you heard—cavalcanti.”
 
“that tells their name, and nothing else.”
 
“ah! true. you do not know the italian nobility; the cavalcanti are all
 descended from princes.”
 
“have they any fortune?”
 
“an enormous one.”
 
“what do they do?”
 
“try to spend it all. they have some business with you, i think, from
 what they told the day before yesterday. i, indeed, invited them
 here today on your account. i will introduce you to them.”
 
“but they appear to speak french with very pure accent,” said
 danglars.
 
“the has been educated in college in the south; i believe near
 marseilles. you will find him quite enthusiastic.”
 
“upon what subject?” asked madame danglars.
 
“the french ladies, madame. has made up his mind to take wife from
 paris.”
 
“a fine idea that of his,” said danglars, shrugging his shoulders.
 madame danglars looked at her husband with an expression which, at any
 other time, would have indicated storm, but for the second time she
 controlled herself.
 
“the baron appears thoughtful today,” said monte cristo to her; “are
 they going to put him in the ministry?”
 
“not yet, i think. more likely has been speculating on the bourse,
 and has lost money.”
 
“m. and madame villefort,” cried baptistin.
 
they entered. m. villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was
 visibly affected, and when monte cristo touched his hand, felt it
 tremble.
 
“certainly, women alone know how to dissimulate,” said monte cristo to
 himself, glancing at madame danglars, who was smiling on the procureur,
 and embracing his wife.
 
after short time, the count saw bertuccio, who, until then, had been
 occupied on the other side of the house, glide into an adjoining room.
 went to him.
 
“what do you want, m. bertuccio?” said he.
 
“your excellency has not stated the number of guests.”
 
“ah, true.”
 
“how many covers?”
 
“count for yourself.”
 
“is everyone here, your excellency?”
 
“yes.”
 
bertuccio glanced through the door, which was ajar. the count watched
 him. “good heavens!” exclaimed.
 
“what is the matter?” said the count.
 
“that woman—that woman!”
 
“which?”
 
“the one with white dress and so many diamonds—the fair one.”
 
“madame danglars?”
 
“i do not know her name; but it is she, sir, it is she!”
 
“whom do you mean?”
 
“the woman of the garden!—she that was _enceinte_—she who was walking
 while she waited for——”
 
bertuccio stood at the open door, with his eyes starting and his hair
 on end.
 
“waiting for whom?” bertuccio, without answering, pointed to villefort
 with something of the gesture macbeth uses to point out banquo.
 
“oh, oh!” at length muttered, “do you see?”
 
“what? who?”
 
“him!”
 
“him!—m. villefort, the king’s attorney? certainly i see him.”
 
“then i did not kill him?”
 
“really, i think you are going mad, good bertuccio,” said the count.
 
“then is not dead?”
 
30213m
 


“no; you see plainly is not dead. instead of striking between the
 sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have
 struck higher or lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or
 rather there is truth in anything you have told me—it was fright
 of the imagination, dream of your fancy. you went to sleep full of
 thoughts of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon your stomach; you had
 the nightmare—that’s all. come, calm yourself, and reckon them up—m.
 and madame villefort, two; m. and madame danglars, four; m. de
 château-renaud, m. debray, m. morrel, seven; major bartolomeo
 cavalcanti, eight.”
 
“eight!” repeated bertuccio.
 
“stop! you are in shocking hurry to be off—you forget one of my
 guests. lean little to the left. stay! look at m. andrea cavalcanti,
 the young man in black coat, looking at murillo’s ‘madonna’; now he
 is turning.”
 
this time bertuccio would have uttered an exclamation, had not look
 from monte cristo silenced him.
 
“benedetto?” muttered; “fatality!”
 
“half-past six o’clock has just struck, m. bertuccio,” said the count
 severely; “i ordered dinner at that hour, and i do not like to wait;”
 and returned to his guests, while bertuccio, leaning against the
 wall, succeeded in reaching the dining-room. five minutes afterwards
 the doors of the drawing-room were thrown open, and bertuccio appearing
 said, with violent effort, “the dinner waits.”
 
the count of monte cristo offered his arm to madame villefort. “m.
 villefort,” said, “will you conduct the baroness danglars?”
 
villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room.
 


chapter 63. the dinner
 
it was evident that one sentiment affected all the guests on entering
 the dining-room. each one asked what strange influence had brought them
 to this house, and yet astonished, even uneasy though they were, they
 still felt that they would not like to be absent. the recent events,
 the solitary and eccentric position of the count, his enormous, nay,
 almost incredible fortune, should have made men cautious, and have
 altogether prevented ladies visiting house where there was one of
 their own sex to receive them; and yet curiosity had been enough to
 lead them to overleap the bounds of prudence and decorum.
 
and all present, even including cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding
 the stiffness of the one and the carelessness of the other, were
 thoughtful, on finding themselves assembled at the house of this
 incomprehensible man. madame danglars had started when villefort, on
 the count’s invitation, offered his arm; and villefort felt that his
 glance was uneasy beneath his gold spectacles, when felt the arm of
 the baroness press upon his own. none of this had escaped the count,
 and even by this mere contact of individuals the scene had already
 acquired considerable interest for an observer.
 
m. villefort had on the right hand madame danglars, on his left
 morrel. the count was seated between madame villefort and danglars;
 the other seats were filled by debray, who was placed between the two
 cavalcanti, and by château-renaud, seated between madame villefort
 and morrel.
 
the repast was magnificent; monte cristo had endeavored completely to
 overturn the parisian ideas, and to feed the curiosity as much as the
 appetite of his guests. it was an oriental feast that offered to
 them, but of such kind as the arabian fairies might be supposed to
 prepare. every delicious fruit that the four quarters of the globe
 could provide was heaped in vases from china and jars from japan. rare
 birds, retaining their most brilliant plumage, enormous fish, spread
 upon massive silver dishes, together with every wine produced in the
 archipelago, asia minor, or the cape, sparkling in bottles, whose
 grotesque shape seemed to give an additional flavor to the draught,—all
 these, like one of the displays with which apicius of old gratified his
 guests, passed in review before the eyes of the astonished parisians,
 who understood that it was possible to expend thousand louis upon a
 dinner for ten persons, but only on the condition of eating pearls,
 like cleopatra, or drinking refined gold, like lorenzo de’ medici.
 
monte cristo noticed the general astonishment, and began laughing and
 joking about it.
 
“gentlemen,” said, “you will admit that, when arrived at certain
 degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are all that can be
 desired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risen to a
 certain eminence of position, the ideal alone can be more exalted. now,
 to follow out this reasoning, what is the marvellous?—that which we do
 not understand. what is it that we really desire?—that which we cannot
 obtain. now, to see things which i cannot understand, to procure
 impossibilities, these are the study of my life. i gratify my wishes by
 two means—my will and my money. i take as much interest in the pursuit
 of some whim as you do, m. danglars, in promoting new railway line;
 you, m. villefort, in condemning culprit to death; you, m. debray,
 in pacifying kingdom; you, m. château-renaud, in pleasing woman;
 and you, morrel, in breaking horse that one can ride. for example,
 you see these two fish; one brought from fifty leagues beyond st.
 petersburg, the other five leagues from naples. is it not amusing to
 see them both on the same table?”
 
“what are the two fish?” asked danglars.
 
“m. château-renaud, who has lived in russia, will tell you the name of
 one, and major cavalcanti, who is an italian, will tell you the name of
 the other.”
 
“this one is, i think, sterlet,” said château-renaud.
 
“and that one, if i mistake not, lamprey.”
 
“just so. now, m. danglars, ask these gentlemen where they are caught.”
 
“sterlets,” said château-renaud, “are only found in the volga.”
 
“and,” said cavalcanti, “i know that lake fusaro alone supplies
 lampreys of that size.”
 
“exactly; one comes from the volga, and the other from lake fusaro.”
 
“impossible!” cried all the guests simultaneously.
 
“well, this is just what amuses me,” said monte cristo. “i am like
 nero—_cupitor impossibilium_; and that is what is amusing you at this
 moment. this fish, which seems so exquisite to you, is very likely no
 better than perch or salmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it,
 and here it is.”
 
“but how could you have these fish brought to france?”
 
“oh, nothing more easy. each fish was brought over in cask—one filled
 with river herbs and weeds, the other with rushes and lake plants; they
 were placed in wagon built on purpose, and thus the sterlet lived
 twelve days, the lamprey eight, and both were alive when my cook seized
 them, killing one with milk and the other with wine. you do not believe
 me, m. danglars!”
 
“i cannot help doubting,” answered danglars with his stupid smile.
 
“baptistin,” said the count, “have the other fish brought in—the
 sterlet and the lamprey which came in the other casks, and which are
 yet alive.”
 
danglars opened his bewildered eyes; the company clapped their hands.
 four servants carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants, and in
 each of which was breathing fish similar to those on the table.
 
“but why have two of each sort?” asked danglars.
 
“merely because one might have died,” carelessly answered monte cristo.
 
“you are certainly an extraordinary man,” said danglars; “and
 philosophers may well say it is fine thing to be rich.”
 
“and to have ideas,” added madame danglars.
 
“oh, do not give credit for this, madame; it was done by the romans,
 who much esteemed them, and pliny relates that they sent slaves from
 ostia to rome, who carried on their heads fish which calls the
 _mulus_, and which, from the description, must probably be the
 goldfish. it was also considered luxury to have them alive, it being
 an amusing sight to see them die, for, when dying, they change color
 three or four times, and like the rainbow when it disappears, pass
 through all the prismatic shades, after which they were sent to the
 kitchen. their agony formed part of their merit—if they were not seen
 alive, they were despised when dead.”
 
“yes,” said debray, “but then ostia is only few leagues from rome.”
 
“true,” said monte cristo; “but what would be the use of living
 eighteen hundred years after lucullus, if we can do better than he
 could?”
 
the two cavalcanti opened their enormous eyes, but had the good sense
 not to say anything.
 
“all this is very extraordinary,” said château-renaud; “still, what i
 admire the most, i confess, is the marvellous promptitude with which
 your orders are executed. is it not true that you only bought this
 house five or six days ago?”
 
“certainly not longer.”
 
“well, i am sure it is quite transformed since last week. if i remember
 rightly, it had another entrance, and the courtyard was paved and
 empty; while today we have splendid lawn, bordered by trees which
 appear to be hundred years old.”
 
“why not? i am fond of grass and shade,” said monte cristo.
 
“yes,” said madame villefort, “the door was towards the road before,
 and on the day of my miraculous escape you brought into the house
 from the road, i remember.”
 
“yes, madame,” said monte cristo; “but i preferred having an entrance
 which would allow to see the bois boulogne over my gate.”
 
“in four days,” said morrel; “it is extraordinary!”
 
“indeed,” said château-renaud, “it seems quite miraculous to make new
 house out of an old one; for it was very old, and dull too. i recollect
 coming for my mother to look at it when m. saint-méran advertised it
 for sale two or three years ago.”
 
“m. saint-méran?” said madame villefort; “then this house
 belonged to m. saint-méran before you bought it?”
 
“it appears so,” replied monte cristo.
 
“is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchased it?”
 
“quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me.”
 
“it is certainly ten years since the house had been occupied,” said
 château-renaud, “and it was quite melancholy to look at it, with the
 blinds closed, the doors locked, and the weeds in the court. really, if
 the house had not belonged to the father-in-law of the procureur, one
 might have thought it some accursed place where horrible crime had
 been committed.”
 
villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or four glasses of
 rare wine which were placed before him, here took one, and drank it
 off. monte cristo allowed short time to elapse, and then said:
 
“it is singular, baron, but the same idea came across the first time
 i came here; it looked so gloomy i should never have bought it if my
 steward had not taken the matter into his own hands. perhaps the fellow
 had been bribed by the notary.”
 
“it is probable,” stammered out villefort, trying to smile; “but i can
 assure you that i had nothing to do with any such proceeding. this
 house is part of valentine’s marriage-portion, and m. saint-méran
 wished to sell it; for if it had remained another year or two
 uninhabited it would have fallen to ruin.”
 
it was morrel’s turn to become pale.
 
“there was, above all, one room,” continued monte cristo, “very plain
 in appearance, hung with red damask, which, i know not why, appeared to
 quite dramatic.”
 
“why so?” said danglars; “why dramatic?”
 
“can we account for instinct?” said monte cristo. “are there not some
 places where we seem to breathe sadness?—why, we cannot tell. it is a
 chain of recollections—an idea which carries you back to other times,
 to other places—which, very likely, have connection with the present
 time and place. and there is something in this room which reminds me
 forcibly of the chamber of the marquise ganges10 or desdemona. stay,
 since we have finished dinner, i will show it to you, and then we will
 take coffee in the garden. after dinner, the play.”
 
monte cristo looked inquiringly at his guests. madame villefort
 rose, monte cristo did the same, and the rest followed their example.
 villefort and madame danglars remained for moment, as if rooted to
 their seats; they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances.
 
“did you hear?” said madame danglars.
 
“we must go,” replied villefort, offering his arm.
 
the others, attracted by curiosity, were already scattered in different
 parts of the house; for they thought the visit would not be limited to
 the one room, and that, at the same time, they would obtain view of
 the rest of the building, of which monte cristo had created palace.
 each one went out by the open doors. monte cristo waited for the two
 who remained; then, when they had passed, brought up the rear, and
 on his face was smile, which, if they could have understood it, would
 have alarmed them much more than visit to the room they were about to
 enter. they began by walking through the apartments, many of which were
 fitted up in the eastern style, with cushions and divans instead of
 beds, and pipes instead of furniture. the drawing-rooms were decorated
 with the rarest pictures by the old masters, the boudoirs hung with
 draperies from china, of fanciful colors, fantastic design, and
 wonderful texture. at length they arrived at the famous room. there was
 nothing particular about it, excepting that, although daylight had
 disappeared, it was not lighted, and everything in it was
 old-fashioned, while the rest of the rooms had been redecorated. these
 two causes were enough to give it gloomy aspect.
 
“oh.” cried madame villefort, “it is really frightful.”
 
madame danglars tried to utter few words, but was not heard. many
 observations were made, the import of which was unanimous opinion
 that there was something sinister about the room.
 
30221m
 


“is it not so?” asked monte cristo. “look at that large clumsy bed,
 hung with such gloomy, blood-colored drapery! and those two crayon
 portraits, that have faded from the dampness; do they not seem to say,
 with their pale lips and staring eyes, ‘we have seen’?”
 
villefort became livid; madame danglars fell into long seat placed
 near the chimney.
 
“oh,” said madame villefort, smiling, “are you courageous enough to
 sit down upon the very seat perhaps upon which the crime was
 committed?”
 
madame danglars rose suddenly.
 
“and then,” said monte cristo, “this is not all.”
 
“what is there more?” said debray, who had not failed to notice the
 agitation of madame danglars.
 
“ah, what else is there?” said danglars; “for, at present, i cannot say
 that i have seen anything extraordinary. what do you say, m.
 cavalcanti?”
 
“ah,” said he, “we have at pisa, ugolino’s tower; at ferrara, tasso’s
 prison; at rimini, the room of francesca and paolo.”
 
“yes, but you have not this little staircase,” said monte cristo,
 opening door concealed by the drapery. “look at it, and tell what
 you think of it.”
 
“what wicked-looking, crooked staircase,” said château-renaud with a
 smile.
 
“i do not know whether the wine of chios produces melancholy, but
 certainly everything appears to black in this house,” said debray.
 
ever since valentine’s dowry had been mentioned, morrel had been silent
 and sad.
 
“can you imagine,” said monte cristo, “some othello or abbé ganges,
 one stormy, dark night, descending these stairs step by step, carrying
 load, which wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not from
 god?”
 
madame danglars half fainted on the arm of villefort, who was obliged
 to support himself against the wall.
 
“ah, madame,” cried debray, “what is the matter with you? how pale you
 look!”
 
“it is very evident what is the matter with her,” said madame de
 villefort; “m. monte cristo is relating horrible stories to us,
 doubtless intending to frighten us to death.”
 
“yes,” said villefort, “really, count, you frighten the ladies.”
 
“what is the matter?” asked debray, in whisper, of madame danglars.
 
“nothing,” she replied with violent effort. “i want air, that is
 all.”
 
“will you come into the garden?” said debray, advancing towards the
 back staircase.
 
“no, no,” she answered, “i would rather remain here.”
 
“are you really frightened, madame?” said monte cristo.
 
“oh, no, sir,” said madame danglars; “but you suppose scenes in a
 manner which gives them the appearance of reality.”
 
30223m
 


“ah, yes,” said monte cristo smiling; “it is all matter of
 imagination. why should we not imagine this the apartment of an honest
 mother? and this bed with red hangings, bed visited by the goddess
 lucina? and that mysterious staircase, the passage through which, not
 to disturb their sleep, the doctor and nurse pass, or even the father
 carrying the sleeping child?”
 
here madame danglars, instead of being calmed by the soft picture,
 uttered groan and fainted.
 
“madame danglars is ill,” said villefort; “it would be better to take
 her to her carriage.”
 
“oh, _mon dieu!_” said monte cristo, “and i have forgotten my
 smelling-bottle!”
 
“i have mine,” said madame villefort; and she passed over to monte
 cristo bottle full of the same kind of red liquid whose good
 properties the count had tested on edward.
 
“ah,” said monte cristo, taking it from her hand.
 
“yes,” she said, “at your advice i have made the trial.”
 
“and have you succeeded?”
 
“i think so.”
 
madame danglars was carried into the adjoining room; monte cristo
 dropped very small portion of the red liquid upon her lips; she
 returned to consciousness.
 
“ah,” she cried, “what frightful dream!”
 
villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not dream. they
 looked for m. danglars, but, as was not especially interested in
 poetical ideas, had gone into the garden, and was talking with major
 cavalcanti on the projected railway from leghorn to florence. monte
 cristo seemed in despair. took the arm of madame danglars, and
 conducted her into the garden, where they found danglars taking coffee
 between the cavalcanti.
 
“really, madame,” said, “did i alarm you much?”
 
“oh, no, sir,” she answered; “but you know, things impress us
 differently, according to the mood of our minds.” villefort forced a
 laugh.
 
“and then, you know,” said, “an idea, supposition, is sufficient.”
 
“well,” said monte cristo, “you may believe if you like, but it is
 my opinion that crime has been committed in this house.”
 
“take care,” said madame villefort, “the king’s attorney is here.”
 
“ah,” replied monte cristo, “since that is the case, i will take
 advantage of his presence to make my declaration.”
 
“your declaration?” said villefort.
 
“yes, before witnesses.”
 
“oh, this is very interesting,” said debray; “if there really has been
 crime, we will investigate it.”
 
“there has been crime,” said monte cristo. “come this way, gentlemen;
 come, m. villefort, for declaration to be available, should be made
 before the competent authorities.”
 
then took villefort’s arm, and, at the same time, holding that of
 madame danglars under his own, dragged the procureur to the
 plantain-tree, where the shade was thickest. all the other guests
 followed.
 
“stay,” said monte cristo, “here, in this very spot” (and stamped
 upon the ground), “i had the earth dug up and fresh mould put in, to
 refresh these old trees; well, my man, digging, found box, or rather,
 the iron-work of box, in the midst of which was the skeleton of a
 newly born infant.”
 
30225m
 


monte cristo felt the arm of madame danglars stiffen, while that of
 villefort trembled.
 
“a newly born infant,” repeated debray; “this affair becomes serious!”
 
“well,” said château-renaud, “i was not wrong just now then, when i
 said that houses had souls and faces like men, and that their exteriors
 carried the impress of their characters. this house was gloomy because
 it was remorseful: it was remorseful because it concealed crime.”
 
“who said it was crime?” asked villefort, with last effort.
 
“how? is it not crime to bury living child in garden?” cried
 monte cristo. “and pray what do you call such an action?”
 
“but who said it was buried alive?”
 
“why bury it there if it were dead? this garden has never been a
 cemetery.”
 
“what is done to infanticides in this country?” asked major cavalcanti
 innocently.
 
“oh, their heads are soon cut off,” said danglars.
 
“ah, indeed?” said cavalcanti.
 
“i think so; am i not right, m. villefort?” asked monte cristo.
 
“yes, count,” replied villefort, in voice now scarcely human.
 
monte cristo, seeing that the two persons for whom had prepared this
 scene could scarcely endure it, and not wishing to carry it too far,
 said:
 
“come, gentlemen,—some coffee, we seem to have forgotten it,” and he
 conducted the guests back to the table on the lawn.
 
“indeed, count,” said madame danglars, “i am ashamed to own it, but all
 your frightful stories have so upset me, that i must beg you to let me
 sit down;” and she fell into chair.
 
monte cristo bowed, and went to madame villefort.
 
“i think madame danglars again requires your bottle,” said. but
 before madame villefort could reach her friend, the procureur had
 found time to whisper to madame danglars, “i must speak to you.”
 
“when?”
 
“tomorrow.”
 
“where?”
 
“in my office, or in the court, if you like,—that is the surest place.”
 
“i will be there.”
 
at this moment madame villefort approached.
 
“thanks, my dear friend,” said madame danglars, trying to smile; “it is
 over now, and i am much better.”
 


chapter 64. the beggar
 
the evening passed on; madame villefort expressed desire to return
 to paris, which madame danglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding
 the uneasiness she experienced. on his wife’s request, m. villefort
 was the first to give the signal of departure. offered seat in his
 landau to madame danglars, that she might be under the care of his
 wife. as for m. danglars, absorbed in an interesting conversation with
 m. cavalcanti, paid attention to anything that was passing. while
 monte cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of madame villefort, he
 had noticed the approach of villefort to madame danglars, and soon
 guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had been
 uttered in so low voice as hardly to be heard by madame danglars.
 without opposing their arrangements, allowed morrel, château-renaud,
 and debray to leave on horseback, and the ladies in m. villefort’s
 carriage. danglars, more and more delighted with major cavalcanti, had
 offered him seat in his carriage. andrea cavalcanti found his tilbury
 waiting at the door; the groom, in every respect caricature of the
 english fashion, was standing on tiptoe to hold large iron-gray
 horse.
 
andrea had spoken very little during dinner; was an intelligent lad,
 and feared to utter some absurdity before so many grand people,
 amongst whom, with dilating eyes, saw the king’s attorney. then he
 had been seized upon by danglars, who, with rapid glance at the
 stiff-necked old major and his modest son, and taking into
 consideration the hospitality of the count, made up his mind that he
 was in the society of some nabob come to paris to finish the worldly
 education of his heir. contemplated with unspeakable delight the
 large diamond which shone on the major’s little finger; for the major,
 like prudent man, in case of any accident happening to his
 bank-notes, had immediately converted them into an available asset.
 then, after dinner, on the pretext of business, questioned the
 father and upon their mode of living; and the father and son,
 previously informed that it was through danglars the one was to receive
 his 48,000 francs and the other 50,000 livres annually, were so full of
 affability that they would have shaken hands even with the banker’s
 servants, so much did their gratitude need an object to expend itself
 upon.
 
one thing above all the rest heightened the respect, nay almost the
 veneration, of danglars for cavalcanti. the latter, faithful to the
 principle of horace, _nil admirari_, had contented himself with showing
 his knowledge by declaring in what lake the best lampreys were caught.
 then had eaten some without saying word more; danglars, therefore,
 concluded that such luxuries were common at the table of the
 illustrious descendant of the cavalcanti, who most likely in lucca fed
 upon trout brought from switzerland, and lobsters sent from england, by
 the same means used by the count to bring the lampreys from lake
 fusaro, and the sterlet from the volga. thus it was with much
 politeness of manner that heard cavalcanti pronounce these words:
 
“tomorrow, sir, i shall have the honor of waiting upon you on
 business.”
 
“and i, sir,” said danglars, “shall be most happy to receive you.”
 
upon which offered to take cavalcanti in his carriage to the hôtel
 des princes, if it would not be depriving him of the company of his
 son. to this cavalcanti replied by saying that for some time past his
 had lived independently of him, that had his own horses and
 carriages, and that not having come together, it would not be difficult
 for them to leave separately. the major seated himself, therefore, by
 the side of danglars, who was more and more charmed with the ideas of
 order and economy which ruled this man, and yet who, being able to
 allow his 60,000 francs year, might be supposed to possess a
 fortune of 500,000 or 600,000 livres.
 
as for andrea, began, by way of showing off, to scold his groom,
 who, instead of bringing the tilbury to the steps of the house, had
 taken it to the outer door, thus giving him the trouble of walking
 thirty steps to reach it. the groom heard him with humility, took the
 bit of the impatient animal with his left hand, and with the right held
 out the reins to andrea, who, taking them from him, rested his polished
 boot lightly on the step.
 
at that moment hand touched his shoulder. the young man turned round,
 thinking that danglars or monte cristo had forgotten something they
 wished to tell him, and had returned just as they were starting. but
 instead of either of these, saw nothing but strange face,
 sunburnt, and encircled by beard, with eyes brilliant as carbuncles,
 and smile upon the mouth which displayed perfect set of white
 teeth, pointed and sharp as the wolf’s or jackal’s. red handkerchief
 encircled his gray head; torn and filthy garments covered his large
 bony limbs, which seemed as though, like those of skeleton, they
 would rattle as walked; and the hand with which leaned upon the
 young man’s shoulder, and which was the first thing andrea saw, seemed
 of gigantic size.
 
30229m
 


did the young man recognize that face by the light of the lantern in
 his tilbury, or was merely struck with the horrible appearance of
 his interrogator? we cannot say; but only relate the fact that he
 shuddered and stepped back suddenly.
 
“what do you want of me?” asked.
 
“pardon me, my friend, if i disturb you,” said the man with the red
 handkerchief, “but i want to speak to you.”
 
“you have right to beg at night,” said the groom, endeavoring to rid
 his master of the troublesome intruder.
 
“i am not begging, my fine fellow,” said the unknown to the servant,
 with so ironical an expression of the eye, and so frightful smile,
 that withdrew; “i only wish to say two or three words to your
 master, who gave commission to execute about fortnight ago.”
 
“come,” said andrea, with sufficient nerve for his servant not to
 perceive his agitation, “what do you want? speak quickly, friend.”
 
the man said, in low voice: “i wish—i wish you to spare the walk
 back to paris. i am very tired, and as i have not eaten so good a
 dinner as you, i can scarcely stand.”
 
the young man shuddered at this strange familiarity.
 
“tell me,” said—“tell what you want?”
 
“well, then, i want you to take up in your fine carriage, and carry
 back.” andrea turned pale, but said nothing.
 
“yes,” said the man, thrusting his hands into his pockets, and looking
 impudently at the youth; “i have taken the whim into my head; do you
 understand, master benedetto?”
 
at this name, doubt, the young man reflected little, for went
 towards his groom, saying:
 
“this man is right; i did indeed charge him with commission, the
 result of which must tell me; walk to the barrier, there take cab,
 that you may not be too late.”
 
the surprised groom retired.
 
“let at least reach shady spot,” said andrea.
 
“oh, as for that, i’ll take you to splendid place,” said the man with
 the handkerchief; and taking the horse’s bit led the tilbury where
 it was certainly impossible for anyone to witness the honor that andrea
 conferred upon him.
 
“don’t think i want the glory of riding in your fine carriage,” said
 he; “oh, no, it’s only because i am tired, and also because i have a
 little business to talk over with you.”
 
“come, step in,” said the young man. it was pity this scene had not
 occurred in daylight, for it was curious to see this rascal throwing
 himself heavily down on the cushion beside the young and elegant driver
 of the tilbury. andrea drove past the last house in the village without
 saying word to his companion, who smiled complacently, as though
 well-pleased to find himself travelling in so comfortable vehicle.
 once out of auteuil, andrea looked around, in order to assure himself
 that could neither be seen nor heard, and then, stopping the horse
 and crossing his arms before the man, asked:
 
“now, tell why you come to disturb my tranquillity?”
 
“let ask you why you deceived me?”
 
“how have i deceived you?”
 
“‘how,’ do you ask? when we parted at the pont du var, you told you
 were going to travel through piedmont and tuscany; but instead of that,
 you come to paris.”
 
“how does that annoy you?”
 
“it does not; on the contrary, i think it will answer my purpose.”
 
“so,” said andrea, “you are speculating upon me?”
 
“what fine words uses!”
 
“i warn you, master caderousse, that you are mistaken.”
 
“well, well, don’t be angry, my boy; you know well enough what it is to
 be unfortunate; and misfortunes make us jealous. i thought you were
 earning living in tuscany or piedmont by acting as _facchino_ or
 _cicerone_, and i pitied you sincerely, as i would child of my own.
 you know i always did call you my child.”
 
“come, come, what then?”
 
“patience—patience!”
 
“i am patient, but go on.”
 
“all at once i see you pass through the barrier with groom, a
 tilbury, and fine new clothes. you must have discovered mine, or else
 become stockbroker.”
 
“so that, as you confess, you are jealous?”
 
“no, i am pleased—so pleased that i wished to congratulate you; but as
 i am not quite properly dressed, i chose my opportunity, that i might
 not compromise you.”
 
“yes, and fine opportunity you have chosen!” exclaimed andrea; “you
 speak to before my servant.”
 
“how can i help that, my boy? i speak to you when i can catch you. you
 have quick horse, light tilbury, you are naturally as slippery as
 an eel; if i had missed you tonight, i might not have had another
 chance.”
 
“you see, i do not conceal myself.”
 
“you are lucky; i wish i could say as much, for i do conceal myself;
 and then i was afraid you would not recognize me, but you did,” added
 caderousse with his unpleasant smile. “it was very polite of you.”
 
“come,” said andrea, “what do you want?”
 
“you do not speak affectionately to me, benedetto, my old friend, that
 is not right—take care, or i may become troublesome.”
 
this menace smothered the young man’s passion. urged the horse again
 into trot.
 
“you should not speak so to an old friend like me, caderousse, as you
 said just now; you are native of marseilles, i am——”
 
“do you know then now what you are?”
 
“no, but i was brought up in corsica; you are old and obstinate, i am
 young and wilful. between people like us threats are out of place,
 everything should be amicably arranged. is it my fault if fortune,
 which has frowned on you, has been kind to me?”
 
“fortune has been kind to you, then? your tilbury, your groom, your
 clothes, are not then hired? good, so much the better,” said
 caderousse, his eyes sparkling with avarice.
 
“oh, you knew that well enough before speaking to me,” said andrea,
 becoming more and more excited. “if i had been wearing handkerchief
 like yours on my head, rags on my back, and worn-out shoes on my feet,
 you would not have known me.”
 
“you wrong me, my boy; now i have found you, nothing prevents my being
 as well-dressed as anyone, knowing, as i do, the goodness of your
 heart. if you have two coats you will give one of them. i used to
 divide my soup and beans with you when you were hungry.”
 
“true,” said andrea.
 
“what an appetite you used to have! is it as good now?”
 
“oh, yes,” replied andrea, laughing.
 
“how did you come to be dining with that prince whose house you have
 just left?”
 
“he is not prince; simply count.”
 
“a count, and rich one too, eh?”
 
“yes; but you had better not have anything to say to him, for is not
 very good-tempered gentleman.”
 
“oh, be easy! i have design upon your count, and you shall have him
 all to yourself. but,” said caderousse, again smiling with the
 disagreeable expression had before assumed, “you must pay for it—you
 understand?”
 
“well, what do you want?”
 
“i think that with hundred francs month——”
 
“well?”
 
“i could live——”
 
“upon hundred francs!”
 
“come—you understand me; but that with——”
 
“with?”
 
“with hundred and fifty francs i should be quite happy.”
 
“here are two hundred,” said andrea; and placed ten gold louis in
 the hand of caderousse.
 
30233m
 


“good!” said caderousse.
 
“apply to the steward on the first day of every month, and you will
 receive the same sum.”
 
“there now, again you degrade me.”
 
“how so?”
 
“by making apply to the servants, when i want to transact business
 with you alone.”
 
“well, be it so, then. take it from then, and so long at least as i
 receive my income, you shall be paid yours.”
 
“come, come; i always said you were fine fellow, and it is blessing
 when good fortune happens to such as you. but tell all about it?”
 
“why do you wish to know?” asked cavalcanti.
 
“what? do you again defy me?”
 
“no; the fact is, i have found my father.”
 
“what? real father?”
 
“yes, so long as pays me——”
 
“you’ll honor and believe him—that’s right. what is his name?”
 
“major cavalcanti.”
 
“is pleased with you?”
 
“so far i have appeared to answer his purpose.”
 
“and who found this father for you?”
 
“the count of monte cristo.”
 
“the man whose house you have just left?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i wish you would try and find situation with him as grandfather,
 since holds the money-chest!”
 
“well, i will mention you to him. meanwhile, what are you going to do?”
 
“i?”
 
“yes, you.”
 
“it is very kind of you to trouble yourself about me.”
 
“since you interest yourself in my affairs, i think it is now my turn
 to ask you some questions.”
 
“ah, true. well; i shall rent room in some respectable house, wear a
 decent coat, shave every day, and go and read the papers in café.
 then, in the evening, i shall go to the theatre; i shall look like some
 retired baker. that is what i want.”
 
“come, if you will only put this scheme into execution, and be steady,
 nothing could be better.”
 
“do you think so, m. bossuet? and you—what will you become? peer of
 france?”
 
“ah,” said andrea, “who knows?”
 
“major cavalcanti is already one, perhaps; but then, hereditary rank is
 abolished.”
 
“no politics, caderousse. and now that you have all you want, and that
 we understand each other, jump down from the tilbury and disappear.”
 
“not at all, my good friend.”
 
“how? not at all?”
 
“why, just think for moment; with this red handkerchief on my head,
 with scarcely any shoes, papers, and ten gold napoleons in my
 pocket, without reckoning what was there before—making in all about two
 hundred francs,—why, i should certainly be arrested at the barriers.
 then, to justify myself, i should say that you gave the money; this
 would cause inquiries, it would be found that i left toulon without
 giving due notice, and i should then be escorted back to the shores of
 the mediterranean. then i should become simply no. 106, and good-bye to
 my dream of resembling the retired baker! no, no, my boy; i prefer
 remaining honorably in the capital.”
 
andrea scowled. certainly, as had himself owned, the reputed of
 major cavalcanti was wilful fellow. drew up for minute, threw a
 rapid glance around him, and then his hand fell instantly into his
 pocket, where it began playing with pistol. but, meanwhile,
 caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off his companion, passed his
 hand behind his back, and opened long spanish knife, which always
 carried with him, to be ready in case of need. the two friends, as we
 see, were worthy of and understood one another. andrea’s hand left his
 pocket inoffensively, and was carried up to the red moustache, which it
 played with for some time.
 
“good caderousse,” said, “how happy you will be.”
 
“i will do my best,” said the innkeeper of the pont du gard, shutting
 up his knife.
 
“well, then, we will go into paris. but how will you pass through the
 barrier without exciting suspicion? it seems to that you are in more
 danger riding than on foot.”
 
“wait,” said caderousse, “we shall see.” then took the greatcoat
 with the large collar, which the groom had left behind in the tilbury,
 and put it on his back; then took off cavalcanti’s hat, which he
 placed upon his own head, and finally assumed the careless attitude
 of servant whose master drives himself.
 
“but, tell me,” said andrea, “am i to remain bareheaded?”
 
“pooh,” said caderousse; “it is so windy that your hat can easily
 appear to have blown off.”
 
“come, come; enough of this,” said cavalcanti.
 
“what are you waiting for?” said caderousse. “i hope i am not the
 cause.”
 
“hush,” said andrea. they passed the barrier without accident. at the
 first cross street andrea stopped his horse, and caderousse leaped out.
 
“well!” said andrea,—“my servant’s coat and my hat?”
 
“ah,” said caderousse, “you would not like to risk taking cold?”
 
“but what am i to do?”
 
“you? oh, you are young while i am beginning to get old. _au revoir_,
 benedetto;” and running into court, disappeared.
 
“alas,” said andrea, sighing, “one cannot be completely happy in this
 world!”
 


chapter 65. conjugal scene
 
at the place louis xv. the three young people separated—that is to say,
 morrel went to the boulevards, château-renaud to the pont la
 révolution, and debray to the quai. most probably morrel and
 château-renaud returned to their “domestic hearths,” as they say in the
 gallery of the chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre of
 the rue richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not the case with
 debray. when reached the wicket of the louvre, turned to the
 left, galloped across the carrousel, passed through the rue saint-roch,
 and, issuing from the rue michodière, arrived at m. danglars’
 door just at the same time that villefort’s landau, after having
 deposited him and his wife at the faubourg saint-honoré, stopped to
 leave the baroness at her own house.
 
debray, with the air of man familiar with the house, entered first
 into the court, threw his bridle into the hands of footman, and
 returned to the door to receive madame danglars, to whom offered his
 arm, to conduct her to her apartments. the gate once closed, and debray
 and the baroness alone in the court, asked:
 
“what was the matter with you, hermine? and why were you so affected at
 that story, or rather fable, which the count related?”
 
“because i have been in such shocking spirits all the evening, my
 friend,” said the baroness.
 
“no, hermine,” replied debray; “you cannot make believe that; on the
 contrary, you were in excellent spirits when you arrived at the
 count’s. m. danglars was disagreeable, certainly, but i know how much
 you care for his ill-humor. someone has vexed you; i will allow one
 to annoy you.”
 
“you are deceived, lucien, i assure you,” replied madame danglars; “and
 what i have told you is really the case, added to the ill-humor you
 remarked, but which i did not think it worth while to allude to.”
 
it was evident that madame danglars was suffering from that nervous
 irritability which women frequently cannot account for even to
 themselves; or that, as debray had guessed, she had experienced some
 secret agitation that she would not acknowledge to anyone. being man
 who knew that the former of these symptoms was one of the inherent
 penalties of womanhood, did not then press his inquiries, but waited
 for more appropriate opportunity when should again interrogate
 her, or receive an avowal _proprio motu_.
 
at the door of her apartment the baroness met mademoiselle cornélie,
 her confidential maid.
 
“what is my daughter doing?” asked madame danglars.
 
“she practiced all the evening, and then went to bed,” replied
 mademoiselle cornélie.
 
“yet i think i hear her piano.”
 
“it is mademoiselle louise d’armilly, who is playing while mademoiselle
 danglars is in bed.”
 
“well,” said madame danglars, “come and undress me.”
 
they entered the bedroom. debray stretched himself upon large couch,
 and madame danglars passed into her dressing-room with mademoiselle
 cornélie.
 
“my dear m. lucien,” said madame danglars through the door, “you are
 always complaining that eugénie will not address word to you.”
 
“madame,” said lucien, playing with little dog, who, recognizing him
 as friend of the house, expected to be caressed, “i am not the only
 one who makes similar complaints, i think i heard morcerf say that he
 could not extract word from his betrothed.”
 
“true,” said madame danglars; “yet i think this will all pass off, and
 that you will one day see her enter your study.”
 
“my study?”
 
“at least that of the minister.”
 
“why so!”
 
“to ask for an engagement at the opera. really, i never saw such an
 infatuation for music; it is quite ridiculous for young lady of
 fashion.”
 
debray smiled. “well,” said he, “let her come, with your consent and
 that of the baron, and we will try and give her an engagement, though
 we are very poor to pay such talent as hers.”
 
“go, cornélie,” said madame danglars, “i do not require you any
 longer.”
 
cornélie obeyed, and the next minute madame danglars left her room in a
 charming loose dress, and came and sat down close to debray. then she
 began thoughtfully to caress the little spaniel. lucien looked at her
 for moment in silence.
 
“come, hermine,” said, after short time, “answer
 candidly,—something vexes you—is it not so?”
 
30239m
 


“nothing,” answered the baroness.
 
and yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and went towards a
 looking-glass. “i am frightful tonight,” she said. debray rose,
 smiling, and was about to contradict the baroness upon this latter
 point, when the door opened suddenly. m. danglars appeared; debray
 reseated himself. at the noise of the door madame danglars turned
 round, and looked upon her husband with an astonishment she took no
 trouble to conceal.
 
“good-evening, madame,” said the banker; “good-evening, m. debray.”
 
probably the baroness thought this unexpected visit signified desire
 to make up for the sharp words had uttered during the day. assuming
 dignified air, she turned round to debray, without answering her
 husband.
 
“read something, m. debray,” she said. debray, who was slightly
 disturbed at this visit, recovered himself when saw the calmness of
 the baroness, and took up book marked by mother-of-pearl knife
 inlaid with gold.
 
“excuse me,” said the banker, “but you will tire yourself, baroness, by
 such late hours, and m. debray lives some distance from here.”
 
debray was petrified, not only to hear danglars speak so calmly and
 politely, but because it was apparent that beneath outward politeness
 there really lurked determined spirit of opposition to anything his
 wife might wish to do. the baroness was also surprised, and showed her
 astonishment by look which would doubtless have had some effect upon
 her husband if had not been intently occupied with the paper, where
 was looking to see the closing stock quotations. the result was,
 that the proud look entirely failed of its purpose.
 
“m. lucien,” said the baroness, “i assure you i have desire to
 sleep, and that i have thousand things to tell you this evening,
 which you must listen to, even though you slept while hearing me.”
 
“i am at your service, madame,” replied lucien coldly.
 
“my dear m. debray,” said the banker, “do not kill yourself tonight
 listening to the follies of madame danglars, for you can hear them as
 well tomorrow; but i claim tonight and will devote it, if you will
 allow me, to talk over some serious matters with my wife.”
 
this time the blow was so well aimed, and hit so directly, that lucien
 and the baroness were staggered, and they interrogated each other with
 their eyes, as if to seek help against this aggression, but the
 irresistible will of the master of the house prevailed, and the husband
 was victorious.
 
“do not think i wish to turn you out, my dear debray,” continued
 danglars; “oh, no, not at all. an unexpected occurrence forces to
 ask my wife to have little conversation with me; it is so rarely i
 make such request, i am sure you cannot grudge it to me.”
 
debray muttered something, bowed and went out, knocking himself against
 the edge of the door, like nathan in _athalie_.
 
“it is extraordinary,” said, when the door was closed behind him,
 “how easily these husbands, whom we ridicule, gain an advantage over
 us.”
 
30241m
 


lucien having left, danglars took his place on the sofa, closed the
 open book, and placing himself in dreadfully dictatorial attitude, he
 began playing with the dog; but the animal, not liking him as well as
 debray, and attempting to bite him, danglars seized him by the skin of
 his neck and threw him upon couch on the other side of the room. the
 animal uttered cry during the transit, but, arrived at its
 destination, it crouched behind the cushions, and stupefied at such
 unusual treatment remained silent and motionless.
 
“do you know, sir,” asked the baroness, “that you are improving?
 generally you are only rude, but tonight you are brutal.”
 
“it is because i am in worse humor than usual,” replied danglars.
 hermine looked at the banker with supreme disdain. these glances
 frequently exasperated the pride of danglars, but this evening took
 notice of them.
 
“and what have i to do with your ill-humor?” said the baroness,
 irritated at the impassibility of her husband; “do these things concern
 me? keep your ill-humor at home in your money boxes, or, since you have
 clerks whom you pay, vent it upon them.”
 
“not so,” replied danglars; “your advice is wrong, so i shall not
 follow it. my money boxes are my pactolus, as, i think, m. demoustier
 says, and i will not retard its course, or disturb its calm. my clerks
 are honest men, who earn my fortune, whom i pay much below their
 deserts, if i may value them according to what they bring in; therefore
 i shall not get into passion with them; those with whom i will be in
 passion are those who eat my dinners, mount my horses, and exhaust my
 fortune.”
 
“and pray who are the persons who exhaust your fortune? explain
 yourself more clearly, i beg, sir.”
 
“oh, make yourself easy!—i am not speaking riddles, and you will soon
 know what i mean. the people who exhaust my fortune are those who draw
 out 700,000 francs in the course of an hour.”
 
“i do not understand you, sir,” said the baroness, trying to disguise
 the agitation of her voice and the flush of her face.
 
“you understand perfectly, on the contrary,” said danglars: “but, if
 you will persist, i will tell you that i have just lost 700,000 francs
 upon the spanish loan.”
 
“and pray,” asked the baroness, “am i responsible for this loss?”
 
“why not?”
 
“is it my fault you have lost 700,000 francs?”
 
“certainly it is not mine.”
 
“once for all, sir,” replied the baroness sharply, “i tell you i will
 not hear cash named; it is style of language i never heard in the
 house of my parents or in that of my first husband.”
 
“oh, i can well believe that, for neither of them was worth penny.”
 
“the better reason for my not being conversant with the slang of the
 bank, which is here dinning in my ears from morning to night; that
 noise of jingling crowns, which are constantly being counted and
 re-counted, is odious to me. i only know one thing i dislike more,
 which is the sound of your voice.”
 
“really?” said danglars. “well, this surprises me, for i thought you
 took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!”
 
30243m
 


“i? what could put such an idea into your head?”
 
“yourself.”
 
“ah?—what next?”
 
“most assuredly.”
 
“i should like to know upon what occasion?”
 
“oh, _mon dieu!_ that is very easily done. last february you were the
 first who told of the haitian funds. you had dreamed that ship had
 entered the harbor at havre, that this ship brought news that a
 payment we had looked upon as lost was going to be made. i know how
 clear-sighted your dreams are; i therefore purchased immediately as
 many shares as i could of the haitian debt, and i gained 400,000 francs
 by it, of which 100,000 have been honestly paid to you. you spent it as
 you pleased; that was your business. in march there was question
 about grant to railway. three companies presented themselves, each
 offering equal securities. you told that your instinct,—and although
 you pretend to know nothing about speculations, i think on the
 contrary, that your comprehension is very clear upon certain
 affairs,—well, you told that your instinct led you to believe the
 grant would be given to the company called the southern. i bought two
 thirds of the shares of that company; as you had foreseen, the shares
 trebled in value, and i picked up million, from which 250,000 francs
 were paid to you for pin-money. how have you spent this 250,000
 francs?—it is business of mine.”
 
“when are you coming to the point?” cried the baroness, shivering with
 anger and impatience.
 
“patience, madame, i am coming to it.”
 
“that’s fortunate.”
 
“in april you went to dine at the minister’s. you heard private
 conversation respecting spanish affairs—on the expulsion of don carlos.
 i bought some spanish shares. the expulsion took place and i pocketed
 600,000 francs the day charles v. repassed the bidassoa. of these
 600,000 francs you took 50,000 crowns. they were yours, you disposed of
 them according to your fancy, and i asked questions; but it is not
 the less true that you have this year received 500,000 livres.”
 
“well, sir, and what then?”
 
“ah, yes, it was just after this that you spoiled everything.”
 
“really, your manner of speaking——”
 
“it expresses my meaning, and that is all i want. well, three days
 after that you talked politics with m. debray, and you fancied from his
 words that don carlos had returned to spain. well, i sold my shares,
 the news got out, and i longer sold—i gave them away, next day i
 find the news was false, and by this false report i have lost 700,000
 francs.”
 
“well?”
 
“well, since i gave you fourth of my gains, i think you owe a
 fourth of my losses; the fourth of 700,000 francs is 175,000 francs.”
 
“what you say is absurd, and i cannot see why m. debray’s name is mixed
 up in this affair.”
 
“because if you do not possess the 175,000 francs i reclaim, you must
 have lent them to your friends, and m. debray is one of your friends.”
 
30245m
 


“for shame!” exclaimed the baroness.
 
“oh, let us have gestures, screams, modern drama, or you will
 oblige to tell you that i see debray leave here, pocketing the whole
 of the 500,000 livres you have handed over to him this year, while he
 smiles to himself, saying that has found what the most skilful
 players have never discovered—that is, roulette where wins without
 playing, and is loser when loses.”
 
the baroness became enraged.
 
“wretch!” she cried, “will you dare to tell you did not know what
 you now reproach with?”
 
“i do not say that i did know it, and i do not say that i did not know
 it. i merely tell you to look into my conduct during the last four
 years that we have ceased to be husband and wife, and see whether it
 has not always been consistent. some time after our rupture, you wished
 to study music, under the celebrated baritone who made such a
 successful appearance at the théâtre italien; at the same time i felt
 inclined to learn dancing of the _danseuse_ who acquired such a
 reputation in london. this cost me, on your account and mine, 100,000
 francs. i said nothing, for we must have peace in the house; and
 100,000 francs for lady and gentleman to be properly instructed in
 music and dancing are not too much. well, you soon become tired of
 singing, and you take fancy to study diplomacy with the minister’s
 secretary. you understand, it signifies nothing to so long as you
 pay for your lessons out of your own cash box. but today i find you are
 drawing on mine, and that your apprenticeship may cost 700,000
 francs per month. stop there, madame, for this cannot last. either the
 diplomatist must give his lessons gratis, and i will tolerate him, or
 must never set his foot again in my house;—do you understand,
 madame?”
 
“oh, this is too much,” cried hermine, choking, “you are worse than
 despicable.”
 
“but,” continued danglars, “i find you did not even pause there——”
 
“insults!”
 
“you are right; let us leave these facts alone, and reason coolly. i
 have never interfered in your affairs excepting for your good; treat me
 in the same way. you say you have nothing to do with my cash box. be it
 so. do as you like with your own, but do not fill or empty mine.
 besides, how do i know that this was not political trick, that the
 minister enraged at seeing in the opposition, and jealous of the
 popular sympathy i excite, has not concerted with m. debray to ruin
 me?”
 
“a probable thing!”
 
“why not? who ever heard of such an occurrence as this?—a false
 telegraphic despatch—it is almost impossible for wrong signals to be
 made as they were in the last two telegrams. it was done on purpose for
 me—i am sure of it.”
 
“sir,” said the baroness humbly, “are you not aware that the man
 employed there was dismissed, that they talked of going to law with
 him, that orders were issued to arrest him and that this order would
 have been put into execution if had not escaped by flight, which
 proves that was either mad or guilty? it was mistake.”
 
“yes, which made fools laugh, which caused the minister to have a
 sleepless night, which has caused the minister’s secretaries to blacken
 several sheets of paper, but which has cost 700,000 francs.”
 
“but, sir,” said hermine suddenly, “if all this is, as you say, caused
 by m. debray, why, instead of going direct to him, do you come and tell
 of it? why, to accuse the man, do you address the woman?”
 
“do i know m. debray?—do i wish to know him?—do i wish to know that he
 gives advice?—do i wish to follow it?—do i speculate? no; you do all
 this, not i.”
 
“still it seems to me, that as you profit by it——”
 
danglars shrugged his shoulders. “foolish creature,” exclaimed.
 “women fancy they have talent because they have managed two or three
 intrigues without being the talk of paris! but know that if you had
 even hidden your irregularities from your husband, who has but the
 commencement of the art—for generally husbands _will_ not see—you would
 then have been but faint imitation of most of your friends among the
 women of the world. but it has not been so with me,—i see, and always
 have seen, during the last sixteen years. you may, perhaps, have hidden
 thought; but not step, not an action, not fault, has escaped me,
 while you flattered yourself upon your address, and firmly believed you
 had deceived me. what has been the result?—that, thanks to my pretended
 ignorance, there is none of your friends, from m. villefort to m.
 debray, who has not trembled before me. there is not one who has not
 treated as the master of the house,—the only title i desire with
 respect to you; there is not one, in fact, who would have dared to
 speak of as i have spoken of them this day. i will allow you to make
 hateful, but i will prevent your rendering ridiculous, and, above
 all, i forbid you to ruin me.”
 
the baroness had been tolerably composed until the name of villefort
 had been pronounced; but then she became pale, and, rising, as if
 touched by spring, she stretched out her hands as though conjuring an
 apparition; she then took two or three steps towards her husband, as
 though to tear the secret from him, of which was ignorant, or which
 withheld from some odious calculation,—odious, as all his
 calculations were.
 
“m. villefort!—what do you mean?”
 
“i mean that m. nargonne, your first husband, being neither a
 philosopher nor banker, or perhaps being both, and seeing there was
 nothing to be got out of king’s attorney, died of grief or anger at
 finding, after an absence of nine months, that you had been _enceinte_
 six. i am brutal,—i not only allow it, but boast of it; it is one of
 the reasons of my success in commercial business. why did kill
 himself instead of you? because had cash to save. my life belongs
 to my cash. m. debray has made lose 700,000 francs; let him bear his
 share of the loss, and we will go on as before; if not, let him become
 bankrupt for the 250,000 livres, and do as all bankrupts do—disappear.
 is charming fellow, i allow, when his news is correct; but when it
 is not, there are fifty others in the world who would do better than
 he.”
 
madame danglars was rooted to the spot; she made violent effort to
 reply to this last attack, but she fell upon chair thinking of
 villefort, of the dinner scene, of the strange series of misfortunes
 which had taken place in her house during the last few days, and
 changed the usual calm of her establishment to scene of scandalous
 debate.
 
danglars did not even look at her, though she did her best to faint. he
 shut the bedroom door after him, without adding another word, and
 returned to his apartments; and when madame danglars recovered from her
 half-fainting condition, she could almost believe that she had had a
 disagreeable dream.
 


chapter 66. matrimonial projects
 
the day following this scene, at the hour debray usually chose to pay a
 visit to madame danglars on his way to his office, his _coupé_ did not
 appear. at this time, that is, about half-past twelve, madame danglars
 ordered her carriage, and went out. danglars, hidden behind curtain,
 watched the departure had been waiting for. gave orders that he
 should be informed as soon as madame danglars appeared; but at two
 o’clock she had not returned. then called for his horses, drove to
 the chamber, and inscribed his name to speak against the budget. from
 twelve to two o’clock danglars had remained in his study, unsealing his
 dispatches, and becoming more and more sad every minute, heaping figure
 upon figure, and receiving, among other visits, one from major
 cavalcanti, who, as stiff and exact as ever, presented himself
 precisely at the hour named the night before, to terminate his business
 with the banker.
 
on leaving the chamber, danglars, who had shown violent marks of
 agitation during the sitting, and been more bitter than ever against
 the ministry, re-entered his carriage, and told the coachman to drive
 to the avenue des champs-Élysées, no. 30.
 
monte cristo was at home; only was engaged with someone and begged
 danglars to wait for moment in the drawing-room. while the banker was
 waiting in the anteroom, the door opened, and man dressed as an abbé
 and doubtless more familiar with the house than was, came in and
 instead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to the farther apartments,
 and disappeared.
 
minute after the door by which the priest had entered reopened, and
 monte cristo appeared.
 
“pardon me,” said he, “my dear baron, but one of my friends, the abbé
 busoni, whom you perhaps saw pass by, has just arrived in paris; not
 having seen him for long time, i could not make up my mind to leave
 him sooner, so i hope this will be sufficient reason for my having made
 you wait.”
 
“nay,” said danglars, “it is my fault; i have chosen my visit at a
 wrong time, and will retire.”
 
“not at all; on the contrary, be seated; but what is the matter with
 you? you look careworn; really, you alarm me. melancholy in a
 capitalist, like the appearance of comet, presages some misfortune to
 the world.”
 
“i have been in ill-luck for several days,” said danglars, “and i have
 heard nothing but bad news.”
 
“ah, indeed?” said monte cristo. “have you had another fall at the
 bourse?”
 
“no; i am safe for few days at least. i am only annoyed about a
 bankrupt of trieste.”
 
“really? does it happen to be jacopo manfredi?”
 
“exactly so. imagine man who has transacted business with for i
 don’t know how long, to the amount of 800,000 or 900,000 francs during
 the year. never mistake or delay—a fellow who paid like prince.
 well, i was million in advance with him, and now my fine jacopo
 manfredi suspends payment!”
 
“really?”
 
“it is an unheard-of fatality. i draw upon him for 600,000 francs, my
 bills are returned unpaid, and, more than that, i hold bills of
 exchange signed by him to the value of 400,000 francs, payable at his
 correspondent’s in paris at the end of this month. today is the 30th. i
 present them; but my correspondent has disappeared. this, with my
 spanish affairs, made pretty end to the month.”
 
“then you really lost by that affair in spain?”
 
“yes; only 700,000 francs out of my cash box—nothing more!”
 
“why, how could you make such mistake—such an old stager?”
 
“oh, it is all my wife’s fault. she dreamed don carlos had returned to
 spain; she believes in dreams. it is magnetism, she says, and when she
 dreams thing it is sure to happen, she assures me. on this conviction
 i allow her to speculate, she having her bank and her stockbroker; she
 speculated and lost. it is true she speculates with her own money, not
 mine; nevertheless, you can understand that when 700,000 francs leave
 the wife’s pocket, the husband always finds it out. but do you mean to
 say you have not heard of this? why, the thing has made tremendous
 noise.”
 
“yes, i heard it spoken of, but i did not know the details, and then no
 one can be more ignorant than i am of the affairs in the bourse.”
 
30251m
 


“then you do not speculate?”
 
“i?—how could i speculate when i already have so much trouble in
 regulating my income? i should be obliged, besides my steward, to keep
 clerk and boy. but touching these spanish affairs, i think that the
 baroness did not dream the whole of the don carlos matter. the papers
 said something about it, did they not?”
 
“then you believe the papers?”
 
“i?—not the least in the world; only i fancied that the honest
 _messager_ was an exception to the rule, and that it only announced
 telegraphic despatches.”
 
“well, that’s what puzzles me,” replied danglars; “the news of the
 return of don carlos was brought by telegraph.”
 
“so that,” said monte cristo, “you have lost nearly 1,700,000 francs
 this month.”
 
“not nearly, indeed; that is exactly my loss.”
 
“_diable!_” said monte cristo compassionately, “it is hard blow for a
 third-rate fortune.”
 
“third-rate,” said danglars, rather humble, “what do you mean by that?”
 
“certainly,” continued monte cristo, “i make three assortments in
 fortune—first-rate, second-rate, and third-rate fortunes. i call those
 first-rate which are composed of treasures one possesses under one’s
 hand, such as mines, lands, and funded property, in such states as
 france, austria, and england, provided these treasures and property
 form total of about hundred millions; i call those second-rate
 fortunes, that are gained by manufacturing enterprises, joint-stock
 companies, viceroyalties, and principalities, not drawing more than
 1,500,000 francs, the whole forming capital of about fifty millions;
 finally, i call those third-rate fortunes, which are composed of a
 fluctuating capital, dependent upon the will of others, or upon chances
 which bankruptcy involves or false telegram shakes, such as banks,
 speculations of the day—in fact, all operations under the influence of
 greater or less mischances, the whole bringing in real or fictitious
 capital of about fifteen millions. i think this is about your position,
 is it not?”
 
“confound it, yes!” replied danglars.
 
“the result, then, of six more such months as this would be to reduce
 the third-rate house to despair.”
 
“oh,” said danglars, becoming very pale, how you are running on!”
 
“let us imagine seven such months,” continued monte cristo, in the same
 tone. “tell me, have you ever thought that seven times 1,700,000 francs
 make nearly twelve millions? no, you have not;—well, you are right, for
 if you indulged in such reflections, you would never risk your
 principal, which is to the speculator what the skin is to civilized
 man. we have our clothes, some more splendid than others,—this is our
 credit; but when man dies has only his skin; in the same way, on
 retiring from business, you have nothing but your real principal of
 about five or six millions, at the most; for third-rate fortunes are
 never more than fourth of what they appear to be, like the locomotive
 on railway, the size of which is magnified by the smoke and steam
 surrounding it. well, out of the five or six millions which form your
 real capital, you have just lost nearly two millions, which must, of
 course, in the same degree diminish your credit and fictitious fortune;
 to follow out my simile, your skin has been opened by bleeding, and
 this if repeated three or four times will cause death—so pay attention
 to it, my dear monsieur danglars. do you want money? do you wish to
 lend you some?”
 
30253m
 


“what bad calculator you are!” exclaimed danglars, calling to his
 assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. “i have made money at
 the same time by speculations which have succeeded. i have made up the
 loss of blood by nutrition. i lost battle in spain, i have been
 defeated in trieste, but my naval army in india will have taken some
 galleons, and my mexican pioneers will have discovered some mine.”
 
“very good, very good! but the wound remains and will reopen at the
 first loss.”
 
“no, for i am only embarked in certainties,” replied danglars, with the
 air of mountebank sounding his own praises; “to involve me, three
 governments must crumble to dust.”
 
“well, such things have been.”
 
“that there should be famine!”
 
“recollect the seven fat and the seven lean kine.”
 
“or, that the should become dry, as in the days of pharaoh, and
 even then my vessels would become caravans.”
 
“so much the better. i congratulate you, my dear m. danglars,” said
 monte cristo; “i see i was deceived, and that you belong to the class
 of second-rate fortunes.”
 
“i think i may aspire to that honor,” said danglars with smile, which
 reminded monte cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fond
 of daubing into their pictures of ruins. “but, while we are speaking of
 business,” danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing
 the subject, “tell what i am to do for m. cavalcanti.”
 
“give him money, if is recommended to you, and the recommendation
 seems good.”
 
“excellent; presented himself this morning with bond of 40,000
 francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by busoni, and returned by you
 to me, with your endorsement—of course, i immediately counted him over
 the forty bank-notes.”
 
monte cristo nodded his head in token of assent.
 
“but that is not all,” continued danglars; “he has opened an account
 with my house for his son.”
 
“may i ask how much allows the young man?”
 
“five thousand francs per month.”
 
“sixty thousand francs per year. i thought i was right in believing
 that cavalcanti to be stingy fellow. how can young man live upon
 5,000 francs month?”
 
“but you understand that if the young man should want few thousands
 more——”
 
“do not advance it; the father will never repay it. you do not know
 these ultramontane millionaires; they are regular misers. and by whom
 were they recommended to you?”
 
“oh, by the house of fenzi, one of the best in florence.”
 
“i do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mind you hold
 to the terms of the agreement.”
 
“would you not trust the cavalcanti?”
 
“i? oh, i would advance ten millions on his signature. i was only
 speaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes we were mentioning
 just now.”
 
“and with all this, how unassuming is! i should never have taken him
 for anything more than mere major.”
 
“and you would have flattered him, for certainly, as you say, has no
 manner. the first time i saw him appeared to like an old
 lieutenant who had grown mouldy under his epaulets. but all the
 italians are the same; they are like old jews when they are not
 glittering in oriental splendor.”
 
“the young man is better,” said danglars.
 
“yes; little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, appeared
 tolerable. i was uneasy about him.”
 
“why?”
 
“because you met him at my house, just after his introduction into the
 world, as they told me. has been travelling with very severe
 tutor, and had never been to paris before.”
 
“ah, i believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they not?” asked
 danglars carelessly; “they like to unite their fortunes.”
 
“it is usual, certainly; but cavalcanti is an original who does nothing
 like other people. i cannot help thinking that has brought his son
 to france to choose wife.”
 
“do you think so?”
 
“i am sure of it.”
 
“and you have heard his fortune mentioned?”
 
“nothing else was talked of; only some said was worth millions, and
 others that did not possess farthing.”
 
“and what is your opinion?”
 
“i ought not to influence you, because it is only my own personal
 impression.”
 
“well, and it is that——”
 
“my opinion is, that all these old _podestàs_, these ancient
 _condottieri_,—for the cavalcanti have commanded armies and governed
 provinces,—my opinion, i say, is, that they have buried their millions
 in corners, the secret of which they have transmitted only to their
 eldest sons, who have done the same from generation to generation; and
 the proof of this is seen in their yellow and dry appearance, like the
 florins of the republic, which, from being constantly gazed upon, have
 become reflected in them.”
 
“certainly,” said danglars, “and this is further supported by the fact
 of their not possessing an inch of land.”
 
“very little, at least; i know of none which cavalcanti possesses,
 excepting his palace in lucca.”
 
“ah, has palace?” said danglars, laughing; “come, that is
 something.”
 
“yes; and more than that, lets it to the minister of finance while
 lives in simple house. oh, as i told you before, i think the old
 fellow is very close.”
 
“come, you do not flatter him.”
 
“i scarcely know him; i think i have seen him three times in my life;
 all i know relating to him is through busoni and himself. was
 telling this morning that, tired of letting his property lie dormant
 in italy, which is dead nation, wished to find method, either in
 france or england, of multiplying his millions, but remember, that
 though i place great confidence in busoni, i am not responsible for
 this.”
 
“never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sent me. it is a
 fine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and my cashier was quite proud of
 it when i explained to him who the cavalcanti were. by the way, this is
 merely simple question, when this sort of people marry their sons, do
 they give them any fortune?”
 
“oh, that depends upon circumstances. i know an italian prince, rich as
 gold mine, one of the noblest families in tuscany, who, when his sons
 married according to his wish, gave them millions; and when they
 married against his consent, merely allowed them thirty crowns month.
 should andrea marry according to his father’s views, will, perhaps,
 give him one, two, or three millions. for example, supposing it were
 the daughter of banker, might take an interest in the house of the
 father-in-law of his son; then again, if disliked his choice, the
 major takes the key, double-locks his coffer, and master andrea would
 be obliged to live like the sons of parisian family, by shuffling
 cards or rattling the dice.”
 
“ah, that boy will find out some bavarian or peruvian princess; will
 want crown, an dorado, and potosí.”
 
“no; these grand lords on the other side of the alps frequently marry
 into plain families; like jupiter, they like to cross the race. but do
 you wish to marry andrea, my dear m. danglars, that you are asking so
 many questions?”
 
“_ma foi_,” said danglars, “it would not be bad speculation, i fancy,
 and you know i am speculator.”
 
“you are not thinking of mademoiselle danglars, i hope; you would not
 like poor andrea to have his throat cut by albert?”
 
“albert,” repeated danglars, shrugging his shoulders; “ah, well; he
 would care very little about it, i think.”
 
“but is betrothed to your daughter, i believe?”
 
“well, m. morcerf and i have talked about this marriage, but madame
 morcerf and albert——”
 
“you do not mean to say that it would not be good match?”
 
“indeed, i imagine that mademoiselle danglars is as good as m. de
 morcerf.”
 
“mademoiselle danglars’ fortune will be great, doubt, especially if
 the telegraph should not make any more mistakes.”
 
“oh, i do not mean her fortune only; but tell me——”
 
“what?”
 
“why did you not invite m. and madame morcerf to your dinner?”
 
“i did so, but excused himself on account of madame morcerf being
 obliged to go to dieppe for the benefit of air.”
 
“yes, yes,” said danglars, laughing, “it would do her great deal of
 good.”
 
“why so?”
 
“because it is the air she always breathed in her youth.”
 
monte cristo took notice of this ill-natured remark.
 
“but still, if albert be not so rich as mademoiselle danglars,” said
 the count, “you must allow that has fine name?”
 
“so has; but i like mine as well.”
 
“certainly; your name is popular, and does honor to the title they have
 adorned it with; but you are too intelligent not to know that according
 to prejudice, too firmly rooted to be exterminated, nobility which
 dates back five centuries is worth more than one that can only reckon
 twenty years.”
 
“and for this very reason,” said danglars with smile, which tried
 to make sardonic, “i prefer m. andrea cavalcanti to m. albert de
 morcerf.”
 
“still, i should not think the morcerfs would yield to the cavalcanti?”
 
“the morcerfs!—stay, my dear count,” said danglars; “you are man of
 the world, are you not?”
 
“i think so.”
 
“and you understand heraldry?”
 
“a little.”
 
“well, look at my coat-of-arms, it is worth more than morcerf’s.”
 
“why so?”
 
“because, though i am not baron by birth, my real name is, at least,
 danglars.”
 
“well, what then?”
 
“while his name is not morcerf.”
 
“how?—not morcerf?”
 
“not the least in the world.”
 
“go on.”
 
“i have been made baron, so that i actually am one; made himself a
 count, so that is not one at all.”
 
“impossible!”
 
“listen my dear count; m. morcerf has been my friend, or rather my
 acquaintance, during the last thirty years. you know i have made the
 most of my arms, though i never forgot my origin.”
 
“a proof of great humility or great pride,” said monte cristo.
 
“well, when i was clerk, morcerf was mere fisherman.”
 
“and then was called——”
 
“fernand.”
 
“only fernand?”
 
“fernand mondego.”
 
“you are sure?”
 
“_pardieu!_ i have bought enough fish of him to know his name.”
 
“then, why did you think of giving your daughter to him?”
 
“because fernand and danglars, being both parvenus, both having become
 noble, both rich, are about equal in worth, excepting that there have
 been certain things mentioned of him that were never said of me.”
 
“what?”
 
“oh, nothing!”
 
“ah, yes; what you tell recalls to mind something about the name of
 fernand mondego. i have heard that name in greece.”
 
“in conjunction with the affairs of ali pasha?”
 
“exactly so.”
 
“this is the mystery,” said danglars. “i acknowledge i would have given
 anything to find it out.”
 
“it would be very easy if you much wished it?”
 
“how so?”
 
“probably you have some correspondent in greece?”
 
“i should think so.”
 
“at yanina?”
 
“everywhere.”
 
“well, write to your correspondent in yanina, and ask him what part was
 played by frenchman named fernand mondego in the catastrophe of ali
 tepelini.”
 
“you are right,” exclaimed danglars, rising quickly, “i will write
 today.”
 
“do so.”
 
“i will.”
 
30259m
 


“and if you should hear of anything very scandalous——”
 
“i will communicate it to you.”
 
“you will oblige me.”
 
danglars rushed out of the room, and made but one leap into his
 _coupé_.
 


chapter 67. the office of the king’s attorney
 
let us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullest speed, and
 follow madame danglars in her morning excursion. we have said that at
 half-past twelve o’clock madame danglars had ordered her horses, and
 had left home in the carriage. she directed her course towards the
 faubourg saint germain, went down the rue mazarine, and stopped at the
 passage du pont-neuf. she descended, and went through the passage. she
 was very plainly dressed, as would be the case with woman of taste
 walking in the morning. at the rue guénégaud she called cab, and
 directed the driver to go to the rue harlay. as soon as she was
 seated in the vehicle, she drew from her pocket very thick black
 veil, which she tied on to her straw bonnet. she then replaced the
 bonnet, and saw with pleasure, in little pocket-mirror, that her
 white complexion and brilliant eyes were alone visible. the cab crossed
 the pont-neuf and entered the rue harlay by the place dauphine; the
 driver was paid as the door opened, and stepping lightly up the stairs
 madame danglars soon reached the salle des pas-perdus.
 
there was great deal going on that morning, and many business-like
 persons at the palais; business-like persons pay very little attention
 to women, and madame danglars crossed the hall without exciting any
 more attention than any other woman calling upon her lawyer.
 
there was great press of people in m. villefort’s antechamber, but
 madame danglars had occasion even to pronounce her name. the instant
 she appeared the door-keeper rose, came to her, and asked her whether
 she was not the person with whom the procureur had made an appointment;
 and on her affirmative answer being given, conducted her by a
 private passage to m. villefort’s office.
 
the magistrate was seated in an armchair, writing, with his back
 towards the door; did not move as heard it open, and the
 door-keeper pronounce the words, “walk in, madame,” and then reclose
 it; but sooner had the man’s footsteps ceased, than started up,
 drew the bolts, closed the curtains, and examined every corner of the
 room. then, when had assured himself that could neither be seen
 nor heard, and was consequently relieved of doubts, said:
 
“thanks, madame,—thanks for your punctuality;” and offered chair
 to madame danglars, which she accepted, for her heart beat so violently
 that she felt nearly suffocated.
 
30261m
 


“it is long time, madame,” said the procureur, describing a
 half-circle with his chair, so as to place himself exactly opposite to
 madame danglars,—“it is long time since i had the pleasure of
 speaking alone with you, and i regret that we have only now met to
 enter upon painful conversation.”
 
“nevertheless, sir, you see i have answered your first appeal, although
 certainly the conversation must be much more painful for than for
 you.” villefort smiled bitterly.
 
“it is true, then,” said, rather uttering his thoughts aloud than
 addressing his companion,—“it is true, then, that all our actions leave
 their traces—some sad, others bright—on our paths; it is true that
 every step in our lives is like the course of an insect on the
 sands;—it leaves its track! alas, to many the path is traced by tears.”
 
“sir,” said madame danglars, “you can feel for my emotion, can you not?
 spare me, then, i beseech you. when i look at this room,—whence so many
 guilty creatures have departed, trembling and ashamed, when i look at
 that chair before which i now sit trembling and ashamed,—oh, it
 requires all my reason to convince that i am not very guilty woman
 and you menacing judge.”
 
villefort dropped his head and sighed.
 
“and i,” said, “i feel that my place is not in the judge’s seat, but
 on the prisoner’s bench.”
 
30263m
 


“you?” said madame danglars.
 
“yes, i.”
 
“i think, sir, you exaggerate your situation,” said madame danglars,
 whose beautiful eyes sparkled for moment. “the paths of which you
 were just speaking have been traced by all young men of ardent
 imaginations. besides the pleasure, there is always remorse from the
 indulgence of our passions, and, after all, what have you men to fear
 from all this? the world excuses, and notoriety ennobles you.”
 
“madame,” replied villefort, “you know that i am hypocrite, or, at
 least, that i never deceive without reason. if my brow be severe, it
 is because many misfortunes have clouded it; if my heart be petrified,
 it is that it might sustain the blows it has received. i was not so in
 my youth, i was not so on the night of the betrothal, when we were all
 seated around table in the rue du cours at marseilles. but since then
 everything has changed in and about me; i am accustomed to brave
 difficulties, and, in the conflict to crush those who, by their own
 free will, or by chance, voluntarily or involuntarily, interfere with
 in my career. it is generally the case that what we most ardently
 desire is as ardently withheld from us by those who wish to obtain it,
 or from whom we attempt to snatch it. thus, the greater number of a
 man’s errors come before him disguised under the specious form of
 necessity; then, after error has been committed in moment of
 excitement, of delirium, or of fear, we see that we might have avoided
 and escaped it. the means we might have used, which we in our blindness
 could not see, then seem simple and easy, and we say, ‘why did i not do
 this, instead of that?’ women, on the contrary, are rarely tormented
 with remorse; for the decision does not come from you,—your misfortunes
 are generally imposed upon you, and your faults the results of others’
 crimes.”
 
“in any case, sir, you will allow,” replied madame danglars, “that,
 even if the fault were alone mine, i last night received severe
 punishment for it.”
 
“poor thing,” said villefort, pressing her hand, “it was too severe for
 your strength, for you were twice overwhelmed, and yet——”
 
“well?”
 
“well, i must tell you. collect all your courage, for you have not yet
 heard all.”
 
“ah,” exclaimed madame danglars, alarmed, “what is there more to hear?”
 
“you only look back to the past, and it is, indeed, bad enough. well,
 picture to yourself future more gloomy still—certainly frightful,
 perhaps sanguinary!”
 
the baroness knew how calm villefort naturally was, and his present
 excitement frightened her so much that she opened her mouth to scream,
 but the sound died in her throat.
 
“how has this terrible past been recalled?” cried villefort; “how is it
 that it has escaped from the depths of the tomb and the recesses of our
 hearts, where it was buried, to visit us now, like phantom, whitening
 our cheeks and flushing our brows with shame?”
 
“alas,” said hermine, “doubtless it is chance.”
 
“chance?” replied villefort; “no, no, madame, there is such thing as
 chance.”
 
“oh, yes; has not fatal chance revealed all this? was it not by
 chance the count of monte cristo bought that house? was it not by
 chance caused the earth to be dug up? is it not by chance that the
 unfortunate child was disinterred under the trees?—that poor innocent
 offspring of mine, which i never even kissed, but for whom i wept many,
 many tears. ah, my heart clung to the count when mentioned the dear
 spoil found beneath the flowers.”
 
“well, no, madame,—this is the terrible news i have to tell you,” said
 villefort in hollow voice—“no, nothing was found beneath the flowers;
 there was child disinterred—no. you must not weep, no, you must not
 groan, you must tremble!”
 
“what can you mean?” asked madame danglars, shuddering.
 
“i mean that m. monte cristo, digging underneath these trees, found
 neither skeleton nor chest, because neither of them was there!”
 
“neither of them there?” repeated madame danglars, her staring,
 wide-open eyes expressing her alarm. “neither of them there!” she again
 said, as though striving to impress herself with the meaning of the
 words which escaped her.
 
“no,” said villefort, burying his face in his hands, “no, hundred
 times no!”
 
“then you did not bury the poor child there, sir? why did you deceive
 me? where did you place it? tell me—where?”
 
“there! but listen to me—listen—and you will pity who has for twenty
 years alone borne the heavy burden of grief i am about to reveal,
 without casting the least portion upon you.”
 
“oh, you frighten me! but speak; i will listen.”
 
“you recollect that sad night, when you were half-expiring on that bed
 in the red damask room, while i, scarcely less agitated than you,
 awaited your delivery. the child was born, was given to me—motionless,
 breathless, voiceless; we thought it dead.”
 
madame danglars moved rapidly, as though she would spring from her
 chair, but villefort stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore
 her attention.
 
“we thought it dead,” repeated; “i placed it in the chest, which was
 to take the place of coffin; i descended to the garden, i dug hole,
 and then flung it down in haste. scarcely had i covered it with earth,
 when the arm of the corsican was stretched towards me; i saw shadow
 rise, and, at the same time, flash of light. i felt pain; i wished to
 cry out, but an icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled my voice; i
 fell lifeless, and fancied myself killed. never shall i forget your
 sublime courage, when, having returned to consciousness, i dragged
 myself to the foot of the stairs, and you, almost dying yourself, came
 to meet me. we were obliged to keep silent upon the dreadful
 catastrophe. you had the fortitude to regain the house, assisted by
 your nurse. duel was the pretext for my wound. though we scarcely
 expected it, our secret remained in our own keeping alone. i was taken
 to versailles; for three months i struggled with death; at last, as i
 seemed to cling to life, i was ordered to the south. four men carried
 from paris to châlons, walking six leagues day; madame de
 villefort followed the litter in her carriage. at châlons i was put
 upon the saône, thence i passed on to the rhône, whence i descended,
 merely with the current, to arles; at arles i was again placed on my
 litter, and continued my journey to marseilles. my recovery lasted six
 months. i never heard you mentioned, and i did not dare inquire for
 you. when i returned to paris, i learned that you, the widow of m. de
 nargonne, had married m. danglars.
 
“what was the subject of my thoughts from the time consciousness
 returned to me? always the same—always the child’s corpse, coming every
 night in my dreams, rising from the earth, and hovering over the grave
 with menacing look and gesture. i inquired immediately on my return to
 paris; the house had not been inhabited since we left it, but it had
 just been let for nine years. i found the tenant. i pretended that i
 disliked the idea that house belonging to my wife’s father and mother
 should pass into the hands of strangers. i offered to pay them for
 cancelling the lease; they demanded 6,000 francs. i would have given
 10,000—i would have given 20,000. i had the money with me; i made the
 tenant sign the deed of resilition, and when i had obtained what i so
 much wanted, i galloped to auteuil. one had entered the house since
 i had left it.
 
“it was five o’clock in the afternoon; i ascended into the red room,
 and waited for night. there all the thoughts which had disturbed me
 during my year of constant agony came back with double force. the
 corsican, who had declared the vendetta against me, who had followed me
 from nîmes to paris, who had hid himself in the garden, who had struck
 me, had seen dig the grave, had seen inter the child,—he might
 become acquainted with your person,—nay, might even then have known
 it. would not one day make you pay for keeping this terrible secret?
 would it not be sweet revenge for him when found that i had not
 died from the blow of his dagger? it was therefore necessary, before
 everything else, and at all risks, that i should cause all traces of
 the past to disappear—that i should destroy every material vestige; too
 much reality would always remain in my recollection. it was for this i
 had annulled the lease—it was for this i had come—it was for this i was
 waiting.
 
“night arrived; i allowed it to become quite dark. i was without a
 light in that room; when the wind shook all the doors, behind which i
 continually expected to see some spy concealed, i trembled. i seemed
 everywhere to hear your moans behind in the bed, and i dared not
 turn around. my heart beat so violently that i feared my wound would
 open. at length, one by one, all the noises in the neighborhood ceased.
 i understood that i had nothing to fear, that i should neither be seen
 nor heard, so i decided upon descending to the garden.
 
“listen, hermine; i consider myself as brave as most men, but when i
 drew from my breast the little key of the staircase, which i had found
 in my coat—that little key we both used to cherish so much, which you
 wished to have fastened to golden ring—when i opened the door, and
 saw the pale moon shedding long stream of white light on the spiral
 staircase like spectre, i leaned against the wall, and nearly
 shrieked. i seemed to be going mad. at last i mastered my agitation. i
 descended the staircase step by step; the only thing i could not
 conquer was strange trembling in my knees. i grasped the railings; if
 i had relaxed my hold for moment, i should have fallen. i reached the
 lower door. outside this door spade was placed against the wall; i
 took it, and advanced towards the thicket. i had provided myself with a
 dark lantern. in the middle of the lawn i stopped to light it, then i
 continued my path.
 
“it was the end of november, all the verdure of the garden had
 disappeared, the trees were nothing more than skeletons with their long
 bony arms, and the dead leaves sounded on the gravel under my feet. my
 terror overcame to such degree as i approached the thicket, that i
 took pistol from my pocket and armed myself. i fancied continually
 that i saw the figure of the corsican between the branches. i examined
 the thicket with my dark lantern; it was empty. i looked carefully
 around; i was indeed alone,—no noise disturbed the silence but the owl,
 whose piercing cry seemed to be calling up the phantoms of the night. i
 tied my lantern to forked branch i had noticed year before at the
 precise spot where i stopped to dig the hole.
 
“the grass had grown very thickly there during the summer, and when
 autumn arrived one had been there to mow it. still one place where
 the grass was thin attracted my attention; it evidently was there i had
 turned up the ground. i went to work. the hour, then, for which i had
 been waiting during the last year had at length arrived. how i worked,
 how i hoped, how i struck every piece of turf, thinking to find some
 resistance to my spade! but no, i found nothing, though i had made a
 hole twice as large as the first. i thought i had been deceived—had
 mistaken the spot. i turned around, i looked at the trees, i tried to
 recall the details which had struck at the time. cold, sharp wind
 whistled through the leafless branches, and yet the drops fell from my
 forehead. i recollected that i was stabbed just as i was trampling the
 ground to fill up the hole; while doing so i had leaned against a
 laburnum; behind was an artificial rockery, intended to serve as a
 resting-place for persons walking in the garden; in falling, my hand,
 relaxing its hold of the laburnum, felt the coldness of the stone. on
 my right i saw the tree, behind the rock. i stood in the same
 attitude, and threw myself down. i rose, and again began digging and
 enlarging the hole; still i found nothing, nothing—the chest was no
 longer there!”
 
30269m
 


“the chest longer there?” murmured madame danglars, choking with
 fear.
 
“think not i contented myself with this one effort,” continued
 villefort. “no; i searched the whole thicket. i thought the assassin,
 having discovered the chest, and supposing it to be treasure, had
 intended carrying it off, but, perceiving his error, had dug another
 hole, and deposited it there; but i could find nothing. then the idea
 struck that had not taken these precautions, and had simply
 thrown it in corner. in the last case i must wait for daylight to
 renew my search. i remained in the room and waited.”
 
“oh, heaven!”
 
30271m
 


when daylight dawned i went down again. my first visit was to the
 thicket. i hoped to find some traces which had escaped in the
 darkness. i had turned up the earth over surface of more than twenty
 feet square, and depth of two feet. laborer would not have done in
 day what occupied an hour. but i could find nothing—absolutely
 nothing. then i renewed the search. supposing it had been thrown aside,
 it would probably be on the path which led to the little gate; but this
 examination was as useless as the first, and with bursting heart i
 returned to the thicket, which now contained hope for me.”
 
“oh,” cried madame danglars, “it was enough to drive you mad!”
 
“i hoped for moment that it might,” said villefort; “but that
 happiness was denied me. however, recovering my strength and my ideas,
 ‘why,’ said i, ‘should that man have carried away the corpse?’”
 
“but you said,” replied madame danglars, “he would require it as a
 proof.”
 
“ah, no, madame, that could not be. dead bodies are not kept year;
 they are shown to magistrate, and the evidence is taken. now, nothing
 of the kind has happened.”
 
“what then?” asked hermine, trembling violently.
 
“something more terrible, more fatal, more alarming for us—the child
 was, perhaps, alive, and the assassin may have saved it!”
 
madame danglars uttered piercing cry, and, seizing villefort’s hands,
 exclaimed, “my child was alive?” said she; “you buried my child alive?
 you were not certain my child was dead, and you buried it? ah——”
 
madame danglars had risen, and stood before the procureur, whose hands
 she wrung in her feeble grasp.
 
“i know not; i merely suppose so, as i might suppose anything else,”
 replied villefort with look so fixed, it indicated that his powerful
 mind was on the verge of despair and madness.
 
“ah, my child, my poor child!” cried the baroness, falling on her
 chair, and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief. villefort, becoming
 somewhat reassured, perceived that to avert the maternal storm
 gathering over his head, must inspire madame danglars with the
 terror felt.
 
“you understand, then, that if it were so,” said he, rising in his
 turn, and approaching the baroness, to speak to her in lower tone,
 “we are lost. this child lives, and someone knows it lives—someone is
 in possession of our secret; and since monte cristo speaks before us of
 child disinterred, when that child could not be found, it is who
 is in possession of our secret.”
 
“just god, avenging god!” murmured madame danglars.
 
villefort’s only answer was stifled groan.
 
“but the child—the child, sir?” repeated the agitated mother.
 
“how i have searched for him,” replied villefort, wringing his hands;
 “how i have called him in my long sleepless nights; how i have longed
 for royal wealth to purchase million of secrets from million of
 men, and to find mine among them! at last, one day, when for the
 hundredth time i took up my spade, i asked myself again and again what
 the corsican could have done with the child. child encumbers a
 fugitive; perhaps, on perceiving it was still alive, had thrown it
 into the river.”
 
“impossible!” cried madame danglars: “a man may murder another out of
 revenge, but would not deliberately drown child.”
 
“perhaps,” continued villefort, “he had put it in the foundling
 hospital.”
 
“oh, yes, yes,” cried the baroness; “my child is there!”
 
“i ran to the hospital, and learned that the same night—the night of
 the 20th of september—a child had been brought there, wrapped in part
 of fine linen napkin, purposely torn in half. this portion of the
 napkin was marked with half baron’s crown, and the letter h.”
 
“truly, truly,” said madame danglars, “all my linen is marked thus;
 monsieur nargonne was baron, and my name is hermine. thank god, my
 child was not then dead!”
 
“no, it was not dead.”
 
“and you can tell so without fearing to make die of joy? where is
 the child?”
 
villefort shrugged his shoulders.
 
“do i know?” said he; “and do you believe that if i knew i would relate
 to you all its trials and all its adventures as would dramatist or a
 novel writer? alas, no, i know not. woman, about six months after,
 came to claim it with the other half of the napkin. this woman gave all
 the requisite particulars, and it was intrusted to her.”
 
“but you should have inquired for the woman; you should have traced
 her.”
 
“and what do you think i did? i feigned criminal process, and
 employed all the most acute bloodhounds and skilful agents in search of
 her. they traced her to châlons, and there they lost her.”
 
“they lost her?”
 
“yes, forever.”
 
madame danglars had listened to this recital with sigh, tear, or a
 shriek for every detail. “and this is all?” said she; “and you stopped
 there?”
 
“oh, no,” said villefort; “i never ceased to search and to inquire.
 however, the last two or three years i had allowed myself some respite.
 but now i will begin with more perseverance and fury than ever, since
 fear urges me, not my conscience.”
 
“but,” replied madame danglars, “the count of monte cristo can know
 nothing, or would not seek our society as does.”
 
“oh, the wickedness of man is very great,” said villefort, “since it
 surpasses the goodness of god. did you observe that man’s eyes while he
 was speaking to us?”
 
“no.”
 
“but have you ever watched him carefully?”
 
“doubtless is capricious, but that is all; one thing alone struck
 me,—of all the exquisite things placed before us, touched
 nothing. i might have suspected was poisoning us.”
 
“and you see you would have been deceived.”
 
“yes, doubtless.”
 
“but believe me, that man has other projects. for that reason i wished
 to see you, to speak to you, to warn you against everyone, but
 especially against him. tell me,” cried villefort, fixing his eyes more
 steadfastly on her than had ever done before, “did you ever reveal
 to anyone our connection?”
 
“never, to anyone.”
 
“you understand me,” replied villefort, affectionately; “when i say
 anyone,—pardon my urgency,—to anyone living i mean?”
 
“yes, yes, i understand very well,” ejaculated the baroness; “never, i
 swear to you.”
 
“were you ever in the habit of writing in the evening what had
 transpired in the morning? do you keep journal?”
 
“no, my life has been passed in frivolity; i wish to forget it myself.”
 
“do you talk in your sleep?”
 
30275m
 


“i sleep soundly, like child; do you not remember?”
 
the color mounted to the baroness’s face, and villefort turned awfully
 pale.
 
“it is true,” said he, in so low tone that could hardly be heard.
 
“well?” said the baroness.
 
“well, i understand what i now have to do,” replied villefort. “in less
 than one week from this time i will ascertain who this m. monte
 cristo is, whence comes, where goes, and why speaks in our
 presence of children that have been disinterred in garden.”
 
villefort pronounced these words with an accent which would have made
 the count shudder had heard him. then pressed the hand the
 baroness reluctantly gave him, and led her respectfully back to the
 door. madame danglars returned in another cab to the passage, on the
 other side of which she found her carriage, and her coachman sleeping
 peacefully on his box while waiting for her.
 


chapter 68. summer ball
 
the same day during the interview between madame danglars and the
 procureur, travelling-carriage entered the rue du helder, passed
 through the gateway of no. 27, and stopped in the yard. in moment the
 door was opened, and madame morcerf alighted, leaning on her son’s
 arm. albert soon left her, ordered his horses, and having arranged his
 toilet, drove to the champs-Élysées, to the house of monte cristo.
 
the count received him with his habitual smile. it was strange thing
 that one ever appeared to advance step in that man’s favor. those
 who would, as it were, force passage to his heart, found an
 impassable barrier. morcerf, who ran towards him with open arms, was
 chilled as drew near, in spite of the friendly smile, and simply
 held out his hand. monte cristo shook it coldly, according to his
 invariable practice.
 
“here i am, dear count.”
 
“welcome home again.”
 
“i arrived an hour since.”
 
“from dieppe?”
 
“no, from tréport.”
 
“indeed?”
 
“and i have come at once to see you.”
 
“that is extremely kind of you,” said monte cristo with tone of
 perfect indifference.
 
“and what is the news?”
 
“you should not ask stranger, foreigner, for news.”
 
“i know it, but in asking for news, i mean, have you done anything for
 me?”
 
“had you commissioned me?” said monte cristo, feigning uneasiness.
 
“come, come,” said albert, “do not assume so much indifference. it is
 said, sympathy travels rapidly, and when at tréport, i felt the
 electric shock; you have either been working for or thinking of me.”
 
“possibly,” said monte cristo, “i have indeed thought of you, but the
 magnetic wire i was guiding acted, indeed, without my knowledge.”
 
30277m
 


“indeed! pray tell how it happened.”
 
“willingly. m. danglars dined with me.”
 
“i know it; to avoid meeting him, my mother and i left town.”
 
“but met here m. andrea cavalcanti.”
 
“your italian prince?”
 
“not so fast; m. andrea only calls himself count.”
 
“calls himself, do you say?”
 
“yes, calls himself.”
 
“is not count?”
 
“what can i know of him? calls himself so. i, of course, give him
 the same title, and everyone else does likewise.”
 
“what strange man you are! what next? you say m. danglars dined
 here?”
 
“yes, with count cavalcanti, the marquis his father, madame danglars,
 m. and madame villefort,—charming people,—m. debray, maximilian
 morrel, and m. château-renaud.”
 
“did they speak of me?”
 
“not word.”
 
“so much the worse.”
 
“why so? i thought you wished them to forget you?”
 
“if they did not speak of me, i am sure they thought about me, and i am
 in despair.”
 
“how will that affect you, since mademoiselle danglars was not among
 the number here who thought of you? truly, she might have thought of
 you at home.”
 
“i have fear of that; or, if she did, it was only in the same way in
 which i think of her.”
 
“touching sympathy! so you hate each other?” said the count.
 
“listen,” said morcerf—“if mademoiselle danglars were disposed to take
 pity on my supposed martyrdom on her account, and would dispense with
 all matrimonial formalities between our two families, i am ready to
 agree to the arrangement. in word, mademoiselle danglars would make a
 charming mistress—but wife—_diable!_”
 
“and this,” said monte cristo, “is your opinion of your intended
 spouse?”
 
“yes; it is rather unkind, i acknowledge, but it is true. but as this
 dream cannot be realized, since mademoiselle danglars must become my
 lawful wife, live perpetually with me, sing to me, compose verses and
 music within ten paces of me, and that for my whole life, it frightens
 me. one may forsake mistress, but wife,—good heavens! there she
 must always be; and to marry mademoiselle danglars would be awful.”
 
“you are difficult to please, viscount.”
 
“yes, for i often wish for what is impossible.”
 
“what is that?”
 
“to find such wife as my father found.”
 
monte cristo turned pale, and looked at albert, while playing with some
 magnificent pistols.
 
“your father was fortunate, then?” said he.
 
“you know my opinion of my mother, count; look at her,—still beautiful,
 witty, more charming than ever. for any other to have stayed with
 his mother for four days at tréport, it would have been condescension
 or martyrdom, while i return, more contented, more peaceful—shall i
 say more poetic!—than if i had taken queen mab or titania as my
 companion.”
 
30279m
 


“that is an overwhelming demonstration, and you would make everyone vow
 to live single life.”
 
“such are my reasons for not liking to marry mademoiselle danglars.
 have you ever noticed how much thing is heightened in value when we
 obtain possession of it? the diamond which glittered in the window at
 marlé’s or fossin’s shines with more splendor when it is our own; but
 if we are compelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, and
 still must retain the one that is inferior, do you not know what we
 have to endure?”
 
“worldling,” murmured the count.
 
“thus i shall rejoice when mademoiselle eugénie perceives i am but a
 pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she has
 millions.” monte cristo smiled. “one plan occurred to me,” continued
 albert; “franz likes all that is eccentric; i tried to make him fall in
 love with mademoiselle danglars; but in spite of four letters, written
 in the most alluring style, invariably answered: ‘my eccentricity
 may be great, but it will not make break my promise.’”
 
“that is what i call devoted friendship, to recommend to another one
 whom you would not marry yourself.” albert smiled.
 
“apropos,” continued he, “franz is coming soon, but it will not
 interest you; you dislike him, i think?”
 
“i?” said monte cristo; “my dear viscount, how have you discovered that
 i did not like m. franz! i like everyone.”
 
“and you include in the expression everyone—many thanks!”
 
“let us not mistake,” said monte cristo; “i love everyone as god
 commands us to love our neighbor, as christians; but i thoroughly hate
 but few. let us return to m. franz d’Épinay. did you say was
 coming?”
 
“yes; summoned by m. villefort, who is apparently as anxious to get
 mademoiselle valentine married as m. danglars is to see mademoiselle
 eugénie settled. it must be very irksome office to be the father of a
 grown-up daughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s
 pulse to ninety beats minute until the deed is done.”
 
“but m. d’Épinay, unlike you, bears his misfortune patiently.”
 
“still more, talks seriously about the matter, puts on white tie,
 and speaks of his family. entertains very high opinion of m. and
 madame villefort.”
 
“which they deserve, do they not?”
 
“i believe they do. m. villefort has always passed for severe but
 just man.”
 
“there is, then, one,” said monte cristo, “whom you do not condemn like
 poor danglars?”
 
“because i am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps,” replied
 albert, laughing.
 
“indeed, my dear sir,” said monte cristo, “you are revoltingly
 foppish.”
 
“i foppish? how do you mean?”
 
“yes; pray take cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to struggle
 to escape marrying mademoiselle danglars. let things take their course;
 perhaps you may not have to retract.”
 
“bah!” said albert, staring.
 
“doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken by force; and
 seriously, do you wish to break off your engagement?”
 
“i would give hundred thousand francs to be able to do so.”
 
“then make yourself quite easy. m. danglars would give double that sum
 to attain the same end.”
 
“am i, indeed, so happy?” said albert, who still could not prevent an
 almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow. “but, my dear
 count, has m. danglars any reason?”
 
“ah! there is your proud and selfish nature. you would expose the
 self-love of another with hatchet, but you shrink if your own is
 attacked with needle.”
 
“but yet, m. danglars appeared——”
 
“delighted with you, was not? well, is man of bad taste, and is
 still more enchanted with another. i know not whom; look and judge for
 yourself.”
 
“thank you, i understand. but my mother—no, not my mother; i mistake—my
 father intends giving ball.”
 
“a ball at this season?”
 
“summer balls are fashionable.”
 
“if they were not, the countess has only to wish it, and they would
 become so.”
 
“you are right; you know they are select affairs; those who remain in
 paris in july must be true parisians. will you take charge of our
 invitation to messieurs cavalcanti?”
 
“when will it take place?”
 
“on saturday.”
 
“m. cavalcanti’s father will be gone.”
 
“but the will be here; will you invite young m. cavalcanti?”
 
“i do not know him, viscount.”
 
“you do not know him?”
 
“no, i never saw him until few days since, and am not responsible for
 him.”
 
“but you receive him at your house?”
 
“that is another thing: was recommended to by good abbé, who
 may be deceived. give him direct invitation, but do not ask to
 present him. if were afterwards to marry mademoiselle danglars, you
 would accuse of intrigue, and would be challenging me,—besides, i
 may not be there myself.”
 
“where?”
 
“at your ball.”
 
“why should you not be there?”
 
“because you have not yet invited me.”
 
“but i come expressly for that purpose.”
 
“you are very kind, but i may be prevented.”
 
“if i tell you one thing, you will be so amiable as to set aside all
 impediments.”
 
“tell what it is.”
 
“my mother begs you to come.”
 
“the comtesse morcerf?” said monte cristo, starting.
 
“ah, count,” said albert, “i assure you madame morcerf speaks freely
 to me, and if you have not felt those sympathetic fibres of which i
 spoke just now thrill within you, you must be entirely devoid of them,
 for during the last four days we have spoken of one else.”
 
“you have talked of me?”
 
“yes, that is the penalty of being living puzzle!”
 
“then i am also puzzle to your mother? i should have thought her too
 reasonable to be led by imagination.”
 
“a problem, my dear count, for everyone—for my mother as well as
 others; much studied, but not solved, you still remain an enigma, do
 not fear. my mother is only astonished that you remain so long
 unsolved. i believe, while the countess g—— takes you for lord ruthven,
 my mother imagines you to be cagliostro or the count saint-germain. the
 first opportunity you have, confirm her in her opinion; it will be easy
 for you, as you have the philosophy of the one and the wit of the
 other.”
 
“i thank you for the warning,” said the count; “i shall endeavor to be
 prepared for all suppositions.”
 
“you will, then, come on saturday?”
 
“yes, since madame morcerf invites me.”
 
“you are very kind.”
 
“will m. danglars be there?”
 
“he has already been invited by my father. we shall try to persuade the
 great d’aguesseau,11 m. villefort, to come, but have not much hope
 of seeing him.”
 
“‘never despair of anything,’ says the proverb.”
 
“do you dance, count?”
 
“i dance?”
 
“yes, you; it would not be astonishing.”
 
“that is very well before one is over forty. no, i do not dance, but i
 like to see others do so. does madame morcerf dance?”
 
“never; you can talk to her, she so delights in your conversation.”
 
“indeed?”
 
30283m
 


“yes, truly; and i assure you. you are the only man of whom i have
 heard her speak with interest.” albert rose and took his hat; the count
 conducted him to the door.
 
“i have one thing to reproach myself with,” said he, stopping albert on
 the steps. “what is it?”
 
“i have spoken to you indiscreetly about danglars.”
 
“on the contrary, speak to always in the same strain about him.”
 
“i am glad to be reassured on that point. apropos, when do you aspect
 m. d’Épinay?”
 
“five or six days hence at the latest.”
 
“and when is to be married?”
 
“immediately on the arrival of m. and madame saint-méran.”
 
“bring him to see me. although you say i do not like him, i assure you
 i shall be happy to see him.”
 
“i will obey your orders, my lord.”
 
“good-bye.”
 
“until saturday, when i may expect you, may i not?”
 
“yes, i promised you.” the count watched albert, waving his hand to
 him. when had mounted his phaeton, monte cristo turned, and seeing
 bertuccio, “what news?” said he.
 
“she went to the palais,” replied the steward.
 
“did she stay long there?”
 
“an hour and half.”
 
“did she return home?”
 
“directly.”
 
“well, my dear bertuccio,” said the count, “i now advise you to go in
 quest of the little estate i spoke to you of in normandy.”
 
bertuccio bowed, and as his wishes were in perfect harmony with the
 order had received, started the same evening.
 


chapter 69. the inquiry
 
m. villefort kept the promise had made to madame danglars, to
 endeavor to find out how the count of monte cristo had discovered the
 history of the house at auteuil. wrote the same day for the required
 information to m. boville, who, from having been an inspector of
 prisons, was promoted to high office in the police; and the latter
 begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be most likely
 to give him full particulars. at the end of the second day m. de
 villefort received the following note:
 
“the person called the count of monte cristo is an intimate
 acquaintance of lord wilmore, rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen
 in paris and who is there at this moment; is also known to the abbé
 busoni, sicilian priest, of high repute in the east, where has
 done much good.”
 
m. villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to be made
 respecting these two persons; his orders were executed, and the
 following evening received these details:
 
“the abbé, who was in paris only for month, inhabited small
 two-storied house behind saint-sulpice; there were two rooms on each
 floor and was the only tenant. the two lower rooms consisted of a
 dining-room, with table, chairs, and side-board of walnut, and a
 wainscoted parlor, without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece. it was
 evident that the abbé limited himself to objects of strict necessity.
 preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs, which was more library
 than parlor, and was furnished with theological books and parchments,
 in which delighted to bury himself for months at time, according
 to his valet chambre. his valet looked at the visitors through a
 sort of wicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeased
 him, replied that the abbé was not in paris, an answer which
 satisfied most persons, because the abbé was known to be great
 traveller. besides, whether at home or not, whether in paris or cairo,
 the abbé always left something to give away, which the valet
 distributed through this wicket in his master’s name. the other room
 near the library was bedroom. bed without curtains, four armchairs,
 and couch, covered with yellow utrecht velvet, composed, with a
 _prie-dieu_, all its furniture.
 
“lord wilmore resided in rue fontaine-saint-georges. was one of
 those english tourists who consume large fortune in travelling. he
 hired the apartment in which lived furnished, passed only few
 hours in the day there, and rarely slept there. one of his
 peculiarities was never to speak word of french, which however
 wrote with great facility.”
 
the day after this important information had been given to the king’s
 attorney, man alighted from carriage at the corner of the rue
 férou, and rapping at an olive-green door, asked if the abbé busoni
 were within.
 
“no, went out early this morning,” replied the valet.
 
“i might not always be content with that answer,” replied the visitor,
 “for i come from one to whom everyone must be at home. but have the
 kindness to give the abbé busoni——”
 
“i told you was not at home,” repeated the valet.
 
“then on his return give him that card and this sealed paper. will he
 be at home at eight o’clock this evening?”
 
“doubtless, unless is at work, which is the same as if were out.”
 
“i will come again at that time,” replied the visitor, who then
 retired.
 
at the appointed hour the same man returned in the same carriage,
 which, instead of stopping this time at the end of the rue férou, drove
 up to the green door. knocked, and it opened immediately to admit
 him. from the signs of respect the valet paid him, saw that his note
 had produced good effect.
 
“is the abbé at home?” asked he.
 
“yes; is at work in his library, but expects you, sir,” replied
 the valet. the stranger ascended rough staircase, and before table,
 illumined by lamp whose light was concentrated by large shade while
 the rest of the apartment was in partial darkness, perceived the
 abbé in monk’s dress, with cowl on his head such as was used by
 learned men of the middle ages.
 
“have i the honor of addressing the abbé busoni?” asked the visitor.
 
“yes, sir,” replied the abbé; “and you are the person whom m. de
 boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to from the prefect
 of police?”
 
“exactly, sir.”
 
“one of the agents appointed to secure the safety of paris?”
 
“yes, sir” replied the stranger with slight hesitation, and blushing.
 
the abbé replaced the large spectacles, which covered not only his eyes
 but his temples, and sitting down motioned to his visitor to do the
 same. “i am at your service, sir,” said the abbé, with marked italian
 accent.
 
“the mission with which i am charged, sir,” replied the visitor,
 speaking with hesitation, “is confidential one on the part of him who
 fulfils it, and him by whom is employed.” the abbé bowed. “your
 probity,” replied the stranger, “is so well known to the prefect that
 wishes as magistrate to ascertain from you some particulars
 connected with the public safety, to ascertain which i am deputed to
 see you. it is hoped that ties of friendship or humane consideration
 will induce you to conceal the truth.”
 
“provided, sir, the particulars you wish for do not interfere with my
 scruples or my conscience. i am priest, sir, and the secrets of
 confession, for instance, must remain between and god, and not
 between and human justice.”
 
“do not alarm yourself, monsieur, we will duly respect your
 conscience.”
 
at this moment the abbé pressed down his side of the shade and so
 raised it on the other, throwing bright light on the stranger’s face,
 while his own remained obscured.
 
“excuse me, abbé,” said the envoy of the prefect of the police, “but
 the light tries my eyes very much.” the abbé lowered the shade.
 
“now, sir, i am listening—go on.”
 
“i will come at once to the point. do you know the count of monte
 cristo?”
 
“you mean monsieur zaccone, i presume?”
 
“zaccone?—is not his name monte cristo?”
 
“monte cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of rock, and not
 family name.”
 
“well, be it so—let us not dispute about words; and since m. monte
 cristo and m. zaccone are the same——”
 
“absolutely the same.”
 
“let us speak of m. zaccone.”
 
“agreed.”
 
“i asked you if you knew him?”
 
“extremely well.”
 
“who is he?”
 
“the of rich shipbuilder in malta.”
 
“i know that is the report; but, as you are aware, the police does not
 content itself with vague reports.”
 
“however,” replied the abbé, with an affable smile, “when that report
 is in accordance with the truth, everybody must believe it, the police
 as well as all the rest.”
 
“are you sure of what you assert?”
 
“what do you mean by that question?”
 
“understand, sir, i do not in the least suspect your veracity; i ask if
 you are certain of it?”
 
“i knew his father, m. zaccone.”
 
“ah, indeed?”
 
“and when child i often played with the in the timber-yards.”
 
“but whence does derive the title of count?”
 
“you are aware that may be bought.”
 
“in italy?”
 
“everywhere.”
 
“and his immense riches, whence does procure them?”
 
“they may not be so very great.”
 
“how much do you suppose possesses?”
 
“from one hundred and fifty to two hundred thousand livres per annum.”
 
“that is reasonable,” said the visitor; “i have heard had three or
 four millions.”
 
“two hundred thousand per annum would make four millions of capital.”
 
“but i was told had four millions per annum.”
 
“that is not probable.”
 
“do you know this island of monte cristo?”
 
“certainly, everyone who has come from palermo, naples, or rome to
 france by must know it, since has passed close to it and must
 have seen it.”
 
“i am told it is delightful place?”
 
“it is rock.”
 
“and why has the count bought rock?”
 
“for the sake of being count. in italy one must have territorial
 possessions to be count.”
 
“you have, doubtless, heard the adventures of m. zaccone’s youth?”
 
“the father’s?”
 
“no, the son’s.”
 
“i know nothing certain; at that period of his life, i lost sight of my
 young comrade.”
 
“was in the wars?”
 
“i think entered the service.”
 
“in what branch?”
 
“in the navy.”
 
“are you not his confessor?”
 
“no, sir; i believe is lutheran.”
 
“a lutheran?”
 
“i say, i believe such is the case, i do not affirm it; besides,
 liberty of conscience is established in france.”
 
“doubtless, and we are not now inquiring into his creed, but his
 actions; in the name of the prefect of police, i ask you what you know
 of him.
 
“he passes for very charitable man. our holy father, the pope, has
 made him knight of jesus christ for the services rendered to the
 christians in the east; has five or six rings as testimonials from
 eastern monarchs of his services.”
 
“does wear them?”
 
“no, but is proud of them; is better pleased with rewards given
 to the benefactors of man than to his destroyers.”
 
“he is quaker then?”
 
“exactly, is quaker, with the exception of the peculiar dress.”
 
“has any friends?”
 
“yes, everyone who knows him is his friend.”
 
“but has any enemies?”
 
“one only.”
 
“what is his name?”
 
“lord wilmore.”
 
“where is he?”
 
“he is in paris just now.”
 
“can give any particulars?”
 
“important ones; was in india with zaccone.”
 
“do you know his abode?”
 
“it’s somewhere in the chaussée d’antin; but i know neither the street
 nor the number.”
 
30289m
 


“are you at variance with the englishman?”
 
“i love zaccone, and hates him; we are consequently not friends.”
 
“do you think the count of monte cristo had ever been in france before
 made this visit to paris?”
 
“to that question i can answer positively; no, sir, had not, because
 applied to six months ago for the particulars required, and as
 i did not know when i might again come to paris, i recommended m.
 cavalcanti to him.”
 
“andrea?”
 
“no, bartolomeo, his father.”
 
“now, sir, i have but one question more to ask, and i charge you, in
 the name of honor, of humanity, and of religion, to answer me
 candidly.”
 
“what is it, sir?”
 
“do you know with what design m. monte cristo purchased house at
 auteuil?”
 
“certainly, for told me.”
 
“what is it, sir?”
 
“to make lunatic asylum of it, similar to that founded by the count
 of pisani at palermo. do you know about that institution?”
 
“i have heard of it.”
 
“it is magnificent charity.” having said this, the abbé bowed to
 imply wished to pursue his studies.
 
the visitor either understood the abbé’s meaning, or had more
 questions to ask; arose, and the abbé accompanied him to the door.
 
“you are great almsgiver,” said the visitor, “and although you are
 said to be rich, i will venture to offer you something for your poor
 people; will you accept my offering?”
 
“i thank you, sir; i am only jealous in one thing, and that is that the
 relief i give should be entirely from my own resources.”
 
“however——”
 
“my resolution, sir, is unchangeable, but you have only to search for
 yourself and you will find, alas, but too many objects upon whom to
 exercise your benevolence.”
 
the abbé once more bowed as opened the door, the stranger bowed and
 took his leave, and the carriage conveyed him straight to the house of
 m. villefort. an hour afterwards the carriage was again ordered, and
 this time it went to the rue fontaine-saint-georges, and stopped at no.
 5, where lord wilmore lived. the stranger had written to lord wilmore,
 requesting an interview, which the latter had fixed for ten o’clock. as
 the envoy of the prefect of police arrived ten minutes before ten, he
 was told that lord wilmore, who was precision and punctuality
 personified, was not yet come in, but that would be sure to return
 as the clock struck.
 
the visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which was like all
 other furnished drawing-rooms. mantle-piece, with two modern sèvres
 vases, timepiece representing cupid with his bent bow, mirror with
 an engraving on each side—one representing homer carrying his guide,
 the other, belisarius begging—a grayish paper; red and black
 tapestry—such was the appearance of lord wilmore’s drawing-room.
 
it was illuminated by lamps with ground-glass shades which gave only a
 feeble light, as if out of consideration for the envoy’s weak sight.
 after ten minutes’ expectation the clock struck ten; at the fifth
 stroke the door opened and lord wilmore appeared. was rather above
 the middle height, with thin reddish whiskers, light complexion and
 light hair, turning rather gray. was dressed with all the english
 peculiarity, namely, in blue coat, with gilt buttons and high collar,
 in the fashion of 1811, white kerseymere waistcoat, and nankeen
 pantaloons, three inches too short, but which were prevented by straps
 from slipping up to the knee. his first remark on entering was:
 
“you know, sir, i do not speak french?”
 
“i know you do not like to converse in our language,” replied the
 envoy.
 
“but you may use it,” replied lord wilmore; “i understand it.”
 
“and i,” replied the visitor, changing his idiom, “know enough of
 english to keep up the conversation. do not put yourself to the
 slightest inconvenience.”
 
“aw?” said lord wilmore, with that tone which is only known to natives
 of great britain.
 
the envoy presented his letter of introduction, which the latter read
 with english coolness, and having finished:
 
“i understand,” said he, “perfectly.”
 
30293m
 


then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been
 addressed to the abbé busoni. but as lord wilmore, in the character of
 the count’s enemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more
 numerous; described the youth of monte cristo, who said, at ten
 years of age, entered the service of one of the petty sovereigns of
 india who make war on the english. it was there wilmore had first met
 him and fought against him; and in that war zaccone had been taken
 prisoner, sent to england, and consigned to the hulks, whence had
 escaped by swimming. then began his travels, his duels, his caprices;
 then the insurrection in greece broke out, and had served in the
 grecian ranks. while in that service had discovered silver mine in
 the mountains of thessaly, but had been careful to conceal it from
 everyone. after the battle of navarino, when the greek government was
 consolidated, asked of king otho mining grant for that district,
 which was given him. hence that immense fortune, which, in lord
 wilmore’s opinion, possibly amounted to one or two millions per
 annum,—a precarious fortune, which might be momentarily lost by the
 failure of the mine.
 
“but,” asked the visitor, “do you know why came to france?”
 
“he is speculating in railways,” said lord wilmore, “and as is an
 expert chemist and physicist, has invented new system of
 telegraphy, which is seeking to bring to perfection.”
 
“how much does spend yearly?” asked the prefect.
 
“not more than five or six hundred thousand francs,” said lord wilmore;
 “he is miser.” hatred evidently inspired the englishman, who, knowing
 other reproach to bring on the count, accused him of avarice.
 
“do you know his house at auteuil?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“what do you know respecting it?”
 
“do you wish to know why bought it?”
 
“yes.”
 
“the count is speculator, who will certainly ruin himself in
 experiments. supposes there is in the neighborhood of the house he
 has bought mineral spring equal to those at bagnères, luchon, and
 cauterets. is going to turn his house into _badhaus_, as the
 germans term it. has already dug up all the garden two or three
 times to find the famous spring, and, being unsuccessful, will soon
 purchase all the contiguous houses. now, as i dislike him, and hope his
 railway, his electric telegraph, or his search for baths, will ruin
 him, i am watching for his discomfiture, which must soon take place.”
 
“what was the cause of your quarrel?”
 
“when was in england seduced the wife of one of my friends.”
 
“why do you not seek revenge?”
 
“i have already fought three duels with him,” said the englishman, “the
 first with the pistol, the second with the sword, and the third with
 the sabre.”
 
“and what was the result of those duels?”
 
“the first time, broke my arm; the second, wounded in the
 breast; and the third time, made this large wound.” the englishman
 turned down his shirt-collar, and showed scar, whose redness proved
 it to be recent one. “so that, you see, there is deadly feud
 between us.”
 
“but,” said the envoy, “you do not go about it in the right way to kill
 him, if i understand you correctly.”
 
“aw?” said the englishman, “i practice shooting every day, and every
 other day grisier comes to my house.”
 
this was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the
 englishman appeared to know. the agent arose, and having bowed to lord
 wilmore, who returned his salutation with the stiff politeness of the
 english, retired. lord wilmore, having heard the door close after
 him, returned to his bedroom, where with one hand pulled off his
 light hair, his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, to resume
 the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth of the count of monte
 cristo.
 
it was m. villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the house
 of m. villefort. the procureur felt more at ease, although had
 learned nothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time since the
 dinner-party at auteuil, slept soundly.
 


chapter 70. the ball
 
it was in the warmest days of july, when in due course of time the
 saturday arrived upon which the ball was to take place at m. de
 morcerf’s. it was ten o’clock at night; the branches of the great trees
 in the garden of the count’s house stood out boldly against the azure
 canopy of heaven, which was studded with golden stars, but where the
 last fleeting clouds of vanishing storm yet lingered.
 
from the apartments on the ground floor might be heard the sound of
 music, with the whirl of the waltz and galop, while brilliant streams
 of light shone through the openings of the venetian blinds. at this
 moment the garden was only occupied by about ten servants, who had just
 received orders from their mistress to prepare the supper, the serenity
 of the weather continuing to increase. until now, it had been undecided
 whether the supper should take place in the dining-room, or under a
 long tent erected on the lawn, but the beautiful blue sky, studded with
 stars, had settled the question in favor of the lawn.
 
the gardens were illuminated with colored lanterns, according to the
 italian custom, and, as is usual in countries where the luxuries of the
 table—the rarest of all luxuries in their complete form—are well
 understood, the supper-table was loaded with wax-lights and flowers.
 
30297m
 


at the time the countess of morcerf returned to the rooms, after giving
 her orders, many guests were arriving, more attracted by the charming
 hospitality of the countess than by the distinguished position of the
 count; for, owing to the good taste of mercédès, one was sure of
 finding some devices at her entertainment worthy of describing, or even
 copying in case of need.
 
madame danglars, in whom the events we have related had caused deep
 anxiety, had hesitated about going to madame morcerf’s, when during
 the morning her carriage happened to meet that of villefort. the latter
 made sign, and when the carriages had drawn close together, said:
 
“you are going to madame morcerf’s, are you not?”
 
“no,” replied madame danglars, “i am too ill.”
 
“you are wrong,” replied villefort, significantly; “it is important
 that you should be seen there.”
 
“do you think so?” asked the baroness.
 
“i do.”
 
“in that case i will go.”
 
and the two carriages passed on towards their different destinations.
 madame danglars therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but
 radiant with splendor; she entered by one door at the time when
 mercédès appeared at the door. the countess took albert to meet madame
 danglars. approached, paid her some well merited compliments on her
 toilet, and offered his arm to conduct her to seat. albert looked
 around him.
 
“you are looking for my daughter?” said the baroness, smiling.
 
“i confess it,” replied albert. “could you have been so cruel as not to
 bring her?”
 
“calm yourself. she has met mademoiselle villefort, and has taken
 her arm; see, they are following us, both in white dresses, one with a
 bouquet of camellias, the other with one of myosotis. but tell me——”
 
“well, what do you wish to know?”
 
“will not the count of monte cristo be here tonight?”
 
“seventeen!” replied albert.
 
“what do you mean?”
 
“i only mean that the count seems the rage,” replied the viscount,
 smiling, “and that you are the seventeenth person that has asked the
 same question. the count is in fashion; i congratulate him upon it.”
 
“and have you replied to everyone as you have to me?”
 
“ah, to be sure, i have not answered you; be satisfied, we shall have
 this ‘lion’; we are among the privileged ones.”
 
“were you at the opera yesterday?”
 
“no.”
 
“he was there.”
 
“ah, indeed? and did the eccentric person commit any new originality?”
 
“can be seen without doing so? elssler was dancing in _le diable
 boiteux_; the greek princess was in ecstasies. after the cachucha he
 placed magnificent ring on the stem of bouquet, and threw it to the
 charming danseuse, who, in the third act, to do honor to the gift,
 reappeared with it on her finger. and the greek princess,—will she be
 here?”
 
“no, you will be deprived of that pleasure; her position in the count’s
 establishment is not sufficiently understood.”
 
“wait; leave here, and go and speak to madame villefort, who is
 trying to attract your attention.”
 
albert bowed to madame danglars, and advanced towards madame de
 villefort, whose lips opened as approached.
 
“i wager anything,” said albert, interrupting her, “that i know what
 you were about to say.”
 
“well, what is it?”
 
“if i guess rightly, will you confess it?”
 
“yes.”
 
“on your honor?”
 
“on my honor.”
 
“you were going to ask if the count of monte cristo had arrived, or
 was expected.”
 
“not at all. it is not of him that i am now thinking. i was going to
 ask you if you had received any news of monsieur franz.”
 
“yes,—yesterday.”
 
“what did tell you?”
 
“that was leaving at the same time as his letter.”
 
“well, now then, the count?”
 
“the count will come, of that you may be satisfied.”
 
“you know that has another name besides monte cristo?”
 
“no, i did not know it.”
 
“monte cristo is the name of an island, and has family name.”
 
“i never heard it.”
 
“well, then, i am better informed than you; his name is zaccone.”
 
“it is possible.”
 
“he is maltese.”
 
“that is also possible.
 
“the of shipowner.”
 
“really, you should relate all this aloud, you would have the greatest
 success.”
 
“he served in india, discovered mine in thessaly, and comes to paris
 to establish mineral water-cure at auteuil.”
 
“well, i’m sure,” said morcerf, “this is indeed news! am i allowed to
 repeat it?”
 
“yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at time, and do not say i told
 you.”
 
“why so?”
 
“because it is secret just discovered.”
 
“by whom?”
 
“the police.”
 
“then the news originated——”
 
“at the prefect’s last night. paris, you can understand, is astonished
 at the sight of such unusual splendor, and the police have made
 inquiries.”
 
“well, well! nothing more is wanting than to arrest the count as a
 vagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich.”
 
“indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his credentials had not
 been so favorable.”
 
“poor count! and is aware of the danger has been in?”
 
“i think not.”
 
“then it will be but charitable to inform him. when arrives, i will
 not fail to do so.”
 
just then, handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and
 glossy moustache, respectfully bowed to madame villefort. albert
 extended his hand.
 
“madame,” said albert, “allow to present to you m. maximilian
 morrel, captain of spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our
 bravest officers.”
 
“i have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at auteuil,
 at the house of the count of monte cristo,” replied madame de
 villefort, turning away with marked coldness of manner.
 
this answer, and especially the tone in which it was uttered, chilled
 the heart of poor morrel. but recompense was in store for him;
 turning around, saw near the door beautiful fair face, whose large
 blue eyes were, without any marked expression, fixed upon him, while
 the bouquet of myosotis was gently raised to her lips.
 
the salutation was so well understood that morrel, with the same
 expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to his mouth; and these
 two living statues, whose hearts beat so violently under their marble
 aspect, separated from each other by the whole length of the room,
 forgot themselves for moment, or rather forgot the world in their
 mutual contemplation. they might have remained much longer lost in one
 another, without anyone noticing their abstraction. the count of monte
 cristo had just entered.
 
we have already said that there was something in the count which
 attracted universal attention wherever appeared. it was not the
 coat, unexceptional in its cut, though simple and unornamented; it was
 not the plain white waistcoat; it was not the trousers, that displayed
 the foot so perfectly formed—it was none of these things that attracted
 the attention,—it was his pale complexion, his waving black hair, his
 calm and serene expression, his dark and melancholy eye, his mouth,
 chiselled with such marvellous delicacy, which so easily expressed such
 high disdain,—these were what fixed the attention of all upon him.
 
many men might have been handsomer, but certainly there could be none
 whose appearance was more _significant_, if the expression may be used.
 everything about the count seemed to have its meaning, for the constant
 habit of thought which had acquired had given an ease and vigor to
 the expression of his face, and even to the most trifling gesture,
 scarcely to be understood. yet the parisian world is so strange, that
 even all this might not have won attention had there not been connected
 with it mysterious story gilded by an immense fortune.
 
30301m
 


meanwhile advanced through the assemblage of guests under battery
 of curious glances towards madame morcerf, who, standing before a
 mantle-piece ornamented with flowers, had seen his entrance in a
 looking-glass placed opposite the door, and was prepared to receive
 him. she turned towards him with serene smile just at the moment he
 was bowing to her. doubt she fancied the count would speak to her,
 while on his side the count thought she was about to address him; but
 both remained silent, and after mere bow, monte cristo directed his
 steps to albert, who received him cordially.
 
“have you seen my mother?” asked albert.
 
“i have just had the pleasure,” replied the count; “but i have not seen
 your father.”
 
“see, is down there, talking politics with that little group of
 great geniuses.”
 
“indeed?” said monte cristo; “and so those gentlemen down there are men
 of great talent. i should not have guessed it. and for what kind of
 talent are they celebrated? you know there are different sorts.”
 
“that tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, discovered, in the
 neighborhood of rome, kind of lizard with vertebra more than
 lizards usually have, and immediately laid his discovery before the
 institute. the thing was discussed for long time, but finally decided
 in his favor. i can assure you the vertebra made great noise in the
 learned world, and the gentleman, who was only knight of the legion
 of honor, was made an officer.”
 
“come,” said monte cristo, “this cross seems to to be wisely
 awarded. i suppose, had found another additional vertebra, they
 would have made him commander.”
 
“very likely,” said albert.
 
“and who can that person be who has taken it into his head to wrap
 himself up in blue coat embroidered with green?”
 
“oh, that coat is not his own idea; it is the republic’s, which deputed
 david12 to devise uniform for the academicians.”
 
“indeed?” said monte cristo; “so this gentleman is an academician?”
 
“within the last week has been made one of the learned assembly.”
 
“and what is his especial talent?”
 
“his talent? i believe thrusts pins through the heads of rabbits, he
 makes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinal marrow out of dogs with
 whalebone.”
 
“and is made member of the academy of sciences for this?”
 
“no; of the french academy.”
 
“but what has the french academy to do with all this?”
 
“i was going to tell you. it seems——”
 
“that his experiments have very considerably advanced the cause of
 science, doubtless?”
 
“no; that his style of writing is very good.”
 
“this must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbits into whose
 heads has thrust pins, to the fowls whose bones has dyed red, and
 to the dogs whose spinal marrow has punched out?”
 
albert laughed.
 
“and the other one?” demanded the count.
 
“that one?”
 
“yes, the third.”
 
“the one in the dark blue coat?”
 
“yes.”
 
“he is colleague of the count, and one of the most active opponents
 to the idea of providing the chamber of peers with uniform. was
 very successful upon that question. stood badly with the liberal
 papers, but his noble opposition to the wishes of the court is now
 getting him into favor with the journalists. they talk of making him an
 ambassador.”
 
30303m
 


“and what are his claims to the peerage?”
 
“he has composed two or three comic operas, written four or five
 articles in the _siècle_, and voted five or six years on the
 ministerial side.”
 
“bravo, viscount,” said monte cristo, smiling; “you are delightful
 _cicerone_. and now you will do favor, will you not?”
 
“what is it?”
 
“do not introduce to any of these gentlemen; and should they wish
 it, you will warn me.” just then the count felt his arm pressed. he
 turned round; it was danglars.
 
“ah! is it you, baron?” said he.
 
“why do you call baron?” said danglars; “you know that i care
 nothing for my title. i am not like you, viscount; you like your title,
 do you not?”
 
“certainly,” replied albert, “seeing that without my title i should be
 nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would still remain the
 millionaire.”
 
“which seems to the finest title under the royalty of july,” replied
 danglars.
 
“unfortunately,” said monte cristo, “one’s title to millionaire does
 not last for life, like that of baron, peer of france, or academician;
 for example, the millionaires franck & poulmann, of frankfurt, who have
 just become bankrupts.”
 
“indeed?” said danglars, becoming pale.
 
“yes; i received the news this evening by courier. i had about a
 million in their hands, but, warned in time, i withdrew it month
 ago.”
 
“ah, _mon dieu!_” exclaimed danglars, “they have drawn on for
 200,000 francs!”
 
“well, you can throw out the draft; their signature is worth five per
 cent.”
 
“yes, but it is too late,” said danglars, “i have honored their bills.”
 
“then,” said monte cristo, “here are 200,000 francs gone after——”
 
“hush, do not mention these things,” said danglars; then, approaching
 monte cristo, added, “especially before young m. cavalcanti;” after
 which smiled, and turned towards the young man in question.
 
albert had left the count to speak to his mother, danglars to converse
 with young cavalcanti; monte cristo was for an instant alone. meanwhile
 the heat became excessive. the footmen were hastening through the rooms
 with waiters loaded with ices. monte cristo wiped the perspiration from
 his forehead, but drew back when the waiter was presented to him; he
 took refreshment. madame morcerf did not lose sight of monte
 cristo; she saw that took nothing, and even noticed his gesture of
 refusal.
 
“albert,” she asked, “did you notice that?”
 
“what, mother?”
 
“that the count has never been willing to partake of food under the
 roof of m. morcerf.”
 
“yes; but then breakfasted with me—indeed, made his first
 appearance in the world on that occasion.”
 
“but your house is not m. morcerf’s,” murmured mercédès; “and since
 has been here i have watched him.”
 
“well?”
 
“well, has taken nothing yet.”
 
“the count is very temperate.”
 
mercédès smiled sadly.
 
“approach him,” said she, “and when the next waiter passes, insist upon
 his taking something.”
 
“but why, mother?”
 
“just to please me, albert,” said mercédès. albert kissed his mother’s
 hand, and drew near the count. another salver passed, loaded like the
 preceding ones; she saw albert attempt to persuade the count, but he
 obstinately refused. albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.
 
“well,” said she, “you see refuses?”
 
“yes; but why need this annoy you?”
 
“you know, albert, women are singular creatures. i should like to have
 seen the count take something in my house, if only an ice. perhaps he
 cannot reconcile himself to the french style of living, and might
 prefer something else.”
 
“oh, no; i have seen him eat of everything in italy; doubt does
 not feel inclined this evening.”
 
“and besides,” said the countess, “accustomed as is to burning
 climates, possibly does not feel the heat as we do.”
 
“i do not think that, for has complained of feeling almost
 suffocated, and asked why the venetian blinds were not opened as well
 as the windows.”
 
“in word,” said mercédès, “it was way of assuring that his
 abstinence was intended.”
 
and she left the room.
 
minute afterwards the blinds were thrown open, and through the
 jessamine and clematis that overhung the window one could see the
 garden ornamented with lanterns, and the supper laid under the tent.
 dancers, players, talkers, all uttered an exclamation of joy—everyone
 inhaled with delight the breeze that floated in. at the same time
 mercédès reappeared, paler than before, but with that imperturbable
 expression of countenance which she sometimes wore. she went straight
 to the group of which her husband formed the centre.
 
“do not detain those gentlemen here, count,” she said; “they would
 prefer, i should think, to breathe in the garden rather than suffocate
 here, since they are not playing.”
 
“ah,” said gallant old general, who, in 1809, had sung _partant pour
 syrie_,—“we will not go alone to the garden.”
 
“then,” said mercédès, “i will lead the way.”
 
turning towards monte cristo, she added, “count, will you oblige me
 with your arm?”
 
the count almost staggered at these simple words; then fixed his
 eyes on mercédès. it was only momentary glance, but it seemed to the
 countess to have lasted for century, so much was expressed in that
 one look. offered his arm to the countess; she took it, or rather
 just touched it with her little hand, and they together descended the
 steps, lined with rhododendrons and camellias. behind them, by another
 outlet, group of about twenty persons rushed into the garden with
 loud exclamations of delight.
 


chapter 71. bread and salt
 
madame morcerf entered an archway of trees with her companion. it
 led through grove of lindens to conservatory.
 
“it was too warm in the room, was it not, count?” she asked.
 
“yes, madame; and it was an excellent idea of yours to open the doors
 and the blinds.” as ceased speaking, the count felt the hand of
 mercédès tremble. “but you,” said, “with that light dress, and
 without anything to cover you but that gauze scarf, perhaps you feel
 cold?”
 
“do you know where i am leading you?” said the countess, without
 replying to the question.
 
“no, madame,” replied monte cristo; “but you see i make resistance.”
 
“we are going to the greenhouse that you see at the other end of the
 grove.”
 
the count looked at mercédès as if to interrogate her, but she
 continued to walk on in silence, and refrained from speaking. they
 reached the building, ornamented with magnificent fruits, which ripen
 at the beginning of july in the artificial temperature which takes the
 place of the sun, so frequently absent in our climate. the countess
 left the arm of monte cristo, and gathered bunch of muscatel grapes.
 
“see, count,” she said, with smile so sad in its expression that one
 could almost detect the tears on her eyelids—“see, our french grapes
 are not to be compared, i know, with yours of sicily and cyprus, but
 you will make allowance for our northern sun.” the count bowed, but
 stepped back.
 
“do you refuse?” said mercédès, in tremulous voice.
 
“pray excuse me, madame,” replied monte cristo, “but i never eat
 muscatel grapes.”
 
mercédès let them fall, and sighed. magnificent peach was hanging
 against an adjoining wall, ripened by the same artificial heat.
 mercédès drew near, and plucked the fruit.
 
“take this peach, then,” she said. the count again refused. “what,
 again?” she exclaimed, in so plaintive an accent that it seemed to
 stifle sob; “really, you pain me.”
 
long silence followed; the peach, like the grapes, fell to the
 ground.
 
“count,” added mercédès with supplicating glance, “there is a
 beautiful arabian custom, which makes eternal friends of those who have
 together eaten bread and salt under the same roof.”
 
“i know it, madame,” replied the count; “but we are in france, and not
 in arabia, and in france eternal friendships are as rare as the custom
 of dividing bread and salt with one another.”
 
“but,” said the countess, breathlessly, with her eyes fixed on monte
 cristo, whose arm she convulsively pressed with both hands, “we are
 friends, are we not?”
 
the count became pale as death, the blood rushed to his heart, and then
 again rising, dyed his cheeks with crimson; his eyes swam like those of
 man suddenly dazzled.
 
“certainly, we are friends,” replied; “why should we not be?”
 
the answer was so little like the one mercédès desired, that she turned
 away to give vent to sigh, which sounded more like groan. “thank
 you,” she said. and they walked on again. they went the whole length of
 the garden without uttering word.
 
“sir,” suddenly exclaimed the countess, after their walk had continued
 ten minutes in silence, “is it true that you have seen so much,
 travelled so far, and suffered so deeply?”
 
“i have suffered deeply, madame,” answered monte cristo.
 
“but now you are happy?”
 
“doubtless,” replied the count, “since one hears complain.”
 
“and your present happiness, has it softened your heart?”
 
“my present happiness equals my past misery,” said the count.
 
“are you not married?” asked the countess.
 
“i, married?” exclaimed monte cristo, shuddering; “who could have told
 you so?”
 
“no one told you were, but you have frequently been seen at the
 opera with young and lovely woman.”
 
“she is slave whom i bought at constantinople, madame, the daughter
 of prince. i have adopted her as my daughter, having one else to
 love in the world.”
 
“you live alone, then?”
 
“i do.”
 
“you have sister—no son—no father?”
 
“i have one.”
 
“how can you exist thus without anyone to attach you to life?”
 
“it is not my fault, madame. at malta, i loved young girl, was on the
 point of marrying her, when war came and carried away. i thought she
 loved well enough to wait for me, and even to remain faithful to my
 memory. when i returned she was married. this is the history of most
 men who have passed twenty years of age. perhaps my heart was weaker
 than the hearts of most men, and i suffered more than they would have
 done in my place; that is all.”
 
the countess stopped for moment, as if gasping for breath. “yes,” she
 said, “and you have still preserved this love in your heart—one can
 only love once—and did you ever see her again?”
 
30309m
 


“never.”
 
“never?”
 
“i never returned to the country where she lived.”
 
“to malta?”
 
“yes; malta.”
 
“she is, then, now at malta?”
 
“i think so.”
 
“and have you forgiven her for all she has made you suffer?”
 
“her,—yes.”
 
“but only her; do you then still hate those who separated you?”
 
“i hate them? not at all; why should i?” the countess placed herself
 before monte cristo, still holding in her hand portion of the
 perfumed grapes.
 
“take some,” she said.
 
“madame, i never eat muscatel grapes,” replied monte cristo, as if the
 subject had not been mentioned before. the countess dashed the grapes
 into the nearest thicket, with gesture of despair.
 
“inflexible man!” she murmured. monte cristo remained as unmoved as if
 the reproach had not been addressed to him.
 
albert at this moment ran in. “oh, mother,” exclaimed, “such a
 misfortune has happened!”
 
“what? what has happened?” asked the countess, as though awakening from
 sleep to the realities of life; “did you say misfortune? indeed, i
 should expect misfortunes.”
 
“m. villefort is here.”
 
“well?”
 
“he comes to fetch his wife and daughter.”
 
“why so?”
 
“because madame saint-méran is just arrived in paris, bringing the
 news of m. saint-méran’s death, which took place on the first stage
 after left marseilles. madame villefort, who was in very good
 spirits, would neither believe nor think of the misfortune, but
 mademoiselle valentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth,
 notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blow struck her
 like thunderbolt, and she fell senseless.”
 
“and how was m. saint-méran related to mademoiselle villefort?”
 said the count.
 
“he was her grandfather on the mother’s side. was coming here to
 hasten her marriage with franz.”
 
“ah, indeed!”
 
“so franz must wait. why was not m. saint-méran also grandfather to
 mademoiselle danglars?”
 
“albert, albert,” said madame morcerf, in tone of mild reproof,
 “what are you saying? ah, count, esteems you so highly, tell him
 that has spoken amiss.”
 
and she took two or three steps forward. monte cristo watched her with
 an air so thoughtful, and so full of affectionate admiration, that she
 turned back and grasped his hand; at the same time she seized that of
 her son, and joined them together.
 
“we are friends; are we not?” she asked.
 
“oh, madame, i do not presume to call myself your friend, but at all
 times i am your most respectful servant.” the countess left with an
 indescribable pang in her heart, and before she had taken ten steps the
 count saw her raise her handkerchief to her eyes.
 
“do not my mother and you agree?” asked albert, astonished.
 
“on the contrary,” replied the count, “did you not hear her declare
 that we were friends?”
 
they re-entered the drawing-room, which valentine and madame de
 villefort had just quitted. it is perhaps needless to add that morrel
 departed almost at the same time.
 


chapter 72. madame saint-méran
 
gloomy scene had indeed just passed at the house of m. villefort.
 after the ladies had departed for the ball, whither all the entreaties
 of madame villefort had failed in persuading him to accompany them,
 the procureur had shut himself up in his study, according to his
 custom, with heap of papers calculated to alarm anyone else, but
 which generally scarcely satisfied his inordinate desires.
 
but this time the papers were mere matter of form. villefort had
 secluded himself, not to study, but to reflect; and with the door
 locked and orders given that should not be disturbed excepting for
 important business, sat down in his armchair and began to ponder
 over the events, the remembrance of which had during the last eight
 days filled his mind with so many gloomy thoughts and bitter
 recollections.
 
then, instead of plunging into the mass of documents piled before him,
 opened the drawer of his desk, touched spring, and drew out a
 parcel of cherished memoranda, amongst which had carefully arranged,
 in characters only known to himself, the names of all those who, either
 in his political career, in money matters, at the bar, or in his
 mysterious love affairs, had become his enemies.
 
their number was formidable, now that had begun to fear, and yet
 these names, powerful though they were, had often caused him to smile
 with the same kind of satisfaction experienced by traveller who from
 the summit of mountain beholds at his feet the craggy eminences, the
 almost impassable paths, and the fearful chasms, through which has
 so perilously climbed. when had run over all these names in his
 memory, again read and studied them, commenting meanwhile upon his
 lists, shook his head.
 
“no,” murmured, “none of my enemies would have waited so patiently
 and laboriously for so long space of time, that they might now come
 and crush with this secret. sometimes, as hamlet says:
 
‘foul deeds will rise,
 
though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes;’
 

but, like phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead. the story has
 been told by the corsican to some priest, who in his turn has repeated
 it. m. monte cristo may have heard it, and to enlighten himself——
 
“but why should wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?” asked
 villefort, after moment’s reflection, “what interest can this m. de
 monte cristo or m. zaccone,—son of shipowner of malta, discoverer of
 mine in thessaly, now visiting paris for the first time,—what
 interest, i say, can take in discovering gloomy, mysterious, and
 useless fact like this? however, among all the incoherent details given
 to by the abbé busoni and by lord wilmore, by that friend and that
 enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion—that in no
 period, in case, in circumstance, could there have been any
 contact between him and me.”
 
but villefort uttered words which even himself did not believe. he
 dreaded not so much the revelation, for could reply to or deny its
 truth;—he cared little for that _mene, mene, tekel upharsin_, which
 appeared suddenly in letters of blood upon the wall;—but what was
 really anxious for was to discover whose hand had traced them. while he
 was endeavoring to calm his fears,—and instead of dwelling upon the
 political future that had so often been the subject of his ambitious
 dreams, was imagining future limited to the enjoyments of home, in
 fear of awakening the enemy that had so long slept,—the noise of a
 carriage sounded in the yard, then heard the steps of an aged person
 ascending the stairs, followed by tears and lamentations, such as
 servants always give vent to when they wish to appear interested in
 their master’s grief.
 
drew back the bolt of his door, and almost directly an old lady
 entered, unannounced, carrying her shawl on her arm, and her bonnet in
 her hand. the white hair was thrown back from her yellow forehead, and
 her eyes, already sunken by the furrows of age, now almost disappeared
 beneath the eyelids swollen with grief.
 
“oh, sir,” she said; “oh, sir, what misfortune! i shall die of it;
 oh, yes, i shall certainly die of it!”
 
and then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burst into a
 paroxysm of sobs. the servants, standing in the doorway, not daring to
 approach nearer, were looking at noirtier’s old servant, who had heard
 the noise from his master’s room, and run there also, remaining behind
 the others. villefort rose, and ran towards his mother-in-law, for it
 was she.
 
“why, what can have happened?” exclaimed, “what has thus disturbed
 you? is m. saint-méran with you?”
 
“m. saint-méran is dead,” answered the old marchioness, without
 preface and without expression; she appeared to be stupefied. villefort
 drew back, and clasping his hands together, exclaimed:
 
“dead!—so suddenly?”
 
“a week ago,” continued madame saint-méran, “we went out together in
 the carriage after dinner. m. saint-méran had been unwell for some
 days; still, the idea of seeing our dear valentine again inspired him
 with courage, and notwithstanding his illness would leave. at six
 leagues from marseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges is
 accustomed to take, fell into such deep sleep, that it appeared to
 unnatural; still i hesitated to wake him, although i fancied that
 his face was flushed, and that the veins of his temples throbbed more
 violently than usual. however, as it became dark, and i could longer
 see, i fell asleep; i was soon aroused by piercing shriek, as from a
 person suffering in his dreams, and suddenly threw his head back
 violently. i called the valet, i stopped the postilion, i spoke to m.
 saint-méran, i applied my smelling-salts; but all was over, and i
 arrived at aix by the side of corpse.”
 
villefort stood with his mouth half open, quite stupefied.
 
“of course you sent for doctor?”
 
“immediately; but, as i have told you, it was too late.”
 
“yes; but then could tell of what complaint the poor marquis had
 died.”
 
“oh, yes, sir, told me; it appears to have been an apoplectic
 stroke.”
 
“and what did you do then?”
 
“m. saint-méran had always expressed desire, in case his death
 happened during his absence from paris, that his body might be brought
 to the family vault. i had him put into leaden coffin, and i am
 preceding him by few days.”
 
“oh! my poor mother!” said villefort, “to have such duties to perform
 at your age after such blow!”
 
“god has supported through all; and then, my dear marquis, would
 certainly have done everything for that i performed for him. it is
 true that since i left him, i seem to have lost my senses. i cannot
 cry; at my age they say that we have more tears,—still i think that
 when one is in trouble one should have the power of weeping. where is
 valentine, sir? it is on her account i am here; i wish to see
 valentine.”
 
30315m
 


villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that valentine was at a
 ball; so only said that she had gone out with her step-mother, and
 that she should be fetched. “this instant, sir—this instant, i beseech
 you!” said the old lady. villefort placed the arm of madame de
 saint-méran within his own, and conducted her to his apartment.
 
“rest yourself, mother,” said.
 
the marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholding the man who
 so forcibly reminded her of her deeply-regretted child, who still lived
 for her in valentine, she felt touched at the name of mother, and
 bursting into tears, she fell on her knees before an armchair, where
 she buried her venerable head. villefort left her to the care of the
 women, while old barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; for nothing
 frightens old people so much as when death relaxes its vigilance over
 them for moment in order to strike some other old person. then, while
 madame saint-méran remained on her knees, praying fervently,
 villefort sent for cab, and went himself to fetch his wife and
 daughter from madame morcerf’s. was so pale when appeared at
 the door of the ball-room, that valentine ran to him, saying:
 
“oh, father, some misfortune has happened!”
 
“your grandmamma has just arrived, valentine,” said m. villefort.
 
“and grandpapa?” inquired the young girl, trembling with apprehension.
 m. villefort only replied by offering his arm to his daughter. it
 was just in time, for valentine’s head swam, and she staggered; madame
 villefort instantly hastened to her assistance, and aided her
 husband in dragging her to the carriage, saying:
 
“what singular event! who could have thought it? ah, yes, it is
 indeed strange!”
 
and the wretched family departed, leaving cloud of sadness hanging
 over the rest of the evening. at the foot of the stairs, valentine
 found barrois awaiting her.
 
“m. noirtier wishes to see you tonight, said, in an undertone.
 
“tell him i will come when i leave my dear grandmamma,” she replied,
 feeling, with true delicacy, that the person to whom she could be of
 the most service just then was madame saint-méran.
 
valentine found her grandmother in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung
 sobs, broken sighs, burning tears, were all that passed in this sad
 interview, while madame villefort, leaning on her husband’s arm,
 maintained all outward forms of respect, at least towards the poor
 widow. she soon whispered to her husband:
 
“i think it would be better for to retire, with your permission, for
 the sight of appears still to afflict your mother-in-law.” madame de
 saint-méran heard her.
 
“yes, yes,” she said softly to valentine, “let her leave; but do you
 stay.”
 
madame villefort left, and valentine remained alone beside the bed,
 for the procureur, overcome with astonishment at the unexpected death,
 had followed his wife. meanwhile, barrois had returned for the first
 time to old noirtier, who having heard the noise in the house, had, as
 we have said, sent his old servant to inquire the cause; on his return,
 his quick intelligent eye interrogated the messenger.
 
“alas, sir,” exclaimed barrois, “a great misfortune has happened.
 madame saint-méran has arrived, and her husband is dead!”
 
m. saint-méran and noirtier had never been on strict terms of
 friendship; still, the death of one old man always considerably affects
 another. noirtier let his head fall upon his chest, apparently
 overwhelmed and thoughtful; then closed one eye, in token of
 inquiry.
 
barrois asked, “mademoiselle valentine?”
 
noirtier nodded his head.
 
“she is at the ball, as you know, since she came to say good-bye to you
 in full dress.” noirtier again closed his left eye.
 
“do you wish to see her?” noirtier again made an affirmative sign.
 
“well, they have gone to fetch her, doubt, from madame morcerf’s;
 i will await her return, and beg her to come up here. is that what you
 wish for?”
 
“yes,” replied the invalid.
 
barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for valentine, and
 informed her of her grandfather’s wish. consequently, valentine came up
 to noirtier, on leaving madame saint-méran, who in the midst of her
 grief had at last yielded to fatigue and fallen into feverish sleep.
 within reach of her hand they placed small table upon which stood a
 bottle of orangeade, her usual beverage, and glass. then, as we have
 said, the young girl left the bedside to see m. noirtier.
 
valentine kissed the old man, who looked at her with such tenderness
 that her eyes again filled with tears, whose sources thought must be
 exhausted. the old gentleman continued to dwell upon her with the same
 expression.
 
“yes, yes,” said valentine, “you mean that i have yet kind
 grandfather left, do you not.” the old man intimated that such was his
 meaning. “ah, yes, happily i have,” replied valentine. “without that,
 what would become of me?”
 
it was one o’clock in the morning. barrois, who wished to go to bed
 himself, observed that after such sad events everyone stood in need of
 rest. noirtier would not say that the only rest needed was to see
 his child, but wished her good-night, for grief and fatigue had made
 her appear quite ill.
 
the next morning she found her grandmother in bed; the fever had not
 abated, on the contrary her eyes glistened and she appeared to be
 suffering from violent nervous irritability.
 
“oh, dear grandmamma, are you worse?” exclaimed valentine, perceiving
 all these signs of agitation.
 
“no, my child, no,” said madame saint-méran; “but i was impatiently
 waiting for your arrival, that i might send for your father.”
 
“my father?” inquired valentine, uneasily.
 
“yes, i wish to speak to him.”
 
valentine durst not oppose her grandmother’s wish, the cause of which
 she did not know, and an instant afterwards villefort entered.
 
“sir,” said madame saint-méran, without using any circumlocution,
 and as if fearing she had time to lose, “you wrote to concerning
 the marriage of this child?”
 
“yes, madame,” replied villefort, “it is not only projected but
 arranged.”
 
“your intended son-in-law is named m. franz d’Épinay?”
 
“yes, madame.”
 
“is not the of general d’Épinay who was on our side, and who was
 assassinated some days before the usurper returned from the island of
 elba?”
 
“the same.”
 
“does not dislike the idea of marrying the granddaughter of a
 jacobin?”
 
“our civil dissensions are now happily extinguished, mother,” said
 villefort; “m. d’Épinay was quite child when his father died, he
 knows very little of m. noirtier, and will meet him, if not with
 pleasure, at least with indifference.”
 
“is it suitable match?”
 
“in every respect.”
 
“and the young man?”
 
“is regarded with universal esteem.”
 
“you approve of him?”
 
“he is one of the most well-bred young men i know.”
 
during the whole of this conversation valentine had remained silent.
 
“well, sir,” said madame saint-méran, after few minutes’
 reflection, “i must hasten the marriage, for i have but short time to
 live.”
 
“you, madame?” “you, dear mamma?” exclaimed m. villefort and
 valentine at the same time.
 
“i know what i am saying,” continued the marchioness; “i must hurry
 you, so that, as she has mother, she may at least have grandmother
 to bless her marriage. i am all that is left to her belonging to my
 poor renée, whom you have so soon forgotten, sir.”
 
“ah, madame,” said villefort, “you forget that i was obliged to give a
 mother to my child.”
 
“a stepmother is never mother, sir. but this is not to the
 purpose,—our business concerns valentine, let us leave the dead in
 peace.”
 
all this was said with such exceeding rapidity, that there was
 something in the conversation that seemed like the beginning of
 delirium.
 
“it shall be as you wish, madame,” said villefort; “more especially
 since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soon as m. d’Épinay
 arrives in paris——”
 
30319m
 


“my dear grandmother,” interrupted valentine, “consider decorum—the
 recent death. you would not have marry under such sad auspices?”
 
“my child,” exclaimed the old lady sharply, “let us hear none of the
 conventional objections that deter weak minds from preparing for the
 future. i also was married at the death-bed of my mother, and certainly
 i have not been less happy on that account.”
 
“still that idea of death, madame,” said villefort.
 
“still?—always! i tell you i am going to die—do you understand? well,
 before dying, i wish to see my son-in-law. i wish to tell him to make
 my child happy; i wish to read in his eyes whether intends to obey
 me;—in fact, i will know him—i will!” continued the old lady, with a
 fearful expression, “that i may rise from the depths of my grave to
 find him, if should not fulfil his duty!”
 
“madame,” said villefort, “you must lay aside these exalted ideas,
 which almost assume the appearance of madness. the dead, once buried in
 their graves, rise more.”
 
“and i tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. this night i have had a
 fearful sleep. it seemed as though my soul were already hovering over
 my body, my eyes, which i tried to open, closed against my will, and
 what will appear impossible above all to you, sir, i saw, with my eyes
 shut, in the spot where you are now standing, issuing from that corner
 where there is door leading into madame villefort’s dressing-room—i
 saw, i tell you, silently enter, white figure.”
 
valentine screamed.
 
“it was the fever that disturbed you, madame,” said villefort.
 
30321m
 


“doubt, if you please, but i am sure of what i say. i saw white
 figure, and as if to prevent my discrediting the testimony of only one
 of my senses, i heard my glass removed—the same which is there now on
 the table.”
 
“oh, dear mother, it was dream.”
 
“so little was it dream, that i stretched my hand towards the bell;
 but when i did so, the shade disappeared; my maid then entered with a
 light.”
 
“but she saw one?”
 
“phantoms are visible to those only who ought to see them. it was the
 soul of my husband!—well, if my husband’s soul can come to me, why
 should not my soul reappear to guard my granddaughter? the tie is even
 more direct, it seems to me.”
 
“oh, madame,” said villefort, deeply affected, in spite of himself, “do
 not yield to those gloomy thoughts; you will long live with us, happy,
 loved, and honored, and we will make you forget——”
 
“never, never, never,” said the marchioness. “when does m. d’Épinay
 return?”
 
“we expect him every moment.”
 
“it is well. as soon as arrives inform me. we must be expeditious.
 and then i also wish to see notary, that i may be assured that all
 our property returns to valentine.”
 
“ah, grandmamma,” murmured valentine, pressing her lips on the burning
 brow, “do you wish to kill me? oh, how feverish you are; we must not
 send for notary, but for doctor!”
 
“a doctor?” said she, shrugging her shoulders, “i am not ill; i am
 thirsty—that is all.”
 
30323m
 


“what are you drinking, dear grandmamma?”
 
“the same as usual, my dear, my glass is there on the table—give it to
 me, valentine.” valentine poured the orangeade into glass and gave it
 to her grandmother with certain degree of dread, for it was the same
 glass she fancied that had been touched by the spectre.
 
the marchioness drained the glass at single draught, and then turned
 on her pillow, repeating,
 
“the notary, the notary!”
 
m. villefort left the room, and valentine seated herself at the
 bedside of her grandmother. the poor child appeared herself to require
 the doctor she had recommended to her aged relative. bright spot
 burned in either cheek, her respiration was short and difficult, and
 her pulse beat with feverish excitement. she was thinking of the
 despair of maximilian, when should be informed that madame de
 saint-méran, instead of being an ally, was unconsciously acting as his
 enemy.
 
more than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she
 would not have hesitated moment, if maximilian morrel had been named
 albert morcerf or raoul château-renaud; but morrel was of
 plebeian extraction, and valentine knew how the haughty marquise de
 saint-méran despised all who were not noble. her secret had each time
 been repressed when she was about to reveal it, by the sad conviction
 that it would be useless to do so; for, were it once discovered by her
 father and mother, all would be lost.
 
two hours passed thus; madame saint-méran was in feverish sleep,
 and the notary had arrived. though his coming was announced in very
 low tone, madame saint-méran arose from her pillow.
 
“the notary!” she exclaimed, “let him come in.”
 
the notary, who was at the door, immediately entered. “go, valentine,”
 said madame saint-méran, “and leave with this gentleman.”
 
“but, grandmamma——”
 
“leave me—go!”
 
the young girl kissed her grandmother, and left with her handkerchief
 to her eyes; at the door she found the valet chambre, who told her
 that the doctor was waiting in the dining-room. valentine instantly ran
 down. the doctor was friend of the family, and at the same time one
 of the cleverest men of the day, and very fond of valentine, whose
 birth had witnessed. had himself daughter about her age, but
 whose life was one continued source of anxiety and fear to him from her
 mother having been consumptive.
 
“oh,” said valentine, “we have been waiting for you with such
 impatience, dear m. d’avrigny. but, first of all, how are madeleine and
 antoinette?”
 
madeleine was the daughter of m. d’avrigny, and antoinette his niece.
 m. d’avrigny smiled sadly.
 
“antoinette is very well,” said, “and madeleine tolerably so. but
 you sent for me, my dear child. it is not your father or madame de
 villefort who is ill. as for you, although we doctors cannot divest our
 patients of nerves, i fancy you have further need of than to
 recommend you not to allow your imagination to take too wide field.”
 
valentine colored. m. d’avrigny carried the science of divination
 almost to miraculous extent, for was one of the physicians who
 always work upon the body through the mind.
 
30325m
 


“no,” she replied, “it is for my poor grandmother. you know the
 calamity that has happened to us, do you not?”
 
“i know nothing.” said m. d’avrigny.
 
“alas,” said valentine, restraining her tears, “my grandfather is
 dead.”
 
“m. saint-méran?”
 
“yes.”
 
“suddenly?”
 
“from an apoplectic stroke.”
 
“an apoplectic stroke?” repeated the doctor.
 
“yes, and my poor grandmother fancies that her husband, whom she never
 left, has called her, and that she must go and join him. oh, m.
 d’avrigny, i beseech you, do something for her!”
 
“where is she?”
 
“in her room with the notary.”
 
“and m. noirtier?”
 
“just as was, his mind perfectly clear, but the same incapability of
 moving or speaking.”
 
“and the same love for you—eh, my dear child?”
 
“yes,” said valentine, “he was very fond of me.”
 
“who does not love you?” valentine smiled sadly. “what are your
 grandmother’s symptoms?”
 
“an extreme nervous excitement and strangely agitated sleep; she
 fancied this morning in her sleep that her soul was hovering above her
 body, which she at the same time watched. it must have been delirium;
 she fancies, too, that she saw phantom enter her chamber and even
 heard the noise it made on touching her glass.”
 
“it is singular,” said the doctor; “i was not aware that madame de
 saint-méran was subject to such hallucinations.”
 
“it is the first time i ever saw her in this condition,” said
 valentine; “and this morning she frightened so that i thought her
 mad; and my father, who you know is strong-minded man, himself
 appeared deeply impressed.”
 
“we will go and see,” said the doctor; “what you tell seems very
 strange.” the notary here descended, and valentine was informed that
 her grandmother was alone.
 
“go upstairs,” she said to the doctor.
 
“and you?”
 
“oh, i dare not—she forbade my sending for you; and, as you say, i am
 myself agitated, feverish and out of sorts. i will go and take turn
 in the garden to recover myself.”
 
the doctor pressed valentine’s hand, and while visited her
 grandmother, she descended the steps. we need not say which portion of
 the garden was her favorite walk. after remaining for short time in
 the parterre surrounding the house, and gathering rose to place in
 her waist or hair, she turned into the dark avenue which led to the
 bench; then from the bench she went to the gate. as usual, valentine
 strolled for short time among her flowers, but without gathering
 them. the mourning in her heart forbade her assuming this simple
 ornament, though she had not yet had time to put on the outward
 semblance of woe.
 
30327m
 


she then turned towards the avenue. as she advanced she fancied she
 heard voice speaking her name. she stopped astonished, then the voice
 reached her ear more distinctly, and she recognized it to be that of
 maximilian.
 


chapter 73. the promise
 
it was indeed maximilian morrel, who had passed wretched existence
 since the previous day. with the instinct peculiar to lovers had
 anticipated after the return of madame saint-méran and the death of
 the marquis, that something would occur at m. villefort’s in
 connection with his attachment for valentine. his presentiments were
 realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded him
 pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.
 
valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow and anxiety, and as
 it was not his accustomed hour for visiting her, she had gone to the
 spot simply by accident or perhaps through sympathy. morrel called her,
 and she ran to the gate.
 
“you here at this hour?” said she.
 
“yes, my poor girl,” replied morrel; “i come to bring and to hear bad
 tidings.”
 
“this is, indeed, house of mourning,” said valentine; “speak,
 maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems already full.”
 
“dear valentine,” said morrel, endeavoring to conceal his own emotion,
 “listen, i entreat you; what i am about to say is very serious. when
 are you to be married?”
 
“i will tell you all,” said valentine; “from you i have nothing to
 conceal. this morning the subject was introduced, and my dear
 grandmother, on whom i depended as my only support, not only declared
 herself favorable to it, but is so anxious for it, that they only await
 the arrival of m. d’Épinay, and the following day the contract will be
 signed.”
 
deep sigh escaped the young man, who gazed long and mournfully at her
 loved.
 
“alas,” replied he, “it is dreadful thus to hear my condemnation from
 your own lips. the sentence is passed, and, in few hours, will be
 executed; it must be so, and i will not endeavor to prevent it. but,
 since you say nothing remains but for m. d’Épinay to arrive that the
 contract may be signed, and the following day you will be his, tomorrow
 you will be engaged to m. d’Épinay, for came this morning to paris.”
 valentine uttered cry.
 
“i was at the house of monte cristo an hour since,” said morrel; “we
 were speaking, of the sorrow your family had experienced, and i of
 your grief, when carriage rolled into the courtyard. never, till
 then, had i placed any confidence in presentiments, but now i cannot
 help believing them, valentine. at the sound of that carriage i
 shuddered; soon i heard steps on the staircase, which terrified as
 much as the footsteps of the commander did don juan. the door at last
 opened; albert morcerf entered first, and i began to hope my fears
 were vain, when, after him, another young man advanced, and the count
 exclaimed: ‘ah, here is the baron franz d’Épinay!’ i summoned all my
 strength and courage to my support. perhaps i turned pale and trembled,
 but certainly i smiled; and five minutes after i left, without having
 heard one word that had passed.”
 
“poor maximilian!” murmured valentine.
 
“valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me. and remember
 my life depends on your answer. what do you intend doing?” valentine
 held down her head; she was overwhelmed.
 
“listen,” said morrel; “it is not the first time you have contemplated
 our present position, which is serious and urgent one; i do not think
 it is moment to give way to useless sorrow; leave that for those who
 like to suffer at their leisure and indulge their grief in secret.
 there are such in the world, and god will doubtless reward them in
 heaven for their resignation on earth, but those who mean to contend
 must not lose one precious moment, but must return immediately the blow
 which fortune strikes. do you intend to struggle against our
 ill-fortune? tell me, valentine for it is that i came to know.”
 
valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. the idea of
 resisting her father, her grandmother, and all the family, had never
 occurred to her.
 
“what do you say, maximilian?” asked valentine. “what do you mean by a
 struggle? oh, it would be sacrilege. what? i resist my father’s
 order, and my dying grandmother’s wish? impossible!”
 
morrel started.
 
“you are too noble not to understand me, and you understand so well
 that you already yield, dear maximilian. no, no; i shall need all my
 strength to struggle with myself and support my grief in secret, as you
 say. but to grieve my father—to disturb my grandmother’s last
 moments—never!”
 
“you are right,” said morrel, calmly.
 
“in what tone you speak!” cried valentine.
 
“i speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle.”
 
“mademoiselle,” cried valentine; “mademoiselle! oh, selfish man! he
 sees in despair, and pretends cannot understand me!”
 
“you mistake—i understand you perfectly. you will not oppose m.
 villefort, you will not displease the marchioness, and tomorrow you
 will sign the contract which will bind you to your husband.”
 
“but, _mon dieu!_ tell me, how can i do otherwise?”
 
“do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; i shall be bad judge in such a
 case; my selfishness will blind me,” replied morrel, whose low voice
 and clenched hands announced his growing desperation.
 
“what would you have proposed, maximilian, had you found willing to
 accede?”
 
“it is not for to say.”
 
“you are wrong; you must advise what to do.”
 
“do you seriously ask my advice, valentine?”
 
“certainly, dear maximilian, for if it is good, i will follow it; you
 know my devotion to you.”
 
“valentine,” said morrel pushing aside loose plank, “give your
 hand in token of forgiveness of my anger; my senses are confused, and
 during the last hour the most extravagant thoughts have passed through
 my brain. oh, if you refuse my advice——”
 
“what do you advise?” said valentine, raising her eyes to heaven and
 sighing.
 
“i am free,” replied maximilian, “and rich enough to support you. i
 swear to make you my lawful wife before my lips even shall have
 approached your forehead.”
 
“you make tremble!” said the young girl.
 
“follow me,” said morrel; “i will take you to my sister, who is worthy
 also to be yours. we will embark for algiers, for england, for america,
 or, if you prefer it, retire to the country and only return to paris
 when our friends have reconciled your family.”
 
valentine shook her head.
 
“i feared it, maximilian,” said she; “it is the counsel of madman,
 and i should be more mad than you, did i not stop you at once with the
 word ‘impossible, morrel, impossible!’”
 
“you will then submit to what fate decrees for you without even
 attempting to contend with it?” said morrel sorrowfully.
 
“yes,—if i die!”
 
“well, valentine,” resumed maximilian, “i can only say again that you
 are right. truly, it is i who am mad, and you prove to that passion
 blinds the most well-meaning. i appreciate your calm reasoning. it is
 then understood that tomorrow you will be irrevocably promised to m.
 franz d’Épinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented to
 heighten the effect of comedy called the signature of the contract,
 but your own will?”
 
“again you drive to despair, maximilian,” said valentine, “again you
 plunge the dagger into the wound! what would you do, tell me, if your
 sister listened to such proposition?”
 
“mademoiselle,” replied morrel with bitter smile, “i am selfish—you
 have already said so—and as selfish man i think not of what others
 would do in my situation, but of what i intend doing myself. i think
 only that i have known you not whole year. from the day i first saw
 you, all my hopes of happiness have been in securing your affection.
 one day you acknowledged that you loved me, and since that day my hope
 of future happiness has rested on obtaining you, for to gain you would
 be life to me. now, i think more; i say only that fortune has turned
 against me—i had thought to gain heaven, and now i have lost it. it is
 an every-day occurrence for gambler to lose not only what he
 possesses but also what has not.”
 
morrel pronounced these words with perfect calmness; valentine looked
 at him moment with her large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to
 let morrel discover the grief which struggled in her heart.
 
“but, in word, what are you going to do?” asked she.
 
“i am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you, mademoiselle,
 solemnly assuring you that i wish your life may be so calm, so happy,
 and so fully occupied, that there may be place for even in your
 memory.”
 
“oh!” murmured valentine.
 
“adieu, valentine, adieu!” said morrel, bowing.
 
“where are you going?” cried the young girl, extending her hand through
 the opening, and seizing maximilian by his coat, for she understood
 from her own agitated feelings that her lover’s calmness could not be
 real; “where are you going?”
 
“i am going, that i may not bring fresh trouble into your family: and
 to set an example which every honest and devoted man, situated as i am,
 may follow.”
 
“before you leave me, tell what you are going to do, maximilian.”
 the young man smiled sorrowfully.
 
“speak, speak!” said valentine; “i entreat you.”
 
“has your resolution changed, valentine?”
 
“it cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!” cried the young
 girl.
 
“then adieu, valentine!”
 
valentine shook the gate with strength of which she could not have
 been supposed to be possessed, as morrel was going away, and passing
 both her hands through the opening, she clasped and wrung them. “i must
 know what you mean to do!” said she. “where are you going?”
 
“oh, fear not,” said maximilian, stopping at short distance, “i do
 not intend to render another man responsible for the rigorous fate
 reserved for me. another might threaten to seek m. franz, to provoke
 him, and to fight with him; all that would be folly. what has m. franz
 to do with it? saw this morning for the first time, and has
 already forgotten has seen me. did not even know i existed when
 it was arranged by your two families that you should be united. i have
 enmity against m. franz, and promise you the punishment shall not
 fall on him.”
 
“on whom, then!—on me?”
 
“on you? valentine! oh, heaven forbid! woman is sacred; the woman one
 loves is holy.”
 
“on yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?”
 
“i am the only guilty person, am i not?” said maximilian.
 
“maximilian!” said valentine, “maximilian, come back, i entreat you!”
 
drew near with his sweet smile, and but for his paleness one might
 have thought him in his usual happy mood.
 
“listen, my dear, my adored valentine,” said in his melodious and
 grave tone; “those who, like us, have never had thought for which we
 need blush before the world, such may read each other’s hearts. i never
 was romantic, and am melancholy hero. i imitate neither manfred nor
 anthony; but without words, protestations, or vows, my life has
 entwined itself with yours; you leave me, and you are right in doing
 so,—i repeat it, you are right; but in losing you, i lose my life. the
 moment you leave me, valentine, i am alone in the world. my sister is
 happily married; her husband is only my brother-in-law, that is, man
 whom the ties of social life alone attach to me; one then longer
 needs my useless life. this is what i shall do; i will wait until the
 very moment you are married, for i will not lose the shadow of one of
 those unexpected chances which are sometimes reserved for us, since m.
 franz may, after all, die before that time, thunderbolt may fall even
 on the altar as you approach it,—nothing appears impossible to one
 condemned to die, and miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape
 from death is concerned. i will, then, wait until the last moment, and
 when my misery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, i will write a
 confidential letter to my brother-in-law, another to the prefect of
 police, to acquaint them with my intention, and at the corner of some
 wood, on the brink of some abyss, on the bank of some river, i will put
 an end to my existence, as certainly as i am the of the most honest
 man who ever lived in france.”
 
30333m
 


valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold of the gate, her
 arms fell by her side, and two large tears rolled down her cheeks. the
 young man stood before her, sorrowful and resolute.
 
“oh, for pity’s sake,” said she, “you will live, will you not?”
 
“no, on my honor,” said maximilian; “but that will not affect you. you
 have done your duty, and your conscience will be at rest.”
 
valentine fell on her knees, and pressed her almost bursting heart.
 “maximilian,” said she, “maximilian, my friend, my brother on earth, my
 true husband in heaven, i entreat you, do as i do, live in suffering;
 perhaps we may one day be united.”
 
“adieu, valentine,” repeated morrel.
 
“my god,” said valentine, raising both her hands to heaven with a
 sublime expression, “i have done my utmost to remain submissive
 daughter; i have begged, entreated, implored; has regarded neither
 my prayers, my entreaties, nor my tears. it is done,” cried she, wiping
 away her tears, and resuming her firmness, “i am resolved not to die of
 remorse, but rather of shame. live, maximilian, and i will be yours.
 say when shall it be? speak, command, i will obey.”
 
morrel, who had already gone some few steps away, again returned, and
 pale with joy extended both hands towards valentine through the
 opening.
 
“valentine,” said he, “dear valentine, you must not speak thus—rather
 let die. why should i obtain you by violence, if our love is mutual?
 is it from mere humanity you bid live? i would then rather die.”
 
“truly,” murmured valentine, “who on this earth cares for me, if he
 does not? who has consoled in my sorrow but he? on whom do my hopes
 rest? on whom does my bleeding heart repose? on him, on him, always on
 him! yes, you are right, maximilian, i will follow you. i will leave
 the paternal home, i will give up all. oh, ungrateful girl that i am,”
 cried valentine, sobbing, “i will give up all, even my dear old
 grandfather, whom i had nearly forgotten.”
 
“no,” said maximilian, “you shall not leave him. m. noirtier has
 evinced, you say, kind feeling towards me. well, before you leave,
 tell him all; his consent would be your justification in god’s sight.
 as soon as we are married, shall come and live with us, instead of
 one child, shall have two. you have told how you talk to him and
 how answers you; i shall very soon learn that language by signs,
 valentine, and i promise you solemnly, that instead of despair, it is
 happiness that awaits us.”
 
“oh, see, maximilian, see the power you have over me, you almost make
 believe you; and yet, what you tell is madness, for my father
 will curse me—he is inflexible—he will never pardon me. now listen to
 me, maximilian; if by artifice, by entreaty, by accident—in short, if
 by any means i can delay this marriage, will you wait?”
 
“yes, i promise you, as faithfully as you have promised that this
 horrible marriage shall not take place, and that if you are dragged
 before magistrate or priest, you will refuse.”
 
“i promise you by all that is most sacred to in the world, namely,
 by my mother.”
 
“we will wait, then,” said morrel.
 
“yes, we will wait,” replied valentine, who revived at these words;
 “there are so many things which may save unhappy beings such as we
 are.”
 
“i rely on you, valentine,” said morrel; “all you do will be well done;
 only if they disregard your prayers, if your father and madame de
 saint-méran insist that m. d’Épinay should be called tomorrow to sign
 the contract——”
 
“then you have my promise, maximilian.”
 
“instead of signing——”
 
“i will go to you, and we will fly; but from this moment until then,
 let us not tempt providence, let us not see each other. it is a
 miracle, it is providence that we have not been discovered. if we
 were surprised, if it were known that we met thus, we should have no
 further resource.”
 
“you are right, valentine; but how shall i ascertain?”
 
“from the notary, m. deschamps.”
 
“i know him.”
 
“and for myself—i will write to you, depend on me. i dread this
 marriage, maximilian, as much as you.”
 
“thank you, my adored valentine, thank you; that is enough. when once i
 know the hour, i will hasten to this spot, you can easily get over this
 fence with my assistance, carriage will await us at the gate, in
 which you will accompany to my sister’s; there living, retired or
 mingling in society, as you wish, we shall be enabled to use our power
 to resist oppression, and not suffer ourselves to be put to death like
 sheep, which only defend themselves by sighs.”
 
“yes,” said valentine, “i will now acknowledge you are right,
 maximilian; and now are you satisfied with your betrothal?” said the
 young girl sorrowfully.
 
“my adored valentine, words cannot express one half of my
 satisfaction.”
 
valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her lips so near the
 fence, that they nearly touched those of morrel, which were pressed
 against the other side of the cold and inexorable barrier.
 
“adieu, then, till we meet again,” said valentine, tearing herself
 away. “i shall hear from you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!”
 
the sound of kiss was heard, and valentine fled through the avenue.
 morrel listened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing the
 branches, and of her footstep on the gravel, then raised his eyes with
 an ineffable smile of thankfulness to heaven for being permitted to be
 thus loved, and then also disappeared.
 
the young man returned home and waited all the evening and all the next
 day without getting any message. it was only on the following day, at
 about ten o’clock in the morning, as was starting to call on m.
 deschamps, the notary, that received from the postman small
 billet, which knew to be from valentine, although had not before
 seen her writing. it was to this effect:
 
“tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed nothing. yesterday, for
 two hours, i was at the church of saint-philippe-du-roule, and for two
 hours i prayed most fervently. heaven is as inflexible as man, and the
 signature of the contract is fixed for this evening at nine o’clock. i
 have but one promise and but one heart to give; that promise is pledged
 to you, that heart is also yours. this evening, then, at quarter to
 nine at the gate.
 
“your betrothed,
 
“valentine villefort.”
 
“p.s.—my poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterday her fever
 amounted to delirium; today her delirium is almost madness. you will be
 very kind to me, will you not, morrel, to make forget my sorrow in
 leaving her thus? i think it is kept secret from grandpapa noirtier,
 that the contract is to be signed this evening.”
 
morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the
 contract was to be signed that evening. then went to call on monte
 cristo and heard still more. franz had been to announce the ceremony,
 and madame villefort had also written to beg the count to excuse her
 not inviting him; the death of m. saint-méran and the dangerous
 illness of his widow would cast gloom over the meeting which she
 would regret should be shared by the count whom she wished every
 happiness.
 
the day before franz had been presented to madame saint-méran, who
 had left her bed to receive him, but had been obliged to return to it
 immediately after.
 
it is easy to suppose that morrel’s agitation would not escape the
 count’s penetrating eye. monte cristo was more affectionate than
 ever,—indeed, his manner was so kind that several times morrel was on
 the point of telling him all. but recalled the promise had made
 to valentine, and kept his secret.
 
the young man read valentine’s letter twenty times in the course of the
 day. it was her first, and on what an occasion! each time read it he
 renewed his vow to make her happy. how great is the power of woman
 who has made so courageous resolution! what devotion does she deserve
 from him for whom she has sacrificed everything! how ought she really
 to be supremely loved! she becomes at once queen and wife, and it
 is impossible to thank and love her sufficiently.
 
morrel longed intensely for the moment when should hear valentine
 say, “here i am, maximilian; come and help me.” had arranged
 everything for her escape; two ladders were hidden in the clover-field;
 cabriolet was ordered for maximilian alone, without servant,
 without lights; at the turning of the first street they would light the
 lamps, as it would be foolish to attract the notice of the police by
 too many precautions. occasionally shuddered; thought of the
 moment when, from the top of that wall, should protect the descent
 of his dear valentine, pressing in his arms for the first time her of
 whom had yet only kissed the delicate hand.
 
when the afternoon arrived and felt that the hour was drawing near,
 wished for solitude, his agitation was extreme; simple question
 from friend would have irritated him. shut himself in his room,
 and tried to read, but his eye glanced over the page without
 understanding word, and threw away the book, and for the second
 time sat down to sketch his plan, the ladders and the fence.
 
at length the hour drew near. never did man deeply in love allow the
 clocks to go on peacefully. morrel tormented his so effectually that
 they struck eight at half-past six. then said, “it is time to start;
 the signature was indeed fixed to take place at nine o’clock, but
 perhaps valentine will not wait for that.” consequently, morrel, having
 left the rue meslay at half-past eight by his timepiece, entered the
 clover-field while the clock of saint-philippe-du-roule was striking
 eight. the horse and cabriolet were concealed behind small ruin,
 where morrel had often waited.
 
the night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden assumed a
 deeper hue. then morrel came out from his hiding-place with beating
 heart, and looked through the small opening in the gate; there was yet
 one to be seen.
 
the clock struck half-past eight, and still another half-hour was
 passed in waiting, while morrel walked to and fro, and gazed more and
 more frequently through the opening. the garden became darker still,
 but in the darkness looked in vain for the white dress, and in the
 silence vainly listened for the sound of footsteps. the house, which
 was discernible through the trees, remained in darkness, and gave no
 indication that so important an event as the signature of a
 marriage-contract was going on. morrel looked at his watch, which
 wanted quarter to ten; but soon the same clock had already heard
 strike two or three times rectified the error by striking half-past
 nine.
 
this was already half an hour past the time valentine had fixed. it was
 terrible moment for the young man. the slightest rustling of the
 foliage, the least whistling of the wind, attracted his attention, and
 drew the perspiration to his brow; then tremblingly fixed his
 ladder, and, not to lose moment, placed his foot on the first step.
 amidst all these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struck ten.
 “it is impossible,” said maximilian, “that the signing of contract
 should occupy so long time without unexpected interruptions. i have
 weighed all the chances, calculated the time required for all the
 forms; something must have happened.”
 
and then walked rapidly to and fro, and pressed his burning forehead
 against the fence. had valentine fainted? or had she been discovered
 and stopped in her flight? these were the only obstacles which appeared
 possible to the young man.
 
the idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to escape, and
 that she had fainted in one of the paths, was the one that most
 impressed itself upon his mind. “in that case,” said he, “i should lose
 her, and by my own fault.” dwelt on this idea for moment, then it
 appeared reality. even thought could perceive something on the
 ground at distance; ventured to call, and it seemed to him that
 the wind wafted back an almost inarticulate sigh.
 
at last the half-hour struck. it was impossible to wait longer, his
 temples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; passed one
 leg over the wall, and in moment leaped down on the other side. he
 was on villefort’s premises—had arrived there by scaling the wall. what
 might be the consequences? however, had not ventured thus far to
 draw back. followed short distance close under the wall, then
 crossed path, hid entered clump of trees. in moment had passed
 through them, and could see the house distinctly.
 
30341m
 


then morrel saw that had been right in believing that the house was
 not illuminated. instead of lights at every window, as is customary on
 days of ceremony, saw only gray mass, which was veiled also by a
 cloud, which at that moment obscured the moon’s feeble light. light
 moved rapidly from time to time past three windows of the second floor.
 these three windows were in madame saint-méran’s room. another
 remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in madame de
 villefort’s bedroom. morrel guessed all this. so many times, in order
 to follow valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had made
 her describe the whole house, that without having seen it knew it
 all.
 
this darkness and silence alarmed morrel still more than valentine’s
 absence had done. almost mad with grief, and determined to venture
 everything in order to see valentine once more, and be certain of the
 misfortune feared, morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and
 was going to pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden,
 when the sound of voice, still at some distance, but which was borne
 upon the wind, reached him. at this sound, as was already partially
 exposed to view, stepped back and concealed himself completely,
 remaining perfectly motionless.
 
had formed his resolution. if it was valentine alone, would speak
 as she passed; if she was accompanied, and could not speak, still he
 should see her, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, he
 would listen to their conversation, and might understand something of
 this hitherto incomprehensible mystery.
 
the moon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which had
 concealed it, and morrel saw villefort come out upon the steps,
 followed by gentleman in black. they descended, and advanced towards
 the clump of trees, and morrel soon recognized the other gentleman as
 doctor d’avrigny.
 
30339m
 


the young man, seeing them approach, drew back mechanically, until he
 found himself stopped by sycamore-tree in the centre of the clump;
 there was compelled to remain. soon the two gentlemen stopped also.
 
“ah, my dear doctor,” said the procureur, “heaven declares itself
 against my house! what dreadful death—what blow! seek not to
 console me; alas, nothing can alleviate so great sorrow—the wound is
 too deep and too fresh! dead, dead!”
 
the cold sweat sprang to the young man’s brow, and his teeth chattered.
 who could be dead in that house, which villefort himself had called
 accursed?
 
“my dear m. villefort,” replied the doctor, with tone which
 redoubled the terror of the young man, “i have not led you here to
 console you; on the contrary——”
 
“what can you mean?” asked the procureur, alarmed.
 
“i mean that behind the misfortune which has just happened to you,
 there is another, perhaps, still greater.”
 
“can it be possible?” murmured villefort, clasping his hands. “what are
 you going to tell me?”
 
“are we quite alone, my friend?”
 
“yes, quite; but why all these precautions?”
 
“because i have terrible secret to communicate to you,” said the
 doctor. “let us sit down.”
 
villefort fell, rather than seated himself. the doctor stood before
 him, with one hand placed on his shoulder. morrel, horrified, supported
 his head with one hand, and with the other pressed his heart, lest its
 beatings should be heard. “dead, dead!” repeated within himself; and
 felt as if were also dying.
 
“speak, doctor—i am listening,” said villefort; “strike—i am prepared
 for everything!”
 
“madame saint-méran was, doubtless, advancing in years, but she
 enjoyed excellent health.” morrel began again to breathe freely, which
 had not done during the last ten minutes.
 
“grief has consumed her,” said villefort—“yes, grief, doctor! after
 living forty years with the marquis——”
 
“it is not grief, my dear villefort,” said the doctor; “grief may kill,
 although it rarely does, and never in day, never in an hour, never in
 ten minutes.” villefort answered nothing, simply raised his head,
 which had been cast down before, and looked at the doctor with
 amazement.
 
“were you present during the last struggle?” asked m. d’avrigny.
 
“i was,” replied the procureur; “you begged not to leave.”
 
“did you notice the symptoms of the disease to which madame de
 saint-méran has fallen victim?”
 
“i did. madame saint-méran had three successive attacks, at
 intervals of some minutes, each one more serious than the former. when
 you arrived, madame saint-méran had already been panting for breath
 some minutes; she then had fit, which i took to be simply nervous
 attack, and it was only when i saw her raise herself in the bed, and
 her limbs and neck appear stiffened, that i became really alarmed. then
 i understood from your countenance there was more to fear than i had
 thought. this crisis past, i endeavored to catch your eye, but could
 not. you held her hand—you were feeling her pulse—and the second fit
 came on before you had turned towards me. this was more terrible than
 the first; the same nervous movements were repeated, and the mouth
 contracted and turned purple.”
 
“and at the third she expired.”
 
“at the end of the first attack i discovered symptoms of tetanus; you
 confirmed my opinion.”
 
“yes, before others,” replied the doctor; “but now we are alone——”
 
“what are you going to say? oh, spare me!”
 
“that the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances are
 the same.”
 
m. villefort started from his seat, then in moment fell down
 again, silent and motionless. morrel knew not if were dreaming or
 awake.
 
“listen,” said the doctor; “i know the full importance of the statement
 i have just made, and the disposition of the man to whom i have made
 it.”
 
“do you speak to as magistrate or as friend?” asked villefort.
 
“as friend, and only as friend, at this moment. the similarity in
 the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances is so
 great, that were i obliged to affirm by oath what i have now stated, i
 should hesitate; i therefore repeat to you, i speak not to a
 magistrate, but to friend. and to that friend i say, ‘during the
 three-quarters of an hour that the struggle continued, i watched the
 convulsions and the death of madame saint-méran, and am thoroughly
 convinced that not only did her death proceed from poison, but i could
 also specify the poison.’”
 
“can it be possible?”
 
“the symptoms are marked, do you see?—sleep broken by nervous spasms,
 excitation of the brain, torpor of the nerve centres. madame de
 saint-méran succumbed to powerful dose of brucine or of strychnine,
 which by some mistake, perhaps, has been given to her.”
 
villefort seized the doctor’s hand.
 
“oh, it is impossible,” said he, “i must be dreaming! it is frightful
 to hear such things from such man as you! tell me, i entreat you, my
 dear doctor, that you may be deceived.”
 
“doubtless i may, but——”
 
“but?”
 
30345m
 


“but i do not think so.”
 
“have pity on doctor! so many dreadful things have happened to me
 lately that i am on the verge of madness.”
 
“has anyone besides seen madame saint-méran?”
 
“no.”
 
“has anything been sent for from chemist’s that i have not examined?”
 
“nothing.”
 
“had madame saint-méran any enemies?”
 
“not to my knowledge.”
 
“would her death affect anyone’s interest?”
 
“it could not indeed, my daughter is her only heiress—valentine alone.
 oh, if such thought could present itself, i would stab myself to
 punish my heart for having for one instant harbored it.”
 
“indeed, my dear friend,” said m. d’avrigny, “i would not accuse
 anyone; i speak only of an accident, you understand,—of mistake,—but
 whether accident or mistake, the fact is there; it is on my conscience
 and compels to speak aloud to you. make inquiry.”
 
“of whom?—how?—of what?”
 
“may not barrois, the old servant, have made mistake, and have given
 madame saint-méran dose prepared for his master?”
 
“for my father?”
 
“yes.”
 
“but how could dose prepared for m. noirtier poison madame de
 saint-méran?”
 
“nothing is more simple. you know poisons become remedies in certain
 diseases, of which paralysis is one. for instance, having tried every
 other remedy to restore movement and speech to m. noirtier, i resolved
 to try one last means, and for three months i have been giving him
 brucine; so that in the last dose i ordered for him there were six
 grains. this quantity, which is perfectly safe to administer to the
 paralyzed frame of m. noirtier, which has become gradually accustomed
 to it, would be sufficient to kill another person.”
 
“my dear doctor, there is communication between m. noirtier’s
 apartment and that of madame saint-méran, and barrois never entered
 my mother-in-law’s room. in short, doctor although i know you to be the
 most conscientious man in the world, and although i place the utmost
 reliance in you, i want, notwithstanding my conviction, to believe this
 axiom, _errare humanum est_.”
 
“is there one of my brethren in whom you have equal confidence with
 myself?”
 
“why do you ask that?—what do you wish?”
 
“send for him; i will tell him what i have seen, and we will consult
 together, and examine the body.”
 
“and you will find traces of poison?”
 
“no, i did not say of poison, but we can prove what was the state of
 the body; we shall discover the cause of her sudden death, and we shall
 say, ‘dear villefort, if this thing has been caused by negligence,
 watch over your servants; if from hatred, watch your enemies.’”
 
“what do you propose to me, d’avrigny?” said villefort in despair; “so
 soon as another is admitted into our secret, an inquest will become
 necessary; and an inquest in my house—impossible! still,” continued the
 procureur, looking at the doctor with uneasiness, “if you wish it—if
 you demand it, why then it shall be done. but, doctor, you see me
 already so grieved—how can i introduce into my house so much scandal,
 after so much sorrow? my wife and my daughter would die of it! and i,
 doctor—you know man does not arrive at the post i occupy—one has not
 been king’s attorney twenty-five years without having amassed a
 tolerable number of enemies; mine are numerous. let this affair be
 talked of, it will be triumph for them, which will make them rejoice,
 and cover with shame. pardon me, doctor, these worldly ideas; were
 you priest i should not dare tell you that, but you are man, and
 you know mankind. doctor, pray recall your words; you have said
 nothing, have you?”
 
“my dear m. villefort,” replied the doctor, “my first duty is to
 humanity. i would have saved madame saint-méran, if science could
 have done it; but she is dead and my duty regards the living. let us
 bury this terrible secret in the deepest recesses of our hearts; i am
 willing, if anyone should suspect this, that my silence on the subject
 should be imputed to my ignorance. meanwhile, sir, watch always—watch
 carefully, for perhaps the evil may not stop here. and when you have
 found the culprit, if you find him, i will say to you, ‘you are a
 magistrate, do as you will!’”
 
“i thank you, doctor,” said villefort with indescribable joy; “i never
 had better friend than you.” and, as if feared doctor d’avrigny
 would recall his promise, hurried him towards the house.
 
when they were gone, morrel ventured out from under the trees, and the
 moon shone upon his face, which was so pale it might have been taken
 for that of ghost.
 
“i am manifestly protected in most wonderful, but most terrible
 manner,” said he; “but valentine, poor girl, how will she bear so much
 sorrow?”
 
as thought thus, looked alternately at the window with red
 curtains and the three windows with white curtains. the light had
 almost disappeared from the former; doubtless madame villefort had
 just put out her lamp, and the nightlamp alone reflected its dull light
 on the window. at the extremity of the building, on the contrary, he
 saw one of the three windows open. wax-light placed on the
 mantle-piece threw some of its pale rays without, and shadow was seen
 for one moment on the balcony. morrel shuddered; thought heard a
 sob.
 
it cannot be wondered at that his mind, generally so courageous, but
 now disturbed by the two strongest human passions, love and fear, was
 weakened even to the indulgence of superstitious thoughts. although it
 was impossible that valentine should see him, hidden as was, he
 thought heard the shadow at the window call him; his disturbed mind
 told him so. this double error became an irresistible reality, and by
 one of the incomprehensible transports of youth, bounded from his
 hiding-place, and with two strides, at the risk of being seen, at the
 risk of alarming valentine, at the risk of being discovered by some
 exclamation which might escape the young girl, crossed the
 flower-garden, which by the light of the moon resembled large white
 lake, and having passed the rows of orange-trees which extended in
 front of the house, reached the step, ran quickly up and pushed the
 door, which opened without offering any resistance.
 
valentine had not seen him. her eyes, raised towards heaven, were
 watching silvery cloud gliding over the azure, its form that of a
 shadow mounting towards heaven. her poetic and excited mind pictured it
 as the soul of her grandmother.
 
meanwhile, morrel had traversed the anteroom and found the staircase,
 which, being carpeted, prevented his approach being heard, and had
 regained that degree of confidence that the presence of m. villefort
 even would not have alarmed him. was quite prepared for any such
 encounter. would at once approach valentine’s father and acknowledge
 all, begging villefort to pardon and sanction the love which united two
 fond and loving hearts. morrel was mad.
 
happily did not meet anyone. now, especially, did find the
 description valentine had given of the interior of the house useful to
 him; arrived safely at the top of the staircase, and while was
 feeling his way, sob indicated the direction was to take. he
 turned back, door partly open enabled him to see his road, and to
 hear the voice of one in sorrow. pushed the door open and entered.
 at the other end of the room, under white sheet which covered it, lay
 the corpse, still more alarming to morrel since the account had so
 unexpectedly overheard. by its side, on her knees, and with her head
 buried in the cushion of an easy-chair, was valentine, trembling and
 sobbing, her hands extended above her head, clasped and stiff. she had
 turned from the window, which remained open, and was praying in accents
 that would have affected the most unfeeling; her words were rapid,
 incoherent, unintelligible, for the burning weight of grief almost
 stopped her utterance.
 
the moon shining through the open blinds made the lamp appear to burn
 paler, and cast sepulchral hue over the whole scene. morrel could not
 resist this; was not exemplary for piety, was not easily
 impressed, but valentine suffering, weeping, wringing her hands before
 him, was more than could bear in silence. sighed, and whispered a
 name, and the head bathed in tears and pressed on the velvet cushion of
 the chair—a head like that of magdalen by correggio—was raised and
 turned towards him. valentine perceived him without betraying the least
 surprise. heart overwhelmed with one great grief is insensible to
 minor emotions. morrel held out his hand to her. valentine, as her only
 apology for not having met him, pointed to the corpse under the sheet,
 and began to sob again.
 
neither dared for some time to speak in that room. they hesitated to
 break the silence which death seemed to impose; at length valentine
 ventured.
 
“my friend,” said she, “how came you here? alas, i would say you are
 welcome, had not death opened the way for you into this house.”
 
“valentine,” said morrel with trembling voice, “i had waited since
 half-past eight, and did not see you come; i became uneasy, leaped the
 wall, found my way through the garden, when voices conversing about the
 fatal event——”
 
“what voices?” asked valentine. morrel shuddered as thought of the
 conversation of the doctor and m. villefort, and thought could
 see through the sheet the extended hands, the stiff neck, and the
 purple lips.
 
“your servants,” said he, “who were repeating the whole of the
 sorrowful story; from them i learned it all.”
 
“but it was risking the failure of our plan to come up here, love.”
 
“forgive me,” replied morrel; “i will go away.”
 
“no,” said valentine, “you might meet someone; stay.”
 
“but if anyone should come here——”
 
the young girl shook her head. “no one will come,” said she; “do not
 fear, there is our safeguard,” pointing to the bed.
 
“but what has become of m. d’Épinay?” replied morrel.
 
30349m
 


“m. franz arrived to sign the contract just as my dear grandmother was
 dying.”
 
“alas,” said morrel with feeling of selfish joy; for thought this
 death would cause the wedding to be postponed indefinitely.
 
“but what redoubles my sorrow,” continued the young girl, as if this
 feeling was to receive its immediate punishment, “is that the poor old
 lady, on her death-bed, requested that the marriage might take place as
 soon as possible; she also, thinking to protect me, was acting against
 me.”
 
“hark!” said morrel. they both listened; steps were distinctly heard in
 the corridor and on the stairs.
 
“it is my father, who has just left his study.”
 
“to accompany the doctor to the door,” added morrel.
 
“how do you know it is the doctor?” asked valentine, astonished.
 
“i imagined it must be,” said morrel.
 
valentine looked at the young man; they heard the street door close,
 then m. villefort locked the garden door, and returned upstairs. he
 stopped moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whether to turn to
 his own apartment or into madame saint-méran’s; morrel concealed
 himself behind door; valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to
 deprive her of all fear. m. villefort passed on to his own room.
 
“now,” said valentine, “you can neither go out by the front door nor by
 the garden.”
 
morrel looked at her with astonishment.
 
“there is but one way left you that is safe,” said she; “it is through
 my grandfather’s room.” she rose. “come,” she added.
 
“where?” asked maximilian.
 
“to my grandfather’s room.”
 
“i in m. noirtier’s apartment?”
 
“yes.”
 
“can you mean it, valentine?”
 
“i have long wished it; is my only remaining friend and we both need
 his help,—come.”
 
“be careful, valentine,” said morrel, hesitating to comply with the
 young girl’s wishes; “i now see my error—i acted like madman in
 coming in here. are you sure you are more reasonable?”
 
“yes,” said valentine; “and i have but one scruple,—that of leaving my
 dear grandmother’s remains, which i had undertaken to watch.”
 
“valentine,” said morrel, “death is in itself sacred.”
 
“yes,” said valentine; “besides, it will not be for long.”
 
she then crossed the corridor, and led the way down narrow staircase
 to m. noirtier’s room; morrel followed her on tiptoe; at the door they
 found the old servant.
 
“barrois,” said valentine, “shut the door, and let one come in.”
 
she passed first.
 
noirtier, seated in his chair, and listening to every sound, was
 watching the door; saw valentine, and his eye brightened. there was
 something grave and solemn in the approach of the young girl which
 struck the old man, and immediately his bright eye began to
 interrogate.
 
“dear grandfather.” said she hurriedly, “you know poor grandmamma died
 an hour since, and now i have friend in the world but you.”
 
his expressive eyes evinced the greatest tenderness.
 
“to you alone, then, may i confide my sorrows and my hopes?”
 
the paralytic motioned “yes.”
 
valentine took maximilian’s hand.
 
“look attentively, then, at this gentleman.”
 
the old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze with slight astonishment on
 morrel.
 
“it is m. maximilian morrel,” said she; “the of that good merchant
 of marseilles, whom you doubtless recollect.”
 
“yes,” said the old man.
 
“he brings an irreproachable name, which maximilian is likely to render
 glorious, since at thirty years of age is captain, an officer of
 the legion of honor.”
 
the old man signified that recollected him.
 
“well, grandpapa,” said valentine, kneeling before him, and pointing to
 maximilian, “i love him, and will be only his; were i compelled to
 marry another, i would destroy myself.”
 
the eyes of the paralytic expressed multitude of tumultuous thoughts.
 
“you like m. maximilian morrel, do you not, grandpapa?” asked
 valentine.
 
“yes.”
 
“and you will protect us, who are your children, against the will of my
 father?”
 
noirtier cast an intelligent glance at morrel, as if to say, “perhaps i
 may.”
 
maximilian understood him.
 
“mademoiselle,” said he, “you have sacred duty to fulfil in your
 deceased grandmother’s room, will you allow the honor of few
 minutes’ conversation with m. noirtier?”
 
“that is it,” said the old man’s eye. then looked anxiously at
 valentine.
 
“do you fear will not understand?”
 
“yes.”
 
“oh, we have so often spoken of you, that knows exactly how i talk
 to you.” then turning to maximilian, with an adorable smile; although
 shaded by sorrow,—“he knows everything i know,” said she.
 
valentine arose, placed chair for morrel, requested barrois not to
 admit anyone, and having tenderly embraced her grandfather, and
 sorrowfully taken leave of morrel, she went away. to prove to noirtier
 that was in valentine’s confidence and knew all their secrets,
 morrel took the dictionary, pen, and some paper, and placed them all
 on table where there was light.
 
“but first,” said morrel, “allow me, sir, to tell you who i am, how
 much i love mademoiselle valentine, and what are my designs respecting
 her.”
 
noirtier made sign that would listen.
 
it was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently mere
 useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support, and adviser of
 the lovers who were both young, beautiful, and strong. his remarkably
 noble and austere expression struck morrel, who began his story with
 trembling. related the manner in which had become acquainted with
 valentine, and how had loved her, and that valentine, in her
 solitude and her misfortune, had accepted the offer of his devotion. he
 told him his birth, his position, his fortune, and more than once, when
 consulted the look of the paralytic, that look answered, “that is
 good, proceed.”
 
“and now,” said morrel, when had finished the first part of his
 recital, “now i have told you of my love and my hopes, may i inform you
 of my intentions?”
 
“yes,” signified the old man.
 
“this was our resolution; cabriolet was in waiting at the gate, in
 which i intended to carry off valentine to my sister’s house, to marry
 her, and to wait respectfully m. villefort’s pardon.”
 
“no,” said noirtier.
 
“we must not do so?”
 
“no.”
 
“you do not sanction our project?”
 
“no.”
 
“there is another way,” said morrel. the old man’s interrogative eye
 said, “which?”
 
“i will go,” continued maximilian, “i will seek m. franz d’Épinay—i am
 happy to be able to mention this in mademoiselle villefort’s
 absence—and will conduct myself toward him so as to compel him to
 challenge me.” noirtier’s look continued to interrogate.
 
“you wish to know what i will do?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i will find him, as i told you. i will tell him the ties which bind me
 to mademoiselle valentine; if be sensible man, will prove it by
 renouncing of his own accord the hand of his betrothed, and will secure
 my friendship, and love until death; if refuse, either through
 interest or ridiculous pride, after i have proved to him that would
 be forcing my wife from me, that valentine loves me, and will have no
 other, i will fight with him, give him every advantage, and i shall
 kill him, or will kill me; if i am victorious, will not marry
 valentine, and if i die, i am very sure valentine will not marry him.”
 
noirtier watched, with indescribable pleasure, this noble and sincere
 countenance, on which every sentiment his tongue uttered was depicted,
 adding by the expression of his fine features all that coloring adds to
 sound and faithful drawing.
 
still, when morrel had finished, shut his eyes several times, which
 was his manner of saying “no.”
 
“no?” said morrel; “you disapprove of this second project, as you did
 of the first?”
 
“i do,” signified the old man.
 
“but what then must be done?” asked morrel. “madame saint-méran’s
 last request was, that the marriage might not be delayed; must i let
 things take their course?” noirtier did not move. “i understand,” said
 morrel; “i am to wait.”
 
“yes.”
 
“but delay may ruin our plan, sir,” replied the young man. “alone,
 valentine has power; she will be compelled to submit. i am here
 almost miraculously, and can scarcely hope for so good an opportunity
 to occur again. believe me, there are only the two plans i have
 proposed to you; forgive my vanity, and tell which you prefer. do
 you authorize mademoiselle valentine to intrust herself to my honor?”
 
“no.”
 
“do you prefer i should seek m. d’Épinay?”
 
“no.”
 
“whence then will come the help we need—from chance?” resumed morrel.
 
“no.”
 
“from you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you thoroughly understand me, sir? pardon my eagerness, for my life
 depends on your answer. will our help come from you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you are sure of it?”
 
“yes.” there was so much firmness in the look which gave this answer,
 one could, at any rate, doubt his will, if they did his power.
 
“oh, thank you thousand times! but how, unless miracle should
 restore your speech, your gesture, your movement, how can you, chained
 to that armchair, dumb and motionless, oppose this marriage?” smile
 lit up the old man’s face, strange smile of the eyes in paralyzed
 face.
 
“then i must wait?” asked the young man.
 
“yes.”
 
“but the contract?” the same smile returned. “will you assure it
 shall not be signed?”
 
“yes,” said noirtier.
 
“the contract shall not be signed!” cried morrel. “oh, pardon me, sir;
 i can scarcely realize so great happiness. will they not sign it?”
 
“no,” said the paralytic. notwithstanding that assurance, morrel still
 hesitated. this promise of an impotent old man was so strange that,
 instead of being the result of the power of his will, it might emanate
 from enfeebled organs. is it not natural that the madman, ignorant of
 his folly, should attempt things beyond his power? the weak man talks
 of burdens can raise, the timid of giants can confront, the poor
 of treasures spends, the most humble peasant, in the height of his
 pride, calls himself jupiter. whether noirtier understood the young
 man’s indecision, or whether had not full confidence in his
 docility, looked uneasily at him.
 
“what do you wish, sir?” asked morrel; “that i should renew my promise
 of remaining tranquil?” noirtier’s eye remained fixed and firm, as if
 to imply that promise did not suffice; then it passed from his face
 to his hands.
 
“shall i swear to you, sir?” asked maximilian.
 
“yes,” said the paralytic with the same solemnity. morrel understood
 that the old man attached great importance to an oath. extended his
 hand.
 
“i swear to you, on my honor,” said he, “to await your decision
 respecting the course i am to pursue with m. d’Épinay.”
 
“that is right,” said the old man.
 
“now,” said morrel, “do you wish to retire?”
 
“yes.”
 
“without seeing mademoiselle valentine?”
 
“yes.”
 
morrel made sign that was ready to obey. “but,” said he, “first
 allow to embrace you as your daughter did just now.” noirtier’s
 expression could not be understood. the young man pressed his lips on
 the same spot, on the old man’s forehead, where valentine’s had been.
 then bowed second time and retired.
 
found outside the door the old servant, to whom valentine had given
 directions. morrel was conducted along dark passage, which led to a
 little door opening on the garden, soon found the spot where had
 entered, with the assistance of the shrubs gained the top of the wall,
 and by his ladder was in an instant in the clover-field where his
 cabriolet was still waiting for him. got in it, and thoroughly
 wearied by so many emotions, arrived about midnight in the rue meslay,
 threw himself on his bed and slept soundly.
 


volume four
 
40010m
 


40012m
 


40020m
 



chapter 74. the villefort family vault
 
two days after, considerable crowd was assembled, towards ten o’clock
 in the morning, around the door of m. villefort’s house, and long
 file of mourning-coaches and private carriages extended along the
 faubourg saint-honoré and the rue pépinière. among them was one
 of very singular form, which appeared to have come from distance.
 it was kind of covered wagon, painted black, and was one of the first
 to arrive. inquiry was made, and it was ascertained that, by strange
 coincidence, this carriage contained the corpse of the marquis de
 saint-méran, and that those who had come thinking to attend one funeral
 would follow two. their number was great. the marquis saint-méran,
 one of the most zealous and faithful dignitaries of louis xviii. and
 king charles x., had preserved great number of friends, and these,
 added to the personages whom the usages of society gave villefort a
 claim on, formed considerable body.
 
due information was given to the authorities, and permission obtained
 that the two funerals should take place at the same time. second
 hearse, decked with the same funereal pomp, was brought to m. de
 villefort’s door, and the coffin removed into it from the post-wagon.
 the two bodies were to be interred in the cemetery of père-lachaise,
 where m. villefort had long since had tomb prepared for the
 reception of his family. the remains of poor renée were already
 deposited there, and now, after ten years of separation, her father and
 mother were to be reunited with her.
 
the parisians, always curious, always affected by funereal display,
 looked on with religious silence while the splendid procession
 accompanied to their last abode two of the number of the old
 aristocracy—the greatest protectors of commerce and sincere devotees to
 their principles.
 
in one of the mourning-coaches beauchamp, debray, and château-renaud
 were talking of the very sudden death of the marchioness.
 
“i saw madame saint-méran only last year at marseilles, when i was
 coming back from algiers,” said château-renaud; “she looked like a
 woman destined to live to be hundred years old, from her apparent
 sound health and great activity of mind and body. how old was she?”
 
“franz assured me,” replied albert, “that she was sixty-six years old.
 but she has not died of old age, but of grief; it appears that since
 the death of the marquis, which affected her very deeply, she has not
 completely recovered her reason.”
 
“but of what disease, then, did she die?” asked debray.
 
“it is said to have been congestion of the brain, or apoplexy, which
 is the same thing, is it not?”
 
“nearly.”
 
“it is difficult to believe that it was apoplexy,” said beauchamp.
 “madame saint-méran, whom i once saw, was short, of slender form,
 and of much more nervous than sanguine temperament; grief could
 hardly produce apoplexy in such constitution as that of madame de
 saint-méran.”
 
“at any rate,” said albert, “whatever disease or doctor may have killed
 her, m. villefort, or rather, mademoiselle valentine,—or, still
 rather, our friend franz, inherits magnificent fortune, amounting, i
 believe, to 80,000 livres per annum.”
 
“and this fortune will be doubled at the death of the old jacobin,
 noirtier.”
 
“that is tenacious old grandfather,” said beauchamp. “_tenacem
 propositi virum_. i think must have made an agreement with death to
 outlive all his heirs, and appears likely to succeed. resembles
 the old conventionalist of ’93, who said to napoleon, in 1814, ‘you
 bend because your empire is young stem, weakened by rapid growth.
 take the republic for tutor; let us return with renewed strength to
 the battle-field, and i promise you 500,000 soldiers, another marengo,
 and second austerlitz. ideas do not become extinct, sire; they
 slumber sometimes, but only revive the stronger before they sleep
 entirely.’”
 
“ideas and men appeared the same to him,” said albert. “one thing only
 puzzles me, namely, how franz d’Épinay will like grandfather who
 cannot be separated from his wife. but where is franz?”
 
“in the first carriage, with m. villefort, who considers him already
 as one of the family.”
 
40024m
 


such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these two sudden
 deaths, so quickly following each other, astonished everyone, but no
 one suspected the terrible secret which m. d’avrigny had communicated,
 in his nocturnal walk to m. villefort. they arrived in about an hour
 at the cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in harmony with
 the funeral ceremony. among the groups which flocked towards the family
 vault, château-renaud recognized morrel, who had come alone in a
 cabriolet, and walked silently along the path bordered with yew-trees.
 
“you here?” said château-renaud, passing his arms through the young
 captain’s; “are you friend of villefort’s? how is it that i have
 never met you at his house?”
 
“i am acquaintance of m. villefort’s,” answered morrel, “but i
 was of madame saint-méran.” albert came up to them at this moment
 with franz.
 
“the time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” said
 albert; “but we are not superstitious. m. morrel, allow to present
 to you m. franz d’Épinay, delightful travelling companion, with whom
 i made the tour of italy. my dear franz, m. maximilian morrel, an
 excellent friend i have acquired in your absence, and whose name you
 will hear mention every time i make any allusion to affection, wit,
 or amiability.”
 
morrel hesitated for moment; feared it would be hypocritical to
 accost in friendly manner the man whom was tacitly opposing, but
 his oath and the gravity of the circumstances recurred to his memory;
 struggled to conceal his emotion and bowed to franz.
 
“mademoiselle villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?” said debray
 to franz.
 
“extremely,” replied he; “she looked so pale this morning, i scarcely
 knew her.”
 
these apparently simple words pierced morrel to the heart. this man had
 seen valentine, and spoken to her! the young and high-spirited officer
 required all his strength of mind to resist breaking his oath. took
 the arm of château-renaud, and turned towards the vault, where the
 attendants had already placed the two coffins.
 
“this is magnificent habitation,” said beauchamp, looking towards the
 mausoleum; “a summer and winter palace. you will, in turn, enter it, my
 dear d’Épinay, for you will soon be numbered as one of the family. i,
 as philosopher, should like little country-house, cottage down
 there under the trees, without so many free-stones over my poor body.
 in dying, i will say to those around what voltaire wrote to piron:
 ‘_eo rus_, and all will be over.’ but come, franz, take courage, your
 wife is an heiress.”
 
“indeed, beauchamp, you are unbearable. politics has made you laugh at
 everything, and political men have made you disbelieve everything. but
 when you have the honor of associating with ordinary men, and the
 pleasure of leaving politics for moment, try to find your
 affectionate heart, which you leave with your stick when you go to the
 chamber.”
 
“but tell me,” said beauchamp, “what is life? is it not halt in
 death’s anteroom?”
 
40026m
 


“i am prejudiced against beauchamp,” said albert, drawing franz away,
 and leaving the former to finish his philosophical dissertation with
 debray.
 
the villefort vault formed square of white stones, about twenty feet
 high; an interior partition separated the two families, and each
 apartment had its entrance door. here were not, as in other tombs,
 ignoble drawers, one above another, where thrift bestows its dead and
 labels them like specimens in museum; all that was visible within the
 bronze gates was gloomy-looking room, separated by wall from the
 vault itself. the two doors before mentioned were in the middle of this
 wall, and enclosed the villefort and saint-méran coffins. there grief
 might freely expend itself without being disturbed by the trifling
 loungers who came from picnic party to visit père-lachaise, or by
 lovers who make it their rendezvous.
 
the two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared for their
 reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to the saint-méran family.
 villefort, franz, and few near relatives alone entered the sanctuary.
 
as the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and
 there was address given, the party all separated; château-renaud,
 albert, and morrel, went one way, and debray and beauchamp the other.
 franz remained with m. villefort; at the gate of the cemetery morrel
 made an excuse to wait; saw franz and m. villefort get into the
 same mourning-coach, and thought this meeting forboded evil. then
 returned to paris, and although in the same carriage with
 château-renaud and albert, did not hear one word of their
 conversation.
 
as franz was about to take leave of m. villefort, “when shall i see
 you again?” said the latter.
 
“at what time you please, sir,” replied franz.
 
“as soon as possible.”
 
“i am at your command, sir; shall we return together?”
 
“if not unpleasant to you.”
 
“on the contrary, i shall feel much pleasure.”
 
thus, the future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage,
 and morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. villefort and franz
 returned to the faubourg saint-honoré. the procureur, without going to
 see either his wife or his daughter, went at once to his study, and,
 offering the young man chair:
 
“m. d’Épinay,” said he, “allow to remind you at this moment,—which
 is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at first sight may appear, for
 obedience to the wishes of the departed is the first offering which
 should be made at their tomb,—allow then to remind you of the wish
 expressed by madame saint-méran on her death-bed, that valentine’s
 wedding might not be deferred. you know the affairs of the deceased are
 in perfect order, and her will bequeaths to valentine the entire
 property of the saint-méran family; the notary showed the documents
 yesterday, which will enable us to draw up the contract immediately.
 you may call on the notary, m. deschamps, place beauveau, faubourg
 saint-honoré, and you have my authority to inspect those deeds.”
 
“sir,” replied m. d’Épinay, “it is not, perhaps, the moment for
 mademoiselle valentine, who is in deep distress, to think of husband;
 indeed, i fear——”
 
40028m
 


“valentine will have greater pleasure than that of fulfilling her
 grandmother’s last injunctions; there will be obstacle from that
 quarter, i assure you.”
 
“in that case,” replied franz, “as i shall raise none, you may make
 arrangements when you please; i have pledged my word, and shall feel
 pleasure and happiness in adhering to it.”
 
“then,” said villefort, “nothing further is required. the contract was
 to have been signed three days since; we shall find it all ready, and
 can sign it today.”
 
“but the mourning?” said franz, hesitating.
 
“don’t be uneasy on that score,” replied villefort; “no ceremony will
 be neglected in my house. mademoiselle villefort may retire during
 the prescribed three months to her estate of saint-méran; i say hers,
 for she inherits it today. there, after few days, if you like, the
 civil marriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony. madame de
 saint-méran wished her daughter should be married there. when that is
 over, you, sir, can return to paris, while your wife passes the time of
 her mourning with her mother-in-law.”
 
“as you please, sir,” said franz.
 
“then,” replied m. villefort, “have the kindness to wait half an
 hour; valentine shall come down into the drawing-room. i will send for
 m. deschamps; we will read and sign the contract before we separate,
 and this evening madame villefort shall accompany valentine to her
 estate, where we will rejoin them in week.”
 
“sir,” said franz, “i have one request to make.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“i wish albert morcerf and raoul château-renaud to be present at
 this signature; you know they are my witnesses.”
 
“half an hour will suffice to apprise them; will you go for them
 yourself, or shall you send?”
 
“i prefer going, sir.”
 
“i shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, and valentine will
 be ready.”
 
franz bowed and left the room. scarcely had the door closed, when m. de
 villefort sent to tell valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in
 half an hour, as expected the notary and m. d’Épinay and his
 witnesses. the news caused great sensation throughout the house;
 madame villefort would not believe it, and valentine was
 thunderstruck. she looked around for help, and would have gone down to
 her grandfather’s room, but on the stairs she met m. villefort, who
 took her arm and led her into the drawing-room. in the anteroom,
 valentine met barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. a
 moment later, madame villefort entered the drawing-room with her
 little edward. it was evident that she had shared the grief of the
 family, for she was pale and looked fatigued. she sat down, took edward
 on her knees, and from time to time pressed this child, on whom her
 affections appeared centred, almost convulsively to her bosom.
 
two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. one was the
 notary’s; the other, that of franz and his friends. in moment the
 whole party was assembled. valentine was so pale one might trace the
 blue veins from her temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. franz
 was deeply affected. château-renaud and albert looked at each other
 with amazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had not appeared
 more sorrowful than did that which was about to begin. madame de
 villefort had placed herself in the shadow behind velvet curtain, and
 as she constantly bent over her child, it was difficult to read the
 expression of her face. m. villefort was, as usual, unmoved.
 
the notary, after having, according to the customary method, arranged
 the papers on the table, taken his place in an armchair, and raised his
 spectacles, turned towards franz:
 
“are you m. franz quesnel, baron d’Épinay?” asked he, although he
 knew it perfectly.
 
“yes, sir,” replied franz. the notary bowed.
 
“i have, then, to inform you, sir, at the request of m. villefort,
 that your projected marriage with mademoiselle villefort has changed
 the feeling of m. noirtier towards his grandchild, and that he
 disinherits her entirely of the fortune would have left her. let me
 hasten to add,” continued he, “that the testator, having only the right
 to alienate part of his fortune, and having alienated it all, the
 will will not bear scrutiny, and is declared null and void.”
 
“yes.” said villefort; “but i warn m. d’Épinay, that during my
 life-time my father’s will shall never be questioned, my position
 forbidding any doubt to be entertained.”
 
40032m
 


“sir,” said franz, “i regret much that such question has been raised
 in the presence of mademoiselle valentine; i have never inquired the
 amount of her fortune, which, however limited it may be, exceeds mine.
 my family has sought consideration in this alliance with m. de
 villefort; all i seek is happiness.”
 
valentine imperceptibly thanked him, while two silent tears rolled down
 her cheeks.
 
“besides, sir,” said villefort, addressing himself to his future
 son-in-law, “excepting the loss of portion of your hopes, this
 unexpected will need not personally wound you; m. noirtier’s weakness
 of mind sufficiently explains it. it is not because mademoiselle
 valentine is going to marry you that is angry, but because she will
 marry, union with any other would have caused him the same sorrow.
 old age is selfish, sir, and mademoiselle villefort has been a
 faithful companion to m. noirtier, which she cannot be when she becomes
 the baroness d’Épinay. my father’s melancholy state prevents our
 speaking to him on any subjects, which the weakness of his mind would
 incapacitate him from understanding, and i am perfectly convinced that
 at the present time, although, knows that his granddaughter is going
 to be married, m. noirtier has even forgotten the name of his intended
 grandson.” m. villefort had scarcely said this, when the door
 opened, and barrois appeared.
 
“gentlemen,” said he, in tone strangely firm for servant speaking
 to his masters under such solemn circumstances,—“gentlemen, m. noirtier
 villefort wishes to speak immediately to m. franz quesnel, baron
 d’Épinay.” he, as well as the notary, that there might be mistake in
 the person, gave all his titles to the bridegroom elect.
 
villefort started, madame villefort let her slip from her knees,
 valentine rose, pale and dumb as statue. albert and château-renaud
 exchanged second look, more full of amazement than the first. the
 notary looked at villefort.
 
“it is impossible,” said the procureur. “m. d’Épinay cannot leave the
 drawing-room at present.”
 
“it is at this moment,” replied barrois with the same firmness, “that
 m. noirtier, my master, wishes to speak on important subjects to m.
 franz d’Épinay.”
 
“grandpapa noirtier can speak now, then,” said edward, with his
 habitual quickness. however, his remark did not make madame de
 villefort even smile, so much was every mind engaged, and so solemn was
 the situation.
 
“tell m. nortier,” resumed villefort, “that what demands is
 impossible.”
 
“then, m. nortier gives notice to these gentlemen,” replied barrois,
 “that will give orders to be carried to the drawing-room.”
 
astonishment was at its height. something like smile was perceptible
 on madame villefort’s countenance. valentine instinctively raised
 her eyes, as if to thank heaven.
 
“pray go, valentine,” said; m. villefort, “and see what this new
 fancy of your grandfather’s is.” valentine rose quickly, and was
 hastening joyfully towards the door, when m. villefort altered his
 intention.
 
“stop,” said he; “i will go with you.”
 
“excuse me, sir,” said franz, “since m. noirtier sent for me, i am
 ready to attend to his wish; besides, i shall be happy to pay my
 respects to him, not having yet had the honor of doing so.”
 
“pray, sir,” said villefort with marked uneasiness, “do not disturb
 yourself.”
 
40032m
 


“forgive me, sir,” said franz in resolute tone. “i would not lose
 this opportunity of proving to m. noirtier how wrong it would be of him
 to encourage feelings of dislike to me, which i am determined to
 conquer, whatever they may be, by my devotion.”
 
and without listening to villefort arose, and followed valentine,
 who was running downstairs with the joy of shipwrecked mariner who
 finds rock to cling to. m. villefort followed them. château-renaud
 and morcerf exchanged third look of still increasing wonder.
 


chapter 75. signed statement
 
noirtier was prepared to receive them, dressed in black, and installed
 in his armchair. when the three persons expected had entered, he
 looked at the door, which his valet immediately closed.
 
“listen,” whispered villefort to valentine, who could not conceal her
 joy; “if m. noirtier wishes to communicate anything which would delay
 your marriage, i forbid you to understand him.”
 
valentine blushed, but did not answer. villefort, approached noirtier.
 
“here is m. franz d’Épinay,” said he; “you requested to see him. we
 have all wished for this interview, and i trust it will convince you
 how ill-formed are your objections to valentine’s marriage.”
 
noirtier answered only by look which made villefort’s blood run cold.
 motioned to valentine to approach. in moment, thanks to her habit
 of conversing with her grandfather, she understood that asked for a
 key. then his eye was fixed on the drawer of small chest between the
 windows. she opened the drawer, and found key; and, understanding
 that was what wanted, again watched his eyes, which turned toward an
 old secretaire which had been neglected for many years and was supposed
 to contain nothing but useless documents.
 
“shall i open the secretaire?” asked valentine.
 
“yes,” said the old man.
 
“and the drawers?”
 
“yes.”
 
“those at the side?”
 
“no.”
 
“the middle one?”
 
“yes.”
 
valentine opened it and drew out bundle of papers. “is that what you
 wish for?” asked she.
 
“no.”
 
she took successively all the other papers out till the drawer was
 empty. “but there are more,” said she. noirtier’s eye was fixed on
 the dictionary.
 
“yes, i understand, grandfather,” said the young girl.
 
40036m
 


she pointed to each letter of the alphabet. at the letter s the old man
 stopped her. she opened, and found the word “secret.”
 
“ah! is there secret spring?” said valentine.
 
“yes,” said noirtier.
 
“and who knows it?” noirtier looked at the door where the servant had
 gone out.
 
“barrois?” said she.
 
“yes.”
 
“shall i call him?”
 
“yes.”
 
valentine went to the door, and called barrois. villefort’s impatience
 during this scene made the perspiration roll from his forehead, and
 franz was stupefied. the old servant came.
 
“barrois,” said valentine, “my grandfather has told to open that
 drawer in the secretaire, but there is secret spring in it, which you
 know—will you open it?”
 
barrois looked at the old man. “obey,” said noirtier’s intelligent eye.
 barrois touched spring, the false bottom came out, and they saw a
 bundle of papers tied with black string.
 
“is that what you wish for?” said barrois.
 
“yes.”
 
“shall i give these papers to m. villefort?”
 
“no.”
 
“to mademoiselle valentine?”
 
“no.”
 
“to m. franz d’Épinay?”
 
“yes.”
 
franz, astonished, advanced step. “to me, sir?” said he.
 
“yes.”
 
franz took them from barrois and casting glance at the cover, read:
 
“‘to be given, after my death, to general durand, who shall bequeath
 the packet to his son, with an injunction to preserve it as containing
 an important document.’
 
“well, sir,” asked franz, “what do you wish to do with this paper?”
 
“to preserve it, sealed up as it is, doubtless,” said the procureur.
 
“no,” replied noirtier eagerly.
 
“do you wish him to read it?” said valentine.
 
“yes,” replied the old man.
 
“you understand, baron, my grandfather wishes you to read this paper,”
 said valentine.
 
“then let us sit down,” said villefort impatiently, “for it will take
 some time.”
 
“sit down,” said the old man. villefort took chair, but valentine
 remained standing by her father’s side, and franz before him, holding
 the mysterious paper in his hand. “read,” said the old man. franz
 untied it, and in the midst of the most profound silence read:
 
40038m
 


“‘_extract of the report of meeting of the bonapartist club in the
 rue saint-jacques, held february 5th, 1815_.’”
 
franz stopped. “february 5th, 1815!” said he; “it is the day my father
 was murdered.” valentine and villefort were dumb; the eye of the old
 man alone seemed to say clearly, “go on.”
 
“but it was on leaving this club,” said he, “my father disappeared.”
 
noirtier’s eye continued to say, “read.” resumed:—
 
“‘the undersigned louis-jacques beaurepaire, lieutenant-colonel of
 artillery, Étienne duchampy, general of brigade, and claude lecharpal,
 keeper of woods and forests, declare, that on the 4th of february, a
 letter arrived from the island of elba, recommending to the kindness
 and the confidence of the bonapartist club, general flavien quesnel,
 who having served the emperor from 1804 to 1814 was supposed to be
 devoted to the interests of the napoleon dynasty, notwithstanding the
 title of baron which louis xviii. had just granted to him with his
 estate of Épinay.
 
400340m
 


“‘a note was in consequence addressed to general quesnel, begging
 him to be present at the meeting next day, the 5th. the note indicated
 neither the street nor the number of the house where the meeting was to
 be held; it bore signature, but it announced to the general that
 someone would call for him if would be ready at nine o’clock. the
 meetings were always held from that time till midnight. at nine o’clock
 the president of the club presented himself; the general was ready, the
 president informed him that one of the conditions of his introduction
 was that should be eternally ignorant of the place of meeting, and
 that would allow his eyes to be bandaged, swearing that would not
 endeavor to take off the bandage. general quesnel accepted the
 condition, and promised on his honor not to seek to discover the road
 they took. the general’s carriage was ready, but the president told him
 it was impossible for him to use it, since it was useless to blindfold
 the master if the coachman knew through what streets went. “what
 must be done then?” asked the general.—“i have my carriage here,” said
 the president.
 
“‘“have you, then, so much confidence in your servant that you can
 intrust him with secret you will not allow to know?”
 
“‘“our coachman is member of the club,” said the president; “we shall
 be driven by state-councillor.”
 
“‘“then we run another risk,” said the general, laughing, “that of
 being upset.” we insert this joke to prove that the general was not in
 the least compelled to attend the meeting, but that came willingly.
 when they were seated in the carriage the president reminded the
 general of his promise to allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he
 made opposition. on the road the president thought saw the
 general make an attempt to remove the handkerchief, and reminded him of
 his oath. “sure enough,” said the general. the carriage stopped at an
 alley leading out of the rue saint-jacques. the general alighted,
 leaning on the arm of the president, of whose dignity was not aware,
 considering him simply as member of the club; they went through the
 alley, mounted flight of stairs, and entered the assembly-room.
 
“‘the deliberations had already begun. the members, apprised of the
 sort of presentation which was to be made that evening, were all in
 attendance. when in the middle of the room the general was invited to
 remove his bandage, did so immediately, and was surprised to see so
 many well-known faces in society of whose existence had till then
 been ignorant. they questioned him as to his sentiments, but he
 contented himself with answering, that the letters from the island of
 elba ought to have informed them——’”
 
franz interrupted himself by saying, “my father was royalist; they
 need not have asked his sentiments, which were well known.”
 
“and hence,” said villefort, “arose my affection for your father, my
 dear m. franz. opinions held in common are ready bond of union.”
 
“read again,” said the old man.
 
franz continued:
 
“‘the president then sought to make him speak more explicitly, but m.
 quesnel replied that wished first to know what they wanted with
 him. was then informed of the contents of the letter from the island
 of elba, in which was recommended to the club as man who would be
 likely to advance the interests of their party. one paragraph spoke of
 the return of bonaparte and promised another letter and further
 details, on the arrival of the _pharaon_ belonging to the shipbuilder
 morrel, of marseilles, whose captain was entirely devoted to the
 emperor. during all this time, the general, on whom they thought to
 have relied as on brother, manifested evidently signs of discontent
 and repugnance. when the reading was finished, remained silent, with
 knitted brows.
 
“‘“well,” asked the president, “what do you say to this letter,
 general?”
 
“‘“i say that it is too soon after declaring myself for louis xviii. to
 break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor.” this answer was too clear to
 permit of any mistake as to his sentiments. “general,” said the
 president, “we acknowledge king louis xviii., or an ex-emperor, but
 his majesty the emperor and king, driven from france, which is his
 kingdom, by violence and treason.”
 
“‘“excuse me, gentlemen,” said the general; “you may not acknowledge
 louis xviii., but i do, as has made baron and field-marshal,
 and i shall never forget that for these two titles i am indebted to his
 happy return to france.”
 
“‘“sir,” said the president, rising with gravity, “be careful what you
 say; your words clearly show us that they are deceived concerning you
 in the island of elba, and have deceived us! the communication has been
 made to you in consequence of the confidence placed in you, and which
 does you honor. now we discover our error; title and promotion attach
 you to the government we wish to overturn. we will not constrain you to
 help us; we enroll one against his conscience, but we will compel
 you to act generously, even if you are not disposed to do so.”
 
“‘“you would call acting generously, knowing your conspiracy and not
 informing against you, that is what i should call becoming your
 accomplice. you see i am more candid than you.”’”
 
“ah, my father!” said franz, interrupting himself. “i understand now
 why they murdered him.” valentine could not help casting one glance
 towards the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful to
 behold. villefort walked to and fro behind them. noirtier watched the
 expression of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding
 attitude. franz returned to the manuscript, and continued:
 
“‘“sir,” said the president, “you have been invited to join this
 assembly—you were not forced here; it was proposed to you to come
 blindfolded—you accepted. when you complied with this twofold request
 you well knew we did not wish to secure the throne of louis xviii., or
 we should not take so much care to avoid the vigilance of the police.
 it would be conceding too much to allow you to put on mask to aid you
 in the discovery of our secret, and then to remove it that you may ruin
 those who have confided in you. no, no, you must first say if you
 declare yourself for the king of day who now reigns, or for his
 majesty the emperor.”
 
“‘“i am royalist,” replied the general; “i have taken the oath of
 allegiance to louis xviii., and i will adhere to it.” these words were
 followed by general murmur, and it was evident that several of the
 members were discussing the propriety of making the general repent of
 his rashness.
 
“‘the president again arose, and having imposed silence, said,—“sir,
 you are too serious and too sensible man not to understand the
 consequences of our present situation, and your candor has already
 dictated to us the conditions which remain for us to offer you.” the
 general, putting his hand on his sword, exclaimed,—“if you talk of
 honor, do not begin by disavowing its laws, and impose nothing by
 violence.”
 
“‘“and you, sir,” continued the president, with calmness still more
 terrible than the general’s anger, “i advise you not to touch your
 sword.” the general looked around him with slight uneasiness; however
 did not yield, but calling up all his fortitude, said,—“i will not
 swear.”
 
“‘“then you must die,” replied the president calmly. m. d’Épinay became
 very pale; looked round him second time, several members of the
 club were whispering, and getting their arms from under their cloaks.
 “general,” said the president, “do not alarm yourself; you are among
 men of honor who will use every means to convince you before resorting
 to the last extremity, but as you have said, you are among
 conspirators, you are in possession of our secret, and you must restore
 it to us.” significant silence followed these words, and as the
 general did not reply,—“close the doors,” said the president to the
 door-keeper.
 
40042m
 


“‘the same deadly silence succeeded these words. then the general
 advanced, and making violent effort to control his feelings,—“i have
 son,” said he, “and i ought to think of him, finding myself among
 assassins.”
 
“‘“general,” said the chief of the assembly, “one man may insult
 fifty—it is the privilege of weakness. but does wrong to use his
 privilege. follow my advice, swear, and do not insult.” the general,
 again daunted by the superiority of the chief, hesitated moment; then
 advancing to the president’s desk,—“what is the form, said he.
 
“‘“it is this:—‘i swear by my honor not to reveal to anyone what i have
 seen and heard on the 5th of february, 1815, between nine and ten
 o’clock in the evening; and i plead guilty of death should i ever
 violate this oath.’” the general appeared to be affected by nervous
 tremor, which prevented his answering for some moments; then,
 overcoming his manifest repugnance, pronounced the required oath,
 but in so low tone as to be scarcely audible to the majority of the
 members, who insisted on his repeating it clearly and distinctly, which
 did.
 
“‘“now am i at liberty to retire?” said the general. the president
 rose, appointed three members to accompany him, and got into the
 carriage with the general after bandaging his eyes. one of those three
 members was the coachman who had driven them there. the other members
 silently dispersed. “where do you wish to be taken?” asked the
 president.—“anywhere out of your presence,” replied m. d’Épinay.
 “beware, sir,” replied the president, “you are longer in the
 assembly, and have only to do with individuals; do not insult them
 unless you wish to be held responsible.” but instead of listening, m.
 d’Épinay went on,—“you are still as brave in your carriage as in your
 assembly because you are still four against one.” the president stopped
 the coach. they were at that part of the quai des ormes where the steps
 lead down to the river. “why do you stop here?” asked d’Épinay.
 
“‘“because, sir,” said the president, “you have insulted man, and
 that man will not go one step farther without demanding honorable
 reparation.”
 
“‘“another method of assassination?” said the general, shrugging his
 shoulders.
 
“‘“make noise, sir, unless you wish to consider you as one of the
 men of whom you spoke just now as cowards, who take their weakness for
 shield. you are alone, one alone shall answer you; you have sword
 by your side, i have one in my cane; you have witness, one of these
 gentlemen will serve you. now, if you please, remove your bandage.” the
 general tore the handkerchief from his eyes. “at last,” said he, “i
 shall know with whom i have to do.” they opened the door and the four
 men alighted.’”
 
franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops from his
 brow; there was something awful in hearing the read aloud in
 trembling pallor these details of his father’s death, which had
 hitherto been mystery. valentine clasped her hands as if in prayer.
 noirtier looked at villefort with an almost sublime expression of
 contempt and pride.
 
franz continued:
 
“‘it was, as we said, the fifth of february. for three days the mercury
 had been five or six degrees below freezing and the steps were covered
 with ice. the general was stout and tall, the president offered him the
 side of the railing to assist him in getting down. the two witnesses
 followed. it was dark night. the ground from the steps to the river
 was covered with snow and hoarfrost, the water of the river looked
 black and deep. one of the seconds went for lantern in coal-barge
 near, and by its light they examined the weapons. the president’s
 sword, which was simply, as had said, one carried in his cane,
 was five inches shorter than the general’s, and had guard. the
 general proposed to cast lots for the swords, but the president said it
 was who had given the provocation, and when had given it had
 supposed each would use his own arms. the witnesses endeavored to
 insist, but the president bade them be silent. the lantern was placed
 on the ground, the two adversaries took their stations, and the duel
 began. the light made the two swords appear like flashes of lightning;
 as for the men, they were scarcely perceptible, the darkness was so
 great.
 
40044m
 


“‘general d’Épinay passed for one of the best swordsmen in the army,
 but was pressed so closely in the onset that missed his aim and
 fell. the witnesses thought was dead, but his adversary, who knew he
 had not struck him, offered him the assistance of his hand to rise. the
 circumstance irritated instead of calming the general, and rushed on
 his adversary. but his opponent did not allow his guard to be broken.
 received him on his sword and three times the general drew back on
 finding himself too closely engaged, and then returned to the charge.
 at the third fell again. they thought slipped, as at first, and
 the witnesses, seeing did not move, approached and endeavored to
 raise him, but the one who passed his arm around the body found it was
 moistened with blood. the general, who had almost fainted, revived.
 “ah,” said he, “they have sent some fencing-master to fight with me.”
 the president, without answering, approached the witness who held the
 lantern, and raising his sleeve, showed him two wounds had received
 in his arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning his waistcoat,
 displayed his side, pierced with third wound. still had not even
 uttered sigh. general d’Épinay died five minutes after.’”
 
franz read these last words in voice so choked that they were hardly
 audible, and then stopped, passing his hand over his eyes as if to
 dispel cloud; but after moment’s silence, continued:
 
“‘the president went up the steps, after pushing his sword into his
 cane; track of blood on the snow marked his course. had scarcely
 arrived at the top when heard heavy splash in the water—it was the
 general’s body, which the witnesses had just thrown into the river
 after ascertaining that was dead. the general fell, then, in loyal
 duel, and not in ambush as it might have been reported. in proof of
 this we have signed this paper to establish the truth of the facts,
 lest the moment should arrive when either of the actors in this
 terrible scene should be accused of premeditated murder or of
 infringement of the laws of honor.
 
“‘signed, beaurepaire, duchampy, and lecharpal.’”
 
when franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful for son;
 when valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped away tear; when
 villefort, trembling, and crouched in corner, had endeavored to
 lessen the storm by supplicating glances at the implacable old man,—
 
“sir,” said d’Épinay to noirtier, “since you are well acquainted with
 all these details, which are attested by honorable signatures,—since
 you appear to take some interest in me, although you have only
 manifested it hitherto by causing sorrow, refuse not one final
 satisfaction—tell the name of the president of the club, that i may
 at least know who killed my father.”
 
villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the door; valentine, who
 understood sooner than anyone her grandfather’s answer, and who had
 often seen two scars upon his right arm, drew back few steps.
 
“mademoiselle,” said franz, turning towards valentine, “unite your
 efforts with mine to find out the name of the man who made an orphan
 at two years of age.” valentine remained dumb and motionless.
 
“hold, sir,” said villefort, “do not prolong this dreadful scene. the
 names have been purposely concealed; my father himself does not know
 who this president was, and if knows, cannot tell you; proper
 names are not in the dictionary.”
 
“oh, misery,” cried franz: “the only hope which sustained and
 enabled to read to the end was that of knowing, at least, the name
 of him who killed my father! sir, sir,” cried he, turning to noirtier,
 “do what you can—make understand in some way!”
 
“yes,” replied noirtier.
 
“oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” cried franz, “your grandfather says
 can indicate the person. help me,—lend your assistance!”
 
noirtier looked at the dictionary. franz took it with nervous
 trembling, and repeated the letters of the alphabet successively, until
 came to m. at that letter the old man signified “yes.”
 
“m,” repeated franz. the young man’s finger, glided over the words, but
 at each one noirtier answered by negative sign. valentine hid her
 head between her hands. at length, franz arrived at the word myself.
 
40046m
 


“yes!”
 
“you!” cried franz, whose hair stood on end; “you, m. noirtier—you
 killed my father?”
 
“yes!” replied noirtier, fixing majestic look on the young man. franz
 fell powerless on chair; villefort opened the door and escaped, for
 the idea had entered his mind to stifle the little remaining life in
 the heart of this terrible old man.
 



chapter 76. progress of cavalcanti the younger
 
meanwhile m. cavalcanti the elder had returned to his service, not in
 the army of his majesty the emperor of austria, but at the gaming-table
 of the baths of lucca, of which was one of the most assiduous
 courtiers. had spent every farthing that had been allowed for his
 journey as reward for the majestic and solemn manner in which had
 maintained his assumed character of father.
 
m. andrea at his departure inherited all the papers which proved that
 had indeed the honor of being the of the marquis bartolomeo and
 the marchioness oliva corsinari. was now fairly launched in that
 parisian society which gives such ready access to foreigners, and
 treats them, not as they really are, but as they wish to be considered.
 besides, what is required of young man in paris? to speak its
 language tolerably, to make good appearance, to be good gamester,
 and to pay in cash. they are certainly less particular with foreigner
 than with frenchman. andrea had, then, in fortnight, attained a
 very fair position. was called count, was said to possess 50,000
 livres per annum; and his father’s immense riches, buried in the
 quarries of saravezza, were constant theme. learned man, before
 whom the last circumstance was mentioned as fact, declared had
 seen the quarries in question, which gave great weight to assertions
 hitherto somewhat doubtful, but which now assumed the garb of reality.
 
such was the state of society in paris at the period we bring before
 our readers, when monte cristo went one evening to pay m. danglars a
 visit. m. danglars was out, but the count was asked to go and see the
 baroness, and accepted the invitation. it was never without a
 nervous shudder, since the dinner at auteuil, and the events which
 followed it, that madame danglars heard monte cristo’s name announced.
 if did not come, the painful sensation became most intense; if, on
 the contrary, appeared, his noble countenance, his brilliant eyes,
 his amiability, his polite attention even towards madame danglars, soon
 dispelled every impression of fear. it appeared impossible to the
 baroness that man of such delightfully pleasing manners should
 entertain evil designs against her; besides, the most corrupt minds
 only suspect evil when it would answer some interested end—useless
 injury is repugnant to every mind.
 
40048m
 


when monte cristo entered the boudoir, to which we have already once
 introduced our readers, and where the baroness was examining some
 drawings, which her daughter passed to her after having looked at them
 with m. cavalcanti, his presence soon produced its usual effect, and it
 was with smiles that the baroness received the count, although she had
 been little disconcerted at the announcement of his name. the latter
 took in the whole scene at glance.
 
the baroness was partially reclining on sofa, eugénie sat near her,
 and cavalcanti was standing. cavalcanti, dressed in black, like one of
 goethe’s heroes, with varnished shoes and white silk open-worked
 stockings, passed white and tolerably nice-looking hand through his
 light hair, and so displayed sparkling diamond, that in spite of
 monte cristo’s advice the vain young man had been unable to resist
 putting on his little finger. this movement was accompanied by killing
 glances at mademoiselle danglars, and by sighs launched in the same
 direction.
 
mademoiselle danglars was still the same—cold, beautiful, and
 satirical. not one of these glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her;
 they might have been said to fall on the shield of minerva, which some
 philosophers assert protected sometimes the breast of sappho. eugénie
 bowed coldly to the count, and availed herself of the first moment when
 the conversation became earnest to escape to her study, whence very
 soon two cheerful and noisy voices being heard in connection with
 occasional notes of the piano assured monte cristo that mademoiselle
 danglars preferred to his society and to that of m. cavalcanti the
 company of mademoiselle louise d’armilly, her singing teacher.
 
it was then, especially while conversing with madame danglars, and
 apparently absorbed by the charm of the conversation, that the count
 noticed m. andrea cavalcanti’s solicitude, his manner of listening to
 the music at the door dared not pass, and of manifesting his
 admiration.
 
the banker soon returned. his first look was certainly directed towards
 monte cristo, but the second was for andrea. as for his wife, bowed
 to her, as some husbands do to their wives, but in way that bachelors
 will never comprehend, until very extensive code is published on
 conjugal life.
 
“have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?” said
 danglars to andrea.
 
“alas, no, sir,” replied andrea with sigh, still more remarkable than
 the former ones. danglars immediately advanced towards the door and
 opened it.
 
40050m
 


the two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, at the piano,
 accompanying themselves, each with one hand, fancy to which they had
 accustomed themselves, and performed admirably. mademoiselle d’armilly,
 whom they then perceived through the open doorway, formed with eugénie
 one of the _tableaux vivants_ of which the germans are so fond. she was
 somewhat beautiful, and exquisitely formed—a little fairy-like figure,
 with large curls falling on her neck, which was rather too long, as
 perugino sometimes makes his virgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue.
 she was said to have weak chest, and like antonia in the _cremona
 violin_, she would die one day while singing.
 
monte cristo cast one rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it
 was the first time had ever seen mademoiselle d’armilly, of whom he
 had heard much.
 
“well,” said the banker to his daughter, “are we then all to be
 excluded?”
 
then led the young man into the study, and either by chance or
 manœuvre the door was partially closed after andrea, so that from the
 place where they sat neither the count nor the baroness could see
 anything; but as the banker had accompanied andrea, madame danglars
 appeared to take notice of it.
 
the count soon heard andrea’s voice, singing corsican song,
 accompanied by the piano. while the count smiled at hearing this song,
 which made him lose sight of andrea in the recollection of benedetto,
 madame danglars was boasting to monte cristo of her husband’s strength
 of mind, who that very morning had lost three or four hundred thousand
 francs by failure at milan. the praise was well deserved, for had not
 the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of those means by which
 knew everything, the baron’s countenance would not have led him to
 suspect it.
 
“hem,” thought monte cristo, “he begins to conceal his losses; month
 since boasted of them.”
 
then aloud,—“oh, madame, m. danglars is so skilful, will soon regain
 at the bourse what loses elsewhere.”
 
“i see that you participate in prevalent error,” said madame
 danglars.
 
“what is it?” said monte cristo.
 
“that m. danglars speculates, whereas never does.”
 
“truly, madame, i recollect m. debray told me——apropos, what has become
 of him? i have seen nothing of him the last three or four days.”
 
“nor i,” said madame danglars; “but you began sentence, sir, and did
 not finish.”
 
“which?”
 
“m. debray had told you——”
 
“ah, yes; told it was you who sacrificed to the demon of
 speculation.”
 
“i was once very fond of it, but i do not indulge now.”
 
“then you are wrong, madame. fortune is precarious; and if i were a
 woman and fate had made banker’s wife, whatever might be my
 confidence in my husband’s good fortune, still in speculation you know
 there is great risk. well, i would secure for myself fortune
 independent of him, even if i acquired it by placing my interests in
 hands unknown to him.” madame danglars blushed, in spite of all her
 efforts.
 
“stay,” said monte cristo, as though had not observed her confusion,
 “i have heard of lucky hit that was made yesterday on the neapolitan
 bonds.”
 
“i have none—nor have i ever possessed any; but really we have talked
 long enough of money, count, we are like two stockbrokers; have you
 heard how fate is persecuting the poor villeforts?”
 
“what has happened?” said the count, simulating total ignorance.
 
“you know the marquis of saint-méran died few days after had set
 out on his journey to paris, and the marchioness few days after her
 arrival?”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo, “i have heard that; but, as claudius said to
 hamlet, ‘it is law of nature; their fathers died before them, and
 they mourned their loss; they will die before their children, who will,
 in their turn, grieve for them.’”
 
“but that is not all.”
 
“not all!”
 
“no; they were going to marry their daughter——”
 
“to m. franz d’Épinay. is it broken off?”
 
“yesterday morning, it appears, franz declined the honor.”
 
“indeed? and is the reason known?”
 
“no.”
 
“how extraordinary! and how does m. villefort bear it?”
 
“as usual. like philosopher.”
 
danglars returned at this moment alone.
 
“well,” said the baroness, “do you leave m. cavalcanti with your
 daughter?”
 
“and mademoiselle d’armilly,” said the banker; “do you consider her no
 one?” then, turning to monte cristo, said, “prince cavalcanti is a
 charming young man, is not? but is really prince?”
 
“i will not answer for it,” said monte cristo. “his father was
 introduced to as marquis, so ought to be count; but i do not
 think has much claim to that title.”
 
“why?” said the banker. “if is prince, is wrong not to maintain
 his rank; i do not like anyone to deny his origin.”
 
“oh, you are thorough democrat,” said monte cristo, smiling.
 
“but do you see to what you are exposing yourself?” said the baroness.
 “if, perchance, m. morcerf came, would find m. cavalcanti in that
 room, where he, the betrothed of eugénie, has never been admitted.”
 
“you may well say, perchance,” replied the banker; “for comes so
 seldom, it would seem only chance that brings him.”
 
“but should come and find that young man with your daughter, he
 might be displeased.”
 
“he? you are mistaken. m. albert would not do us the honor to be
 jealous; does not like eugénie sufficiently. besides, i care not for
 his displeasure.”
 
“still, situated as we are——”
 
“yes, do you know how we are situated? at his mother’s ball danced
 once with eugénie, and m. cavalcanti three times, and took notice
 of it.”
 
the valet announced the vicomte albert morcerf. the baroness rose
 hastily, and was going into the study, when danglars stopped her.
 
“let her alone,” said he.
 
she looked at him in amazement. monte cristo appeared to be unconscious
 of what passed. albert entered, looking very handsome and in high
 spirits. bowed politely to the baroness, familiarly to danglars, and
 affectionately to monte cristo. then turning to the baroness: “may i
 ask how mademoiselle danglars is?” said he.
 
“she is quite well,” replied danglars quickly; “she is at the piano
 with m. cavalcanti.”
 
albert retained his calm and indifferent manner; might feel perhaps
 annoyed, but knew monte cristo’s eye was on him. “m. cavalcanti has
 fine tenor voice,” said he, “and mademoiselle eugénie splendid
 soprano, and then she plays the piano like thalberg. the concert must
 be delightful one.”
 
“they suit each other remarkably well,” said danglars. albert appeared
 not to notice this remark, which was, however, so rude that madame
 danglars blushed.
 
“i, too,” said the young man, “am musician—at least, my masters used
 to tell so; but it is strange that my voice never would suit any
 other, and soprano less than any.”
 
danglars smiled, and seemed to say, “it is of consequence.” then,
 hoping doubtless to effect his purpose, said,—“the prince and my
 daughter were universally admired yesterday. you were not of the party,
 m. morcerf?”
 
“what prince?” asked albert.
 
“prince cavalcanti,” said danglars, who persisted in giving the young
 man that title.
 
“pardon me,” said albert, “i was not aware that was prince. and
 prince cavalcanti sang with mademoiselle eugénie yesterday? it must
 have been charming, indeed. i regret not having heard them. but i was
 unable to accept your invitation, having promised to accompany my
 mother to german concert given by the baroness of château-renaud.”
 
this was followed by rather an awkward silence.
 
“may i also be allowed,” said morcerf, “to pay my respects to
 mademoiselle danglars?”
 
“wait moment,” said the banker, stopping the young man; “do you hear
 that delightful cavatina? ta, ta, ta, ti, ta, ti, ta, ta; it is
 charming, let them finish—one moment. bravo, bravi, brava!” the banker
 was enthusiastic in his applause.
 
40054m
 


“indeed,” said albert, “it is exquisite; it is impossible to understand
 the music of his country better than prince cavalcanti does. you said
 prince, did you not? but can easily become one, if is not
 already; it is uncommon thing in italy. but to return to the
 charming musicians—you should give us treat, danglars, without
 telling them there is stranger. ask them to sing one more song; it is
 so delightful to hear music in the distance, when the musicians are
 unrestrained by observation.”
 
danglars was quite annoyed by the young man’s indifference. took
 monte cristo aside.
 
“what do you think of our lover?” said he.
 
“he appears cool. but, then your word is given.”
 
“yes, doubtless i have promised to give my daughter to man who loves
 her, but not to one who does not. see him there, cold as marble and
 proud like his father. if were rich, if had cavalcanti’s fortune,
 that might be pardoned. _ma foi_, i haven’t consulted my daughter; but
 if she has good taste——”
 
“oh,” said monte cristo, “my fondness may blind me, but i assure you i
 consider morcerf charming young man who will render your daughter
 happy and will sooner or later attain certain amount of distinction,
 and his father’s position is good.”
 
“hem,” said danglars.
 
“why do you doubt?”
 
“the past—that obscurity on the past.”
 
“but that does not affect the son.”
 
“very true.”
 
“now, i beg of you, don’t go off your head. it’s month now that you
 have been thinking of this marriage, and you must see that it throws
 some responsibility on me, for it was at my house you met this young
 cavalcanti, whom i do not really know at all.”
 
“but i do.”
 
“have you made inquiry?”
 
“is there any need of that! does not his appearance speak for him? and
 is very rich.”
 
“i am not so sure of that.”
 
“and yet you said had money.”
 
“fifty thousand livres—a mere trifle.”
 
“he is well educated.”
 
“hem,” said monte cristo in his turn.
 
“he is musician.”
 
“so are all italians.”
 
“come, count, you do not do that young man justice.”
 
“well, i acknowledge it annoys me, knowing your connection with the
 morcerf family, to see him throw himself in the way.” danglars burst
 out laughing.
 
“what puritan you are!” said he; “that happens every day.”
 
“but you cannot break it off in this way; the morcerfs are depending on
 this union.”
 
“indeed.”
 
“positively.”
 
“then let them explain themselves; you should give the father hint,
 you are so intimate with the family.”
 
“i?—where the devil did you find out that?”
 
“at their ball; it was apparent enough. why, did not the countess, the
 proud mercédès, the disdainful catalane, who will scarcely open her
 lips to her oldest acquaintances, take your arm, lead you into the
 garden, into the private walks, and remain there for half an hour?”
 
“ah, baron, baron,” said albert, “you are not listening—what barbarism
 in megalomaniac like you!”
 
“oh, don’t worry about me, sir mocker,” said danglars; then turning to
 monte cristo said:
 
“but will you undertake to speak to the father?”
 
“willingly, if you wish it.”
 
“but let it be done explicitly and positively. if demands my
 daughter let him fix the day—declare his conditions; in short, let us
 either understand each other, or quarrel. you understand—no more
 delay.”
 
“yes, sir, i will give my attention to the subject.”
 
“i do not say that i await with pleasure his decision, but i do await
 it. banker must, you know, be slave to his promise.” and danglars
 sighed as m. cavalcanti had done half an hour before.
 
“bravi! bravo! brava!” cried morcerf, parodying the banker, as the
 selection came to an end. danglars began to look suspiciously at
 morcerf, when someone came and whispered few words to him.
 
“i shall soon return,” said the banker to monte cristo; “wait for me. i
 shall, perhaps, have something to say to you.” and went out.
 
the baroness took advantage of her husband’s absence to push open the
 door of her daughter’s study, and m. andrea, who was sitting before the
 piano with mademoiselle eugénie, started up like jack-in-the-box.
 albert bowed with smile to mademoiselle danglars, who did not appear
 in the least disturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness.
 cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; bowed to morcerf, who replied
 with the most impertinent look possible. then albert launched out in
 praise of mademoiselle danglars’ voice, and on his regret, after what
 had just heard, that had been unable to be present the previous
 evening.
 
cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to monte cristo.
 
“come,” said madame danglars, “leave music and compliments, and let us
 go and take tea.”
 
“come, louise,” said mademoiselle danglars to her friend.
 
they passed into the next drawing-room, where tea was prepared. just as
 they were beginning, in the english fashion, to leave the spoons in
 their cups, the door again opened and danglars entered, visibly
 agitated. monte cristo observed it particularly, and by look asked
 the banker for an explanation.
 
“i have just received my courier from greece,” said danglars.
 
“ah, yes,” said the count; “that was the reason of your running away
 from us.”
 
“yes.”
 
“how is king otho getting on?” asked albert in the most sprightly tone.
 
danglars cast another suspicious look towards him without answering,
 and monte cristo turned away to conceal the expression of pity which
 passed over his features, but which was gone in moment.
 
“we shall go together, shall we not?” said albert to the count.
 
“if you like,” replied the latter.
 
albert could not understand the banker’s look, and turning to monte
 cristo, who understood it perfectly,—“did you see,” said he, “how he
 looked at me?”
 
“yes,” said the count; “but did you think there was anything particular
 in his look?”
 
“indeed, i did; and what does mean by his news from greece?”
 
“how can i tell you?”
 
“because i imagine you have correspondents in that country.”
 
monte cristo smiled significantly.
 
“stop,” said albert, “here comes. i shall compliment mademoiselle
 danglars on her cameo, while the father talks to you.”
 
“if you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, at least,” said
 monte cristo.
 
“no, everyone would do that.”
 
“my dear viscount, you are dreadfully impertinent.”
 
albert advanced towards eugénie, smiling.
 
meanwhile, danglars, stooping to monte cristo’s ear, “your advice was
 excellent,” said he; “there is whole history connected with the names
 fernand and yanina.”
 
“indeed?” said monte cristo.
 
“yes, i will tell you all; but take away the young man; i cannot endure
 his presence.”
 
“he is going with me. shall i send the father to you?”
 
“immediately.”
 
“very well.” the count made sign to albert and they bowed to the
 ladies, and took their leave, albert perfectly indifferent to
 mademoiselle danglars’ contempt, monte cristo reiterating his advice to
 madame danglars on the prudence banker’s wife should exercise in
 providing for the future.
 
m. cavalcanti remained master of the field.
 


chapter 77. haydée
 
scarcely had the count’s horses cleared the angle of the boulevard,
 when albert, turning towards the count, burst into loud fit of
 laughter—much too loud in fact not to give the idea of its being rather
 forced and unnatural.
 
“well,” said he, “i will ask you the same question which charles ix.
 put to catherine de’ medici, after the massacre of saint bartholomew:
 ‘how have i played my little part?’”
 
“to what do you allude?” asked monte cristo.
 
“to the installation of my rival at m. danglars’.”
 
“what rival?”
 
“_ma foi!_ what rival? why, your protégé, m. andrea cavalcanti!”
 
“ah, joking, viscount, if you please; i do not patronize m.
 andrea—at least, not as concerns m. danglars.”
 
“and you would be to blame for not assisting him, if the young man
 really needed your help in that quarter, but, happily for me, can
 dispense with it.”
 
“what, do you think is paying his addresses?”
 
“i am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulated tones when
 addressing mademoiselle danglars fully proclaim his intentions. he
 aspires to the hand of the proud eugénie.”
 
“what does that signify, so long as they favor your suit?”
 
“but it is not the case, my dear count: on the contrary. i am repulsed
 on all sides.”
 
“what!”
 
“it is so indeed; mademoiselle eugénie scarcely answers me, and
 mademoiselle d’armilly, her confidant, does not speak to at all.”
 
“but the father has the greatest regard possible for you,” said monte
 cristo.
 
“he? oh, no, has plunged thousand daggers into my heart,
 tragedy-weapons, i own, which instead of wounding sheathe their points
 in their own handles, but daggers which nevertheless believed to be
 real and deadly.”
 
“jealousy indicates affection.”
 
“true; but i am not jealous.”
 
“he is.”
 
“of whom?—of debray?”
 
“no, of you.”
 
“of me? i will engage to say that before week is past the door will
 be closed against me.”
 
“you are mistaken, my dear viscount.”
 
“prove it to me.”
 
“do you wish to do so?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, i am charged with the commission of endeavoring to induce the
 comte morcerf to make some definite arrangement with the baron.”
 
“by whom are you charged?”
 
“by the baron himself.”
 
“oh,” said albert with all the cajolery of which was capable. “you
 surely will not do that, my dear count?”
 
“certainly i shall, albert, as i have promised to do it.”
 
“well,” said albert, with sigh, “it seems you are determined to marry
 me.”
 
“i am determined to try and be on good terms with everybody, at all
 events,” said monte cristo. “but apropos of debray, how is it that i
 have not seen him lately at the baron’s house?”
 
“there has been misunderstanding.”
 
“what, with the baroness?”
 
“no, with the baron.”
 
“has perceived anything?”
 
“ah, that is good joke!”
 
“do you think suspects?” said monte cristo with charming
 artlessness.
 
“where have you come from, my dear count?” said albert.
 
“from congo, if you will.”
 
“it must be farther off than even that.”
 
“but what do i know of your parisian husbands?”
 
“oh, my dear count, husbands are pretty much the same everywhere; an
 individual husband of any country is pretty fair specimen of the
 whole race.”
 
“but then, what can have led to the quarrel between danglars and
 debray? they seemed to understand each other so well,” said monte
 cristo with renewed energy.
 
“ah, now you are trying to penetrate into the mysteries of isis, in
 which i am not initiated. when m. andrea cavalcanti has become one of
 the family, you can ask him that question.”
 
the carriage stopped.
 
“here we are,” said monte cristo; “it is only half-past ten o’clock,
 come in.”
 
“certainly, i will.”
 
“my carriage shall take you back.”
 
“no, thank you; i gave orders for my _coupé_ to follow me.”
 
“there it is, then,” said monte cristo, as stepped out of the
 carriage. they both went into the house; the drawing-room was lighted
 up—they went in there. “you will make tea for us, baptistin,” said the
 count. baptistin left the room without waiting to answer, and in two
 seconds reappeared, bringing on tray, all that his master had
 ordered, ready prepared, and appearing to have sprung from the ground,
 like the repasts which we read of in fairy tales.
 
“really, my dear count,” said morcerf, “what i admire in you is, not so
 much your riches, for perhaps there are people even wealthier than
 yourself, nor is it only your wit, for beaumarchais might have
 possessed as much,—but it is your manner of being served, without any
 questions, in moment, in second; it is as if they guessed what you
 wanted by your manner of ringing, and made point of keeping
 everything you can possibly desire in constant readiness.”
 
“what you say is perhaps true; they know my habits. for instance, you
 shall see; how do you wish to occupy yourself during tea-time?”
 
“_ma foi_, i should like to smoke.”
 
monte cristo took the gong and struck it once. in about the space of a
 second private door opened, and ali appeared, bringing two chibouques
 filled with excellent latakia.
 
“it is quite wonderful,” said albert.
 
“oh no, it is as simple as possible,” replied monte cristo. “ali knows
 i generally smoke while i am taking my tea or coffee; has heard that
 i ordered tea, and also knows that i brought you home with me; when
 i summoned him naturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as
 comes from country where hospitality is especially manifested
 through the medium of smoking, naturally concludes that we shall
 smoke in company, and therefore brings two chibouques instead of
 one—and now the mystery is solved.”
 
“certainly you give most commonplace air to your explanation, but it
 is not the less true that you——ah, but what do i hear?” and morcerf
 inclined his head towards the door, through which sounds seemed to
 issue resembling those of guitar.
 
“_ma foi_, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music this evening;
 you have only escaped from mademoiselle danglars’ piano, to be attacked
 by haydée’s guzla.”
 
“haydée—what an adorable name! are there, then, really women who bear
 the name of haydée anywhere but in byron’s poems?”
 
“certainly there are. haydée is very uncommon name in france, but is
 common enough in albania and epirus; it is as if you said, for example,
 chastity, modesty, innocence,—it is kind of baptismal name, as you
 parisians call it.”
 
“oh, that is charming,” said albert, “how i should like to hear my
 countrywomen called mademoiselle goodness, mademoiselle silence,
 mademoiselle christian charity! only think, then, if mademoiselle
 danglars, instead of being called claire-marie-eugénie, had been named
 mademoiselle chastity-modesty-innocence danglars; what fine effect
 that would have produced on the announcement of her marriage!”
 
“hush,” said the count, “do not joke in so loud tone; haydée may hear
 you, perhaps.”
 
“and you think she would be angry?”
 
“no, certainly not,” said the count with haughty expression.
 
“she is very amiable, then, is she not?” said albert.
 
“it is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; slave does not
 dictate to master.”
 
“come; you are joking yourself now. are there any more slaves to be had
 who bear this beautiful name?”
 
“undoubtedly.”
 
“really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other people. the
 slave of the count of monte cristo! why, it is rank of itself in
 france, and from the way in which you lavish money, it is place that
 must be worth hundred thousand francs year.”
 
“a hundred thousand francs! the poor girl originally possessed much
 more than that; she was born to treasures in comparison with which
 those recorded in the _thousand and one nights_ would seem but
 poverty.”
 
“she must be princess then.”
 
“you are right; and she is one of the greatest in her country too.”
 
“i thought so. but how did it happen that such great princess became
 slave?”
 
“how was it that dionysius the tyrant became schoolmaster? the
 fortune of war, my dear viscount,—the caprice of fortune; that is the
 way in which these things are to be accounted for.”
 
“and is her name secret?”
 
“as regards the generality of mankind it is; but not for you, my dear
 viscount, who are one of my most intimate friends, and on whose silence
 i feel i may rely, if i consider it necessary to enjoin it—may i not do
 so?”
 
“certainly; on my word of honor.”
 
“you know the history of the pasha of yanina, do you not?”
 
“of ali tepelini?13 oh, yes; it was in his service that my father made
 his fortune.”
 
“true, i had forgotten that.”
 
40062m
 


“well, what is haydée to ali tepelini?”
 
“merely his daughter.”
 
“what? the daughter of ali pasha?”
 
“of ali pasha and the beautiful vasiliki.”
 
“and your slave?”
 
“_ma foi_, yes.”
 
“but how did she become so?”
 
“why, simply from the circumstance of my having bought her one day, as
 i was passing through the market at constantinople.”
 
“wonderful! really, my dear count, you seem to throw sort of magic
 influence over all in which you are concerned; when i listen to you,
 existence longer seems reality, but waking dream. now, i am
 perhaps going to make an imprudent and thoughtless request, but——”
 
“say on.”
 
“but, since you go out with haydée, and sometimes even take her to the
 opera——”
 
“well?”
 
“i think i may venture to ask you this favor.”
 
“you may venture to ask anything.”
 
“well then, my dear count, present to your princess.”
 
“i will do so; but on two conditions.”
 
“i accept them at once.”
 
“the first is, that you will never tell anyone that i have granted the
 interview.”
 
“very well,” said albert, extending his hand; “i swear i will not.”
 
“the second is, that you will not tell her that your father ever served
 hers.”
 
“i give you my oath that i will not.”
 
“enough, viscount; you will remember those two vows, will you not? but
 i know you to be man of honor.”
 
the count again struck the gong. ali reappeared. “tell haydée,” said
 he, “that i will take coffee with her, and give her to understand that
 i desire permission to present one of my friends to her.”
 
ali bowed and left the room.
 
“now, understand me,” said the count, “no direct questions, my dear
 morcerf; if you wish to know anything, tell me, and i will ask her.”
 
“agreed.”
 
ali reappeared for the third time, and drew back the tapestried hanging
 which concealed the door, to signify to his master and albert that they
 were at liberty to pass on.
 
“let us go in,” said monte cristo.
 
albert passed his hand through his hair, and curled his moustache,
 then, having satisfied himself as to his personal appearance, followed
 the count into the room, the latter having previously resumed his hat
 and gloves. ali was stationed as kind of advanced guard, and the door
 was kept by the three french attendants, commanded by myrtho.
 
haydée was awaiting her visitors in the first room of her apartments,
 which was the drawing-room. her large eyes were dilated with surprise
 and expectation, for it was the first time that any man, except monte
 cristo, had been accorded an entrance into her presence. she was
 sitting on sofa placed in an angle of the room, with her legs crossed
 under her in the eastern fashion, and seemed to have made for herself,
 as it were, kind of nest in the rich indian silks which enveloped
 her. near her was the instrument on which she had just been playing; it
 was elegantly fashioned, and worthy of its mistress. on perceiving
 monte cristo, she arose and welcomed him with smile peculiar to
 herself, expressive at once of the most implicit obedience and also of
 the deepest love. monte cristo advanced towards her and extended his
 hand, which she as usual raised to her lips.
 
40064m
 


albert had proceeded farther than the door, where remained rooted
 to the spot, being completely fascinated by the sight of such
 surpassing beauty, beheld as it was for the first time, and of which an
 inhabitant of more northern climes could form adequate idea.
 
“whom do you bring?” asked the young girl in romaic, of monte cristo;
 “is it friend, brother, simple acquaintance, or an enemy.”
 
“a friend,” said monte cristo in the same language.
 
“what is his name?”
 
“count albert; it is the same man whom i rescued from the hands of the
 banditti at rome.”
 
“in what language would you like to converse with him?”
 
monte cristo turned to albert. “do you know modern greek,” asked he.
 
“alas! no,” said albert; “nor even ancient greek, my dear count; never
 had homer or plato more unworthy scholar than myself.”
 
“then,” said haydée, proving by her remark that she had quite
 understood monte cristo’s question and albert’s answer, “then i will
 speak either in french or italian, if my lord so wills it.”
 
monte cristo reflected one instant. “you will speak in italian,” said
 he.
 
then, turning towards albert,—“it is pity you do not understand
 either ancient or modern greek, both of which haydée speaks so
 fluently; the poor child will be obliged to talk to you in italian,
 which will give you but very false idea of her powers of
 conversation.”
 
the count made sign to haydée to address his visitor. “sir,” she said
 to morcerf, “you are most welcome as the friend of my lord and master.”
 this was said in excellent tuscan, and with that soft roman accent
 which makes the language of dante as sonorous as that of homer. then,
 turning to ali, she directed him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he
 had left the room to execute the orders of his young mistress she
 beckoned albert to approach nearer to her. monte cristo and morcerf
 drew their seats towards small table, on which were arranged music,
 drawings, and vases of flowers. ali then entered bringing coffee and
 chibouques; as to m. baptistin, this portion of the building was
 interdicted to him. albert refused the pipe which the nubian offered
 him.
 
“oh, take it—take it,” said the count; “haydée is almost as civilized
 as parisian; the smell of havana is disagreeable to her, but the
 tobacco of the east is most delicious perfume, you know.”
 
ali left the room. the cups of coffee were all prepared, with the
 addition of sugar, which had been brought for albert. monte cristo and
 haydée took the beverage in the original arabian manner, that is to
 say, without sugar. haydée took the porcelain cup in her little slender
 fingers and conveyed it to her mouth with all the innocent artlessness
 of child when eating or drinking something which it likes. at this
 moment two women entered, bringing salvers filled with ices and
 sherbet, which they placed on two small tables appropriated to that
 purpose.
 
“my dear host, and you, signora,” said albert, in italian, “excuse my
 apparent stupidity. i am quite bewildered, and it is natural that it
 should be so. here i am in the heart of paris; but moment ago i heard
 the rumbling of the omnibuses and the tinkling of the bells of the
 lemonade-sellers, and now i feel as if i were suddenly transported to
 the east; not such as i have seen it, but such as my dreams have
 painted it. oh, signora, if i could but speak greek, your conversation,
 added to the fairy-scene which surrounds me, would furnish an evening
 of such delight as it would be impossible for ever to forget.”
 
“i speak sufficient italian to enable to converse with you, sir,”
 said haydée quietly; “and if you like what is eastern, i will do my
 best to secure the gratification of your tastes while you are here.”
 
“on what subject shall i converse with her?” said albert, in low tone
 to monte cristo.
 
“just what you please; you may speak of her country and of her youthful
 reminiscences, or if you like it better you can talk of rome, naples,
 or florence.”
 
“oh,” said albert, “it is of use to be in the company of greek if
 one converses just in the same style as with parisian; let speak
 to her of the east.”
 
“do so then, for of all themes which you could choose that will be the
 most agreeable to her taste.”
 
albert turned towards haydée. “at what age did you leave greece,
 signora?” asked he.
 
“i left it when i was but five years old,” replied haydée.
 
“and have you any recollection of your country?”
 
“when i shut my eyes and think, i seem to see it all again. the mind
 can see as well as the body. the body forgets sometimes; but the mind
 always remembers.”
 
“and how far back into the past do your recollections extend?”
 
“i could scarcely walk when my mother, who was called vasiliki, which
 means royal,” said the young girl, tossing her head proudly, “took me
 by the hand, and after putting in our purse all the money we possessed,
 we went out, both covered with veils, to solicit alms for the
 prisoners, saying, ‘he who giveth to the poor lendeth to the lord.’
 then when our purse was full we returned to the palace, and without
 saying word to my father, we sent it to the convent, where it was
 divided amongst the prisoners.”
 
“and how old were you at that time?”
 
“i was three years old,” said haydée.
 
“then you remember everything that went on about you from the time when
 you were three years old?” said albert.
 
“everything.”
 
“count,” said albert, in low tone to monte cristo, “do allow the
 signora to tell something of her history. you prohibited my
 mentioning my father’s name to her, but perhaps she will allude to him
 of her own accord in the course of the recital, and you have idea
 how delighted i should be to hear our name pronounced by such beautiful
 lips.”
 
monte cristo turned to haydée, and with an expression of countenance
 which commanded her to pay the most implicit attention to his words, he
 said in greek, “Πατρὸς μὲν ἄτην μήζε τὸ ὄνομα προδότου καὶ προδοσίαν
 εἰπὲ ἡμῖν,”—that is, “tell us the fate of your father; but neither the
 name of the traitor nor the treason.” haydée sighed deeply, and shade
 of sadness clouded her beautiful brow.
 
“what are you saying to her?” said morcerf in an undertone.
 
“i again reminded her that you were friend, and that she need not
 conceal anything from you.”
 
“then,” said albert, “this pious pilgrimage in behalf of the prisoners
 was your first remembrance; what is the next?”
 
“oh, then i remember as if it were but yesterday sitting under the
 shade of some sycamore-trees, on the borders of lake, in the waters
 of which the trembling foliage was reflected as in mirror. under the
 oldest and thickest of these trees, reclining on cushions, sat my
 father; my mother was at his feet, and i, childlike, amused myself by
 playing with his long white beard which descended to his girdle, or
 with the diamond-hilt of the scimitar attached to his girdle. then from
 time to time there came to him an albanian who said something to which
 i paid attention, but which always answered in the same tone of
 voice, either ‘kill,’ or ‘pardon.’”
 
“it is very strange,” said albert, “to hear such words proceed from the
 mouth of anyone but an actress on the stage, and one needs constantly
 to be saying to one’s self, ‘this is fiction, it is all reality,’ in
 order to believe it. and how does france appear in your eyes,
 accustomed as they have been to gaze on such enchanted scenes?”
 
“i think it is fine country,” said haydée, “but i see france as it
 really is, because i look on it with the eyes of woman; whereas my
 own country, which i can only judge of from the impression produced on
 my childish mind, always seems enveloped in vague atmosphere, which
 is luminous or otherwise, according as my remembrances of it are sad or
 joyous.”
 
“so young,” said albert, forgetting at the moment the count’s command
 that should ask questions of the slave herself, “is it possible
 that you can have known what suffering is except by name?”
 
haydée turned her eyes towards monte cristo, who, making at the same
 time some imperceptible sign, murmured:
 
“Εἰπέ—speak.”
 
“nothing is ever so firmly impressed on the mind as the memory of our
 early childhood, and with the exception of the two scenes i have just
 described to you, all my earliest reminiscences are fraught with
 deepest sadness.”
 
40068m
 


“speak, speak, signora,” said albert, “i am listening with the most
 intense delight and interest to all you say.”
 
haydée answered his remark with melancholy smile. “you wish me, then,
 to relate the history of my past sorrows?” said she.
 
“i beg you to do so,” replied albert.
 
“well, i was but four years old when one night i was suddenly awakened
 by my mother. we were in the palace of yanina; she snatched from the
 cushions on which i was sleeping, and on opening my eyes i saw hers
 filled with tears. she took away without speaking. when i saw her
 weeping i began to cry too. ‘hush, child!’ said she. at other times in
 spite of maternal endearments or threats, i had with child’s caprice
 been accustomed to indulge my feelings of sorrow or anger by crying as
 much as i felt inclined; but on this occasion there was an intonation
 of such extreme terror in my mother’s voice when she enjoined to
 silence, that i ceased crying as soon as her command was given. she
 bore rapidly away.
 
“i saw then that we were descending large staircase; around us were
 all my mother’s servants carrying trunks, bags, ornaments, jewels,
 purses of gold, with which they were hurrying away in the greatest
 distraction.
 
“behind the women came guard of twenty men armed with long guns and
 pistols, and dressed in the costume which the greeks have assumed since
 they have again become nation. you may imagine there was something
 startling and ominous,” said haydée, shaking her head and turning pale
 at the mere remembrance of the scene, “in this long file of slaves and
 women only half-aroused from sleep, or at least so they appeared to me,
 who was myself scarcely awake. here and there on the walls of the
 staircase, were reflected gigantic shadows, which trembled in the
 flickering light of the pine-torches till they seemed to reach to the
 vaulted roof above.
 
“‘quick!’ said voice at the end of the gallery. this voice made
 everyone bow before it, resembling in its effect the wind passing over
 field of wheat, by its superior strength forcing every ear to yield
 obeisance. as for me, it made tremble. this voice was that of my
 father. came last, clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his
 hand the carbine which your emperor presented him. was leaning on
 the shoulder of his favorite selim, and drove us all before him, as
 shepherd would his straggling flock. my father,” said haydée, raising
 her head, “was that illustrious man known in europe under the name of
 ali tepelini, pasha of yanina, and before whom turkey trembled.”
 
albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these words pronounced
 with such haughty and dignified accent; it appeared to him as if
 there was something supernaturally gloomy and terrible in the
 expression which gleamed from the brilliant eyes of haydée at this
 moment; she appeared like pythoness evoking spectre, as she
 recalled to his mind the remembrance of the fearful death of this man,
 to the news of which all europe had listened with horror.
 
“soon,” said haydée, “we halted on our march, and found ourselves on
 the borders of lake. my mother pressed to her throbbing heart, and
 at the distance of few paces i saw my father, who was glancing
 anxiously around. four marble steps led down to the water’s edge, and
 below them was boat floating on the tide.
 
40070m
 


“from where we stood i could see in the middle of the lake large
 blank mass; it was the kiosk to which we were going. this kiosk
 appeared to to be at considerable distance, perhaps on account of
 the darkness of the night, which prevented any object from being more
 than partially discerned. we stepped into the boat. i remember well
 that the oars made noise whatever in striking the water, and when i
 leaned over to ascertain the cause i saw that they were muffled with
 the sashes of our palikares.14 besides the rowers, the boat contained
 only the women, my father, mother, selim, and myself. the palikares had
 remained on the shore of the lake, ready to cover our retreat; they
 were kneeling on the lowest of the marble steps, and in that manner
 intended making rampart of the three others, in case of pursuit. our
 bark flew before the wind. ‘why does the boat go so fast?’ asked i of
 my mother.
 
“‘silence, child! hush, we are flying!’ i did not understand. why
 should my father fly?—he, the all-powerful—he, before whom others were
 accustomed to fly—he, who had taken for his device,
 
‘they hate me; then they fear me!’
 

“it was, indeed, flight which my father was trying to effect. i have
 been told since that the garrison of the castle of yanina, fatigued
 with long service——”
 
here haydée cast significant glance at monte cristo, whose eyes had
 been riveted on her countenance during the whole course of her
 narrative. the young girl then continued, speaking slowly, like a
 person who is either inventing or suppressing some feature of the
 history which is relating.
 
“you were saying, signora,” said albert, who was paying the most
 implicit attention to the recital, “that the garrison of yanina,
 fatigued with long service——”
 
“had treated with the seraskier15 kourchid, who had been sent by the
 sultan to gain possession of the person of my father; it was then that
 ali tepelini—after having sent to the sultan french officer in whom
 reposed great confidence—resolved to retire to the asylum which he
 had long before prepared for himself, and which called
 _kataphygion_, or the refuge.”
 
“and this officer,” asked albert, “do you remember his name, signora?”
 
monte cristo exchanged rapid glance with the young girl, which was
 quite unperceived by albert.
 
“no,” said she, “i do not remember it just at this moment; but if it
 should occur to presently, i will tell you.”
 
albert was on the point of pronouncing his father’s name, when monte
 cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the young man
 recollected his promise, and was silent.
 
“it was towards this kiosk that we were rowing. ground floor,
 ornamented with arabesques, bathing its terraces in the water, and
 another floor, looking on the lake, was all which was visible to the
 eye. but beneath the ground floor, stretching out into the island, was
 large subterranean cavern, to which my mother, myself, and the women
 were conducted. in this place were together 60,000 pouches and 200
 barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000 of money in gold, and the
 barrels were filled with 30,000 pounds of gunpowder.
 
“near the barrels stood selim, my father’s favorite, whom i mentioned
 to you just now. stood watch day and night with lance provided
 with lighted slowmatch in his hand, and had orders to blow up
 everything—kiosk, guards, women, gold, and ali tepelini himself—at the
 first signal given by my father. i remember well that the slaves,
 convinced of the precarious tenure on which they held their lives,
 passed whole days and nights in praying, crying, and groaning. as for
 me, i can never forget the pale complexion and black eyes of the young
 soldier, and whenever the angel of death summons to another world, i
 am quite sure i shall recognize selim. i cannot tell you how long we
 remained in this state; at that period i did not even know what time
 meant. sometimes, but very rarely, my father summoned and my mother
 to the terrace of the palace; these were hours of recreation for me, as
 i never saw anything in the dismal cavern but the gloomy countenances
 of the slaves and selim’s fiery lance. my father was endeavoring to
 pierce with his eager looks the remotest verge of the horizon,
 examining attentively every black speck which appeared on the lake,
 while my mother, reclining by his side, rested her head on his
 shoulder, and i played at his feet, admiring everything i saw with that
 unsophisticated innocence of childhood which throws charm round
 objects insignificant in themselves, but which in its eyes are invested
 with the greatest importance. the heights of pindus towered above us;
 the castle of yanina rose white and angular from the blue waters of the
 lake, and the immense masses of black vegetation which, viewed in the
 distance, gave the idea of lichens clinging to the rocks, were in
 reality gigantic fir-trees and myrtles.
 
“one morning my father sent for us; my mother had been crying all the
 night, and was very wretched; we found the pasha calm, but paler than
 usual. ‘take courage, vasiliki,’ said he; ‘today arrives the firman of
 the master, and my fate will be decided. if my pardon be complete, we
 shall return triumphant to yanina; if the news be inauspicious, we must
 fly this night.’—‘but supposing our enemy should not allow us to do
 so?’ said my mother. ‘oh, make yourself easy on that head,’ said ali,
 smiling; ‘selim and his flaming lance will settle that matter. they
 would be glad to see dead, but they would not like themselves to die
 with me.’
 
“my mother only answered by sighs to consolations which she knew did
 not come from my father’s heart. she prepared the iced water which he
 was in the habit of constantly drinking,—for since his sojourn at the
 kiosk had been parched by the most violent fever,—after which she
 anointed his white beard with perfumed oil, and lighted his chibouque,
 which sometimes smoked for hours together, quietly watching the
 wreaths of vapor that ascended in spiral clouds and gradually melted
 away in the surrounding atmosphere. presently made such sudden
 movement that i was paralyzed with fear. then, without taking his eyes
 from the object which had first attracted his attention, asked for
 his telescope. my mother gave it him, and as she did so, looked whiter
 than the marble against which she leaned. i saw my father’s hand
 tremble. ‘a boat!—two!—three!’ murmured my, father;—‘four!’ then
 arose, seizing his arms and priming his pistols. ‘vasiliki,’ said to
 my mother, trembling perceptibly, ‘the instant approaches which will
 decide everything. in the space of half an hour we shall know the
 emperor’s answer. go into the cavern with haydée.’—‘i will not quit
 you,’ said vasiliki; ‘if you die, my lord, i will die with you.’—‘go to
 selim!’ cried my father. ‘adieu, my lord,’ murmured my mother,
 determining quietly to await the approach of death. ‘take away
 vasiliki!’ said my father to his palikares.
 
“as for me, i had been forgotten in the general confusion; i ran toward
 ali tepelini; saw hold out my arms to him, and stooped down
 and pressed my forehead with his lips. oh, how distinctly i remember
 that kiss!—it was the last ever gave me, and i feel as if it were
 still warm on my forehead. on descending, we saw through the
 lattice-work several boats which were gradually becoming more distinct
 to our view. at first they appeared like black specks, and now they
 looked like birds skimming the surface of the waves. during this time,
 in the kiosk at my father’s feet, were seated twenty palikares,
 concealed from view by an angle of the wall and watching with eager
 eyes the arrival of the boats. they were armed with their long guns
 inlaid with mother-of-pearl and silver, and cartridges in great numbers
 were lying scattered on the floor. my father looked at his watch, and
 paced up and down with countenance expressive of the greatest
 anguish. this was the scene which presented itself to my view as i
 quitted my father after that last kiss.
 
“my mother and i traversed the gloomy passage leading to the cavern.
 selim was still at his post, and smiled sadly on us as we entered. we
 fetched our cushions from the other end of the cavern, and sat down by
 selim. in great dangers the devoted ones cling to each other; and,
 young as i was, i quite understood that some imminent danger was
 hanging over our heads.”
 
albert had often heard—not from his father, for never spoke on the
 subject, but from strangers—the description of the last moments of the
 vizier of yanina; had read different accounts of his death, but the
 story seemed to acquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of
 the young girl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholy
 expression of her countenance at once charmed and horrified him.
 
as to haydée, these terrible reminiscences seemed to have overpowered
 her for moment, for she ceased speaking, her head leaning on her hand
 like beautiful flower bowing beneath the violence of the storm; and
 her eyes gazing on vacancy indicated that she was mentally
 contemplating the green summit of the pindus and the blue waters of the
 lake of yanina, which, like magic mirror, seemed to reflect the
 sombre picture which she sketched. monte cristo looked at her with an
 indescribable expression of interest and pity.
 
“go on, my child,” said the count in the romaic language.
 
40074m
 


haydée looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of monte cristo’s
 voice had awakened her from dream; and she resumed her narrative.
 
“it was about four o’clock in the afternoon, and although the day was
 brilliant out-of-doors, we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of the
 cavern. one single, solitary light was burning there, and it appeared
 like star set in heaven of blackness; it was selim’s flaming lance.
 my mother was christian, and she prayed. selim repeated from time to
 time the sacred words: ‘god is great!’ however, my mother had still
 some hope. as she was coming down, she thought she recognized the
 french officer who had been sent to constantinople, and in whom my
 father placed so much confidence; for knew that all the soldiers of
 the french emperor were naturally noble and generous. she advanced some
 steps towards the staircase, and listened. ‘they are approaching,’ said
 she; ‘perhaps they bring us peace and liberty!’
 
“‘what do you fear, vasiliki?’ said selim, in voice at once so gentle
 and yet so proud. ‘if they do not bring us peace, we will give them
 war; if they do not bring life, we will give them death.’ and he
 renewed the flame of his lance with gesture which made one think of
 dionysus of old crete.16 but i, being only little child, was
 terrified by this undaunted courage, which appeared to both
 ferocious and senseless, and i recoiled with horror from the idea of
 the frightful death amidst fire and flames which probably awaited us.
 
“my mother experienced the same sensations, for i felt her tremble.
 ‘mamma, mamma,’ said i, ‘are we really to be killed?’ and at the sound
 of my voice the slaves redoubled their cries and prayers and
 lamentations. ‘my child,’ said vasiliki, ‘may god preserve you from
 ever wishing for that death which today you so much dread!’ then,
 whispering to selim, she asked what were her master’s orders. ‘if he
 send his poniard, it will signify that the emperor’s intentions are
 not favorable, and i am to set fire to the powder; if, on the contrary,
 send his ring, it will be sign that the emperor pardons him,
 and i am to extinguish the match and leave the magazine untouched.’—‘my
 friend,’ said my mother, ‘when your master’s orders arrive, if it is
 the poniard which sends, instead of despatching us by that horrible
 death which we both so much dread, you will mercifully kill us with
 this same poniard, will you not?’—‘yes, vasiliki,’ replied selim
 tranquilly.
 
“suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discerned that they were
 cries of joy. the name of the french officer who had been sent to
 constantinople resounded on all sides amongst our palikares; it was
 evident that brought the answer of the emperor, and that it was
 favorable.”
 
“and do you not remember the frenchman’s name?” said morcerf, quite
 ready to aid the memory of the narrator. monte cristo made sign to
 him to be silent.
 
“i do not recollect it,” said haydée.
 
“the noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearer and nearer;
 they were descending the steps leading to the cavern. selim made ready
 his lance. soon figure appeared in the gray twilight at the entrance
 of the cave, formed by the reflection of the few rays of daylight which
 had found their way into this gloomy retreat. ‘who are you?’ cried
 selim. ‘but whoever you may be, i charge you not to advance another
 step.’—‘long live the emperor!’ said the figure. ‘he grants full
 pardon to the vizier ali, and not only gives him his life, but restores
 to him his fortune and his possessions.’ my mother uttered cry of
 joy, and clasped to her bosom. ‘stop,’ said selim, seeing that she
 was about to go out; ‘you see i have not yet received the
 ring,’—‘true,’ said my mother. and she fell on her knees, at the same
 time holding up towards heaven, as if she desired, while praying to
 god in my behalf, to raise actually to his presence.”
 
and for the second time haydée stopped, overcome by such violent
 emotion that the perspiration stood upon her pale brow, and her stifled
 voice seemed hardly able to find utterance, so parched and dry were her
 throat and lips.
 
40076m
 


monte cristo poured little iced water into glass, and presented it
 to her, saying with mildness in which was also shade of
 command,—“courage.”
 
haydée dried her eyes, and continued:
 
“by this time our eyes, habituated to the darkness, had recognized the
 messenger of the pasha,—it was friend. selim had also recognized him,
 but the brave young man only acknowledged one duty, which was to obey.
 ‘in whose name do you come?’ said to him. ‘i come in the name of our
 master, ali tepelini.’—‘if you come from ali himself,’ said selim, ‘you
 know what you were charged to remit to me?’—‘yes,’ said the messenger,
 ‘and i bring you his ring.’ at these words raised his hand above his
 head, to show the token; but it was too far off, and there was not
 light enough to enable selim, where was standing, to distinguish and
 recognize the object presented to his view. ‘i do not see what you have
 in your hand,’ said selim. ‘approach then,’ said the messenger, ‘or i
 will come nearer to you, if you prefer it.’—‘i will agree to neither
 one nor the other,’ replied the young soldier; ‘place the object which
 i desire to see in the ray of light which shines there, and retire
 while i examine it.’—‘be it so,’ said the envoy; and retired, after
 having first deposited the token agreed on in the place pointed out to
 him by selim.
 
“oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem to be ring
 which was placed there. but was it my father’s ring? that was the
 question. selim, still holding in his hand the lighted match, walked
 towards the opening in the cavern, and, aided by the faint light which
 streamed in through the mouth of the cave, picked up the token.
 
“‘it is well,’ said he, kissing it; ‘it is my master’s ring!’ and
 throwing the match on the ground, trampled on it and extinguished
 it. the messenger uttered cry of joy and clapped his hands. at this
 signal four soldiers of the seraskier kourchid suddenly appeared, and
 selim fell, pierced by five blows. each man had stabbed him separately,
 and, intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear, they
 sought all over the cavern to discover if there was any fear of fire,
 after which they amused themselves by rolling on the bags of gold. at
 this moment my mother seized in her arms, and hurrying noiselessly
 along numerous turnings and windings known only to ourselves, she
 arrived at private staircase of the kiosk, where was scene of
 frightful tumult and confusion. the lower rooms were entirely filled
 with kourchid’s troops; that is to say, with our enemies. just as my
 mother was on the point of pushing open small door, we heard the
 voice of the pasha sounding in loud and threatening tone. my mother
 applied her eye to the crack between the boards; i luckily found a
 small opening which afforded view of the apartment and what was
 passing within. ‘what do you want?’ said my father to some people who
 were holding paper inscribed with characters of gold. ‘what we want,’
 replied one, ‘is to communicate to you the will of his highness. do you
 see this firman?’—‘i do,’ said my father. ‘well, read it; demands
 your head.’
 
40078m
 


“my father answered with loud laugh, which was more frightful than
 even threats would have been, and had not ceased when two reports of
 pistol were heard; had fired them himself, and had killed two men.
 the palikares, who were prostrated at my father’s feet, now sprang up
 and fired, and the room was filled with fire and smoke. at the same
 instant the firing began on the other side, and the balls penetrated
 the boards all round us. oh, how noble did the grand vizier my father
 look at that moment, in the midst of the flying bullets, his scimitar
 in his hand, and his face blackened with the powder of his enemies! and
 how terrified them, even then, and made them fly before him! ‘selim,
 selim!’ cried he, ‘guardian of the fire, do your duty!’—‘selim is
 dead,’ replied voice which seemed to come from the depths of the
 earth, ‘and you are lost, ali!’ at the same moment an explosion was
 heard, and the flooring of the room in which my father was sitting was
 suddenly torn up and shivered to atoms—the troops were firing from
 underneath. three or four palikares fell with their bodies literally
 ploughed with wounds.
 
“my father howled aloud, plunged his fingers into the holes which the
 balls had made, and tore up one of the planks entire. but immediately
 through this opening twenty more shots were fired, and the flame,
 rushing up like fire from the crater of volcano, soon reached the
 tapestry, which it quickly devoured. in the midst of all this frightful
 tumult and these terrific cries, two reports, fearfully distinct,
 followed by two shrieks more heartrending than all, froze with
 terror. these two shots had mortally wounded my father, and it was he
 who had given utterance to these frightful cries. however, remained
 standing, clinging to window. my mother tried to force the door, that
 she might go and die with him, but it was fastened on the inside. all
 around him were lying the palikares, writhing in convulsive agonies,
 while two or three who were only slightly wounded were trying to escape
 by springing from the windows. at this crisis the whole flooring
 suddenly gave way, my father fell on one knee, and at the same moment
 twenty hands were thrust forth, armed with sabres, pistols, and
 poniards—twenty blows were instantaneously directed against one man,
 and my father disappeared in whirlwind of fire and smoke kindled by
 these demons, and which seemed like hell itself opening beneath his
 feet. i felt myself fall to the ground, my mother had fainted.”
 
haydée’s arms fell by her side, and she uttered deep groan, at the
 same time looking towards the count as if to ask if were satisfied
 with her obedience to his commands.
 
monte cristo arose and approached her, took her hand, and said to her
 in romaic:
 
“calm yourself, my dear child, and take courage in remembering that
 there is god who will punish traitors.”
 
“it is frightful story, count,” said albert, terrified at the
 paleness of haydée’s countenance, “and i reproach myself now for having
 been so cruel and thoughtless in my request.”
 
“oh, it is nothing,” said monte cristo. then, patting the young girl on
 the head, continued, “haydée is very courageous, and she sometimes
 even finds consolation in the recital of her misfortunes.”
 
“because, my lord,” said haydée eagerly, “my miseries recall to the
 remembrance of your goodness.”
 
albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yet related what
 most desired to know,—how she had become the slave of the count.
 haydée saw at glance the same expression pervading the countenances
 of her two auditors; she continued:
 
“when my mother recovered her senses we were before the seraskier.
 ‘kill,’ said she, ‘but spare the honor of the widow of ali.’—‘it is not
 to to whom you must address yourself,’ said kourchid.
 
“‘to whom, then?’—‘to your new master.’
 
“‘who and where is he?’—‘he is here.’
 
“and kourchid pointed out one who had more than any contributed to the
 death of my father,” said haydée, in tone of chastened anger.
 
“then,” said albert, “you became the property of this man?”
 
40080m
 


“no,” replied haydée, “he did not dare to keep us, so we were sold to
 some slave-merchants who were going to constantinople. we traversed
 greece, and arrived half dead at the imperial gates. they were
 surrounded by crowd of people, who opened way for us to pass, when
 suddenly my mother, having looked closely at an object which was
 attracting their attention, uttered piercing cry and fell to the
 ground, pointing as she did so to head which was placed over the
 gates, and beneath which were inscribed these words:
 
‘_this is the head of ali tepelini, pasha of yanina._’
 
“i cried bitterly, and tried to raise my mother from the earth, but she
 was dead! i was taken to the slave-market, and was purchased by rich
 armenian. caused to be instructed, gave masters, and when i
 was thirteen years of age sold to the sultan mahmoud.”
 
“of whom i bought her,” said monte cristo, “as i told you, albert, with
 the emerald which formed match to the one i had made into box for
 the purpose of holding my hashish pills.”
 
“oh, you are good, you are great, my lord!” said haydée, kissing the
 count’s hand, “and i am very fortunate in belonging to such master!”
 
albert remained quite bewildered with all that had seen and heard.
 
“come, finish your cup of coffee,” said monte cristo; “the history is
 ended.”
 


chapter 78. we hear from yanina
 
if valentine could have seen the trembling step and agitated
 countenance of franz when quitted the chamber of m. noirtier, even
 she would have been constrained to pity him. villefort had only just
 given utterance to few incoherent sentences, and then retired to his
 study, where received about two hours afterwards the following
 letter:
 
“after all the disclosures which were made this morning, m. noirtier de
 villefort must see the utter impossibility of any alliance being formed
 between his family and that of m. franz d’Épinay. m. d’Épinay must say
 that is shocked and astonished that m. villefort, who appeared to
 be aware of all the circumstances detailed this morning, should not
 have anticipated him in this announcement.”
 

one who had seen the magistrate at this moment, so thoroughly
 unnerved by the recent inauspicious combination of circumstances, would
 have supposed for an instant that had anticipated the annoyance;
 although it certainly never had occurred to him that his father would
 carry candor, or rather rudeness, so far as to relate such history.
 and in justice to villefort, it must be understood that m. noirtier,
 who never cared for the opinion of his on any subject, had always
 omitted to explain the affair to villefort, so that had all his life
 entertained the belief that general quesnel, or the baron d’Épinay,
 as was alternately styled, according as the speaker wished to
 identify him by his own family name, or by the title which had been
 conferred on him, fell the victim of assassination, and not that was
 killed fairly in duel. this harsh letter, coming as it did from man
 generally so polite and respectful, struck mortal blow at the pride
 of villefort.
 
hardly had read the letter, when his wife entered. the sudden
 departure of franz, after being summoned by m. noirtier, had so much
 astonished everyone, that the position of madame villefort, left
 alone with the notary and the witnesses, became every moment more
 embarrassing. determined to bear it longer, she arose and left the
 room; saying she would go and make some inquiries into the cause of his
 sudden disappearance.
 
m. villefort’s communications on the subject were very limited and
 concise; told her, in fact, that an explanation had taken place
 between m. noirtier, m. d’Épinay, and himself, and that the marriage of
 valentine and franz would consequently be broken off. this was an
 awkward and unpleasant thing to have to report to those who were
 waiting. she therefore contented herself with saying that m. noirtier
 having at the commencement of the discussion been attacked by sort of
 apoplectic fit, the affair would necessarily be deferred for some days
 longer. this news, false as it was following so singularly in the train
 of the two similar misfortunes which had so recently occurred,
 evidently astonished the auditors, and they retired without word.
 
during this time valentine, at once terrified and happy, after having
 embraced and thanked the feeble old man for thus breaking with single
 blow the chain which she had been accustomed to consider as
 irrefragable, asked leave to retire to her own room, in order to
 recover her composure. noirtier looked the permission which she
 solicited. but instead of going to her own room, valentine, having once
 gained her liberty, entered the gallery, and, opening small door at
 the end of it, found herself at once in the garden.
 
in the midst of all the strange events which had crowded one on the
 other, an indefinable sentiment of dread had taken possession of
 valentine’s mind. she expected every moment that she should see morrel
 appear, pale and trembling, to forbid the signing of the contract, like
 the laird of ravenswood in _the bride of lammermoor_.
 
it was high time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for
 maximilian had long awaited her coming. had half guessed what was
 going on when saw franz quit the cemetery with m. villefort. he
 followed m. d’Épinay, saw him enter, afterwards go out, and then
 re-enter with albert and château-renaud. had longer any doubts as
 to the nature of the conference; therefore quickly went to the gate
 in the clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of the proceedings,
 and very certain that valentine would hasten to him the first moment
 she should be set at liberty. was not mistaken; peering through the
 crevices of the wooden partition, soon discovered the young girl,
 who cast aside all her usual precautions and walked at once to the
 barrier. the first glance which maximilian directed towards her
 entirely reassured him, and the first words she spoke made his heart
 bound with delight.
 
“we are saved!” said valentine.
 
“saved?” repeated morrel, not being able to conceive such intense
 happiness; “by whom?”
 
“by my grandfather. oh, morrel, pray love him for all his goodness to
 us!”
 
morrel swore to love him with all his soul; and at that moment could
 safely promise to do so, for felt as though it were not enough to
 love him merely as friend or even as father, worshiped him as a
 god.
 
“but tell me, valentine, how has it all been effected? what strange
 means has used to compass this blessed end?”
 
valentine was on the point of relating all that had passed, but she
 suddenly remembered that in doing so she must reveal terrible secret
 which concerned others as well as her grandfather, and she said:
 
“at some future time i will tell you all about it.”
 
“but when will that be?”
 
“when i am your wife.”
 
the conversation had now turned upon topic so pleasing to morrel,
 that was ready to accede to anything that valentine thought fit to
 propose, and likewise felt that piece of intelligence such as he
 just heard ought to be more than sufficient to content him for one day.
 however, would not leave without the promise of seeing valentine
 again the next night. valentine promised all that morrel required of
 her, and certainly it was less difficult now for her to believe that
 she should marry maximilian than it was an hour ago to assure herself
 that she should not marry franz.
 
during the time occupied by the interview we have just detailed, madame
 villefort had gone to visit m. noirtier. the old man looked at her
 with that stern and forbidding expression with which was accustomed
 to receive her.
 
“sir,” said she, “it is superfluous for to tell you that valentine’s
 marriage is broken off, since it was here that the affair was
 concluded.”
 
noirtier’s countenance remained immovable.
 
“but one thing i can tell you, of which i do not think you are aware;
 that is, that i have always been opposed to this marriage, and that the
 contract was entered into entirely without my consent or approbation.”
 
noirtier regarded his daughter-in-law with the look of man desiring
 an explanation.
 
“now that this marriage, which i know you so much disliked, is done
 away with, i come to you on an errand which neither m. villefort nor
 valentine could consistently undertake.”
 
noirtier’s eyes demanded the nature of her mission.
 
“i come to entreat you, sir,” continued madame villefort, “as the
 only one who has the right of doing so, inasmuch as i am the only one
 who will receive personal benefit from the transaction,—i come to
 entreat you to restore, not your love, for that she has always
 possessed, but to restore your fortune to your granddaughter.”
 
there was doubtful expression in noirtier’s eyes; was evidently
 trying to discover the motive of this proceeding, and could not
 succeed in doing so.
 
“may i hope, sir,” said madame villefort, “that your intentions
 accord with my request?”
 
noirtier made sign that they did.
 
“in that case, sir,” rejoined madame villefort, “i will leave you
 overwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at your prompt acquiescence to
 my wishes.” she then bowed to m. noirtier and retired.
 
the next day m. noirtier sent for the notary; the first will was torn
 up and second made, in which left the whole of his fortune to
 valentine, on condition that she should never be separated from him. it
 was then generally reported that mademoiselle villefort, the heiress
 of the marquis and marchioness of saint-méran, had regained the good
 graces of her grandfather, and that she would ultimately be in
 possession of an income of 300,000 livres.
 
while all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the
 marriage-contract were being carried on at the house of m. de
 villefort, monte cristo had paid his visit to the count of morcerf,
 who, in order to lose time in responding to m. danglars’ wishes, and
 at the same time to pay all due deference to his position in society,
 donned his uniform of lieutenant-general, which ornamented with all
 his crosses, and thus attired, ordered his finest horses and drove to
 the rue chaussée d’antin.
 
danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it was perhaps not the
 most favorable moment for finding him in his best humor. at the first
 sight of his old friend, danglars assumed his majestic air, and settled
 himself in his easy-chair.
 
morcerf, usually so stiff and formal, accosted the banker in an affable
 and smiling manner, and, feeling sure that the overture was about to
 make would be well received, did not consider it necessary to adopt
 any manœuvres in order to gain his end, but went at once straight to
 the point.
 
40086m
 


“well, baron,” said he, “here i am at last; some time has elapsed since
 our plans were formed, and they are not yet executed.”
 
morcerf paused at these words, quietly waiting till the cloud should
 have dispersed which had gathered on the brow of danglars, and which he
 attributed to his silence; but, on the contrary, to his great surprise,
 it grew darker and darker.
 
“to what do you allude, monsieur?” said danglars; as if were trying
 in vain to guess at the possible meaning of the general’s words.
 
“ah,” said morcerf, “i see you are stickler for forms, my dear sir,
 and you would remind that the ceremonial rites should not be
 omitted. _ma foi_, i beg your pardon, but as i have but one son, and it
 is the first time i have ever thought of marrying him, i am still
 serving my apprenticeship, you know; come, i will reform.”
 
and morcerf with forced smile arose, and, making low bow to m.
 danglars, said:
 
“baron, i have the honor of asking of you the hand of mademoiselle
 eugénie danglars for my son, the vicomte albert morcerf.”
 
but danglars, instead of receiving this address in the favorable manner
 which morcerf had expected, knit his brow, and without inviting the
 count, who was still standing, to take seat, said:
 
“monsieur, it will be necessary to reflect before i give you an
 answer.”
 
“to reflect?” said morcerf, more and more astonished; “have you not had
 enough time for reflection during the eight years which have elapsed
 since this marriage was first discussed between us?”
 
“count,” said the banker, “things are constantly occurring in the world
 to induce us to lay aside our most established opinions, or at all
 events to cause us to remodel them according to the change of
 circumstances, which may have placed affairs in totally different
 light to that in which we at first viewed them.”
 
“i do not understand you, baron,” said morcerf.
 
“what i mean to say is this, sir,—that during the last fortnight
 unforeseen circumstances have occurred——”
 
“excuse me,” said morcerf, “but is it play we are acting?”
 
“a play?”
 
“yes, for it is like one; pray let us come more to the point, and
 endeavor thoroughly to understand each other.”
 
“that is quite my desire.”
 
“you have seen m. monte cristo have you not?”
 
“i see him very often,” said danglars, drawing himself up; “he is a
 particular friend of mine.”
 
“well, in one of your late conversations with him, you said that i
 appeared to be forgetful and irresolute concerning this marriage, did
 you not?”
 
“i did say so.”
 
“well, here i am, proving at once that i am really neither the one nor
 the other, by entreating you to keep your promise on that score.”
 
danglars did not answer.
 
“have you so soon changed your mind,” added morcerf, “or have you only
 provoked my request that you may have the pleasure of seeing me
 humbled?”
 
danglars, seeing that if continued the conversation in the same tone
 in which had begun it, the whole thing might turn out to his own
 disadvantage, turned to morcerf, and said:
 
“count, you must doubtless be surprised at my reserve, and i assure you
 it costs much to act in such manner towards you; but, believe me
 when i say that imperative necessity has imposed the painful task upon
 me.”
 
“these are all so many empty words, my dear sir,” said morcerf: “they
 might satisfy new acquaintance, but the comte morcerf does not
 rank in that list; and when man like him comes to another, recalls to
 him his plighted word, and this man fails to redeem the pledge, has
 at least right to exact from him good reason for so doing.”
 
danglars was coward, but did not wish to appear so; was piqued at
 the tone which morcerf had just assumed.
 
“i am not without good reason for my conduct,” replied the banker.
 
“what do you mean to say?”
 
“i mean to say that i have good reason, but that it is difficult to
 explain.”
 
“you must be aware, at all events, that it is impossible for to
 understand motives before they are explained to me; but one thing at
 least is clear, which is, that you decline allying yourself with my
 family.”
 
“no, sir,” said danglars; “i merely suspend my decision, that is all.”
 
“and do you really flatter yourself that i shall yield to all your
 caprices, and quietly and humbly await the time of again being received
 into your good graces?”
 
“then, count, if you will not wait, we must look upon these projects as
 if they had never been entertained.”
 
the count bit his lips till the blood almost started, to prevent the
 ebullition of anger which his proud and irritable temper scarcely
 allowed him to restrain; understanding, however, that in the present
 state of things the laugh would decidedly be against him, turned
 from the door, towards which had been directing his steps, and again
 confronted the banker. cloud settled on his brow, evincing decided
 anxiety and uneasiness, instead of the expression of offended pride
 which had lately reigned there.
 
“my dear danglars,” said morcerf, “we have been acquainted for many
 years, and consequently we ought to make some allowance for each
 other’s failings. you owe an explanation, and really it is but fair
 that i should know what circumstance has occurred to deprive my of
 your favor.”
 
“it is from personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that is all i
 can say, sir,” replied danglars, who resumed his insolent manner as
 soon as perceived that morcerf was little softened and calmed
 down.
 
“and towards whom do you bear this personal ill-feeling, then?” said
 morcerf, turning pale with anger. the expression of the count’s face
 had not remained unperceived by the banker; fixed on him look of
 greater assurance than before, and said:
 
“you may, perhaps, be better satisfied that i should not go farther
 into particulars.”
 
tremor of suppressed rage shook the whole frame of the count, and
 making violent effort over himself, said: “i have right to
 insist on your giving an explanation. is it madame morcerf who
 has displeased you? is it my fortune which you find insufficient? is it
 because my opinions differ from yours?”
 
“nothing of the kind, sir,” replied danglars: “if such had been the
 case, i only should have been to blame, inasmuch as i was aware of all
 these things when i made the engagement. no, do not seek any longer to
 discover the reason. i really am quite ashamed to have been the cause
 of your undergoing such severe self-examination; let us drop the
 subject, and adopt the middle course of delay, which implies neither a
 rupture nor an engagement. _ma foi_, there is hurry. my daughter is
 only seventeen years old, and your twenty-one. while we wait, time
 will be progressing, events will succeed each other; things which in
 the evening look dark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light
 of morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or the lapse of a
 single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies.”
 
“calumnies, did you say, sir?” cried morcerf, turning livid with rage.
 “does anyone dare to slander me?”
 
“monsieur, i told you that i considered it best to avoid all
 explanation.”
 
“then, sir, i am patiently to submit to your refusal?”
 
“yes, sir, although i assure you the refusal is as painful for to
 give as it is for you to receive, for i had reckoned on the honor of
 your alliance, and the breaking off of marriage contract always
 injures the lady more than the gentleman.”
 
“enough, sir,” said morcerf, “we will speak more on the subject.”
 
and clutching his gloves in anger, left the apartment. danglars
 observed that during the whole conversation morcerf had never once
 dared to ask if it was on his own account that danglars recalled his
 word.
 
that evening had long conference with several friends; and m.
 cavalcanti, who had remained in the drawing-room with the ladies, was
 the last to leave the banker’s house.
 
the next morning, as soon as awoke, danglars asked for the
 newspapers; they were brought to him; laid aside three or four, and
 at last fixed on _l’impartial_, the paper of which beauchamp was the
 chief editor. hastily tore off the cover, opened the journal with
 nervous precipitation, passed contemptuously over the paris jottings,
 and arriving at the miscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a
 malicious smile, at paragraph headed
 
_we hear from yanina._
 

“very good,” observed danglars, after having read the paragraph; “here
 is little article on colonel fernand, which, if i am not mistaken,
 would render the explanation which the comte morcerf required of me
 perfectly unnecessary.”
 
at the same moment, that is, at nine o’clock in the morning, albert de
 morcerf, dressed in black coat buttoned up to his chin, might have
 been seen walking with quick and agitated step in the direction of
 monte cristo’s house in the champs-Élysées. when presented himself
 at the gate the porter informed him that the count had gone out about
 half an hour previously.
 
“did take baptistin with him?”
 
“no, my lord.”
 
“call him, then; i wish to speak to him.”
 
the concierge went to seek the valet chambre, and returned with him
 in an instant.
 
“my good friend,” said albert, “i beg pardon for my intrusion, but i
 was anxious to know from your own mouth if your master was really out
 or not.”
 
“he is really out, sir,” replied baptistin.
 
“out, even to me?”
 
“i know how happy my master always is to receive the vicomte,” said
 baptistin; “and i should therefore never think of including him in any
 general order.”
 
“you are right; and now i wish to see him on an affair of great
 importance. do you think it will be long before comes in?”
 
“no, i think not, for ordered his breakfast at ten o’clock.”
 
“well, i will go and take turn in the champs-Élysées, and at ten
 o’clock i will return here; meanwhile, if the count should come in,
 will you beg him not to go out again without seeing me?”
 
“you may depend on my doing so, sir,” said baptistin.
 
albert left the cab in which had come at the count’s door, intending
 to take turn on foot. as was passing the allée des veuves, he
 thought saw the count’s horses standing at gosset’s
 shooting-gallery; approached, and soon recognized the coachman.
 
“is the count shooting in the gallery?” said morcerf.
 
“yes, sir,” replied the coachman. while was speaking, albert had
 heard the report of two or three pistol-shots. entered, and on his
 way met the waiter.
 
“excuse me, my lord,” said the lad; “but will you have the kindness to
 wait moment?”
 
“what for, philip?” asked albert, who, being constant visitor there,
 did not understand this opposition to his entrance.
 
“because the person who is now in the gallery prefers being alone, and
 never practices in the presence of anyone.”
 
“not even before you, philip? then who loads his pistol?”
 
“his servant.”
 
“a nubian?”
 
“a negro.”
 
“it is he, then.”
 
“do you know this gentleman?”
 
“yes, and i am come to look for him; is friend of mine.”
 
“oh, that is quite another thing, then. i will go immediately and
 inform him of your arrival.”
 
and philip, urged by his own curiosity, entered the gallery; second
 afterwards, monte cristo appeared on the threshold.
 
“i ask your pardon, my dear count,” said albert, “for following you
 here, and i must first tell you that it was not the fault of your
 servants that i did so; i alone am to blame for the indiscretion. i
 went to your house, and they told you were out, but that they
 expected you home at ten o’clock to breakfast. i was walking about in
 order to pass away the time till ten o’clock, when i caught sight of
 your carriage and horses.”
 
“what you have just said induces to hope that you intend
 breakfasting with me.”
 
40092m
 


“no, thank you, i am thinking of other things besides breakfast just
 now; perhaps we may take that meal at later hour and in worse
 company.”
 
“what on earth are you talking of?”
 
“i am to fight today.”
 
“for what?”
 
“for the sake of fighting!”
 
“yes, i understand that, but what is the quarrel? people fight for all
 sorts of reasons, you know.”
 
“i fight in the cause of honor.”
 
“ah, that is something serious.”
 
“so serious, that i come to beg you to render service.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“to be my second.”
 
“that is serious matter, and we will not discuss it here; let us
 speak of nothing till we get home. ali, bring some water.”
 
the count turned up his sleeves, and passed into the little vestibule
 where the gentlemen were accustomed to wash their hands after shooting.
 
“come in, my lord,” said philip in low tone, “and i will show you
 something droll.” morcerf entered, and in place of the usual target, he
 saw some playing-cards fixed against the wall. at distance albert
 thought it was complete suit, for counted from the ace to the ten.
 
“ah, ha,” said albert, “i see you were preparing for game of cards.”
 
“no,” said the count, “i was making suit.”
 
“how?” said albert.
 
“those are really aces and twos which you see, but my shots have turned
 them into threes, fives, sevens, eights, nines, and tens.”
 
albert approached. in fact, the bullets had actually pierced the cards
 in the exact places which the painted signs would otherwise have
 occupied, the lines and distances being as regularly kept as if they
 had been ruled with pencil. in going up to the target morcerf picked up
 two or three swallows that had been rash enough to come within the
 range of the count’s pistol.
 
“_diable!_” said morcerf.
 
“what would you have, my dear viscount?” said monte cristo, wiping his
 hands on the towel which ali had brought him; “i must occupy my leisure
 moments in some way or other. but come, i am waiting for you.”
 
both men entered monte cristo’s carriage, which in the course of few
 minutes deposited them safely at no. 30. monte cristo took albert into
 his study, and pointing to seat, placed another for himself. “now let
 us talk the matter over quietly,” said the count.
 
“you see i am perfectly composed,” said albert.
 
“with whom are you going to fight?”
 
“with beauchamp.”
 
“one of your friends!”
 
“of course; it is always with friends that one fights.”
 
“i suppose you have some cause of quarrel?”
 
“i have.”
 
40094m
 


“what has done to you?”
 
“there appeared in his journal last night—but wait, and read for
 yourself.” and albert handed over the paper to the count, who read as
 follows:
 
“a correspondent at yanina informs us of fact of which until now we
 had remained in ignorance. the castle which formed the protection of
 the town was given up to the turks by french officer named fernand,
 in whom the grand vizier, ali tepelini, had reposed the greatest
 confidence.”
 

“well,” said monte cristo, “what do you see in that to annoy you?”
 
“what do i see in it?”
 
“yes; what does it signify to you if the castle of yanina was given up
 by french officer?”
 
“it signifies to my father, the count of morcerf, whose christian name
 is fernand!”
 
“did your father serve under ali pasha?”
 
“yes; that is to say, fought for the independence of the greeks, and
 hence arises the calumny.”
 
“oh, my dear viscount, do talk reason!”
 
“i do not desire to do otherwise.”
 
“now, just tell who the devil should know in france that the officer
 fernand and the count of morcerf are one and the same person? and who
 cares now about yanina, which was taken as long ago as the year 1822 or
 1823?”
 
“that just shows the meanness of this slander. they have allowed all
 this time to elapse, and then all of sudden rake up events which have
 been forgotten to furnish materials for scandal, in order to tarnish
 the lustre of our high position. i inherit my father’s name, and i do
 not choose that the shadow of disgrace should darken it. i am going to
 beauchamp, in whose journal this paragraph appears, and i shall insist
 on his retracting the assertion before two witnesses.”
 
“beauchamp will never retract.”
 
“then we must fight.”
 
“no you will not, for will tell you, what is very true, that perhaps
 there were fifty officers in the greek army bearing the same name.”
 
“we will fight, nevertheless. i will efface that blot on my father’s
 character. my father, who was such brave soldier, whose career was so
 brilliant——”
 
“oh, well, will add, ‘we are warranted in believing that this
 fernand is not the illustrious count of morcerf, who also bears the
 same christian name.’”
 
“i am determined not to be content with anything short of an entire
 retractation.”
 
“and you intend to make him do it in the presence of two witnesses, do
 you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you do wrong.”
 
“which means, i suppose, that you refuse the service which i asked of
 you?”
 
“you know my theory regarding duels; i told you my opinion on that
 subject, if you remember, when we were at rome.”
 
“nevertheless, my dear count, i found you this morning engaged in an
 occupation but little consistent with the notions you profess to
 entertain.”
 
“because, my dear fellow, you understand one must never be eccentric.
 if one’s lot is cast among fools, it is necessary to study folly. i
 shall perhaps find myself one day called out by some harebrained scamp,
 who has more real cause of quarrel with than you have with
 beauchamp; may take to task for some foolish trifle or other, he
 will bring his witnesses, or will insult in some public place, and i
 am expected to kill him for all that.”
 
“you admit that you would fight, then? well, if so, why do you object
 to my doing so?”
 
“i do not say that you ought not to fight, i only say that duel is a
 serious thing, and ought not to be undertaken without due reflection.”
 
“did reflect before insulted my father?”
 
“if spoke hastily, and owns that did so, you ought to be
 satisfied.”
 
“ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent.”
 
“and you are far too exacting. supposing, for instance, and do not be
 angry at what i am going to say——”
 
“well.”
 
“supposing the assertion to be really true?”
 
“a ought not to submit to such stain on his father’s honor.”
 
“_ma foi!_ we live in times when there is much to which we must
 submit.”
 
“that is precisely the fault of the age.”
 
“and do you undertake to reform it?”
 
“yes, as far as i am personally concerned.”
 
“well, you are indeed exacting, my dear fellow!”
 
“yes, i own it.”
 
“are you quite impervious to good advice?”
 
“not when it comes from friend.”
 
“and do you account that title?”
 
“certainly i do.”
 
“well, then, before going to beauchamp with your witnesses, seek
 further information on the subject.”
 
“from whom?”
 
“from haydée.”
 
“why, what can be the use of mixing woman up in the affair?—what can
 she do in it?”
 
“she can declare to you, for example, that your father had hand
 whatever in the defeat and death of the vizier; or if by chance had,
 indeed, the misfortune to——”
 
“i have told you, my dear count, that i would not for one moment admit
 of such proposition.”
 
“you reject this means of information, then?”
 
“i do—most decidedly.”
 
“then let offer one more word of advice.”
 
“do so, then, but let it be the last.”
 
“you do not wish to hear it, perhaps?”
 
“on the contrary, i request it.”
 
“do not take any witnesses with you when you go to beauchamp—visit him
 alone.”
 
“that would be contrary to all custom.”
 
“your case is not an ordinary one.”
 
“and what is your reason for advising to go alone?”
 
“because then the affair will rest between you and beauchamp.”
 
“explain yourself.”
 
“i will do so. if beauchamp be disposed to retract, you ought at least
 to give him the opportunity of doing it of his own free will,—the
 satisfaction to you will be the same. if, on the contrary, refuses
 to do so, it will then be quite time enough to admit two strangers into
 your secret.”
 
“they will not be strangers, they will be friends.”
 
“ah, but the friends of today are the enemies of tomorrow; beauchamp,
 for instance.”
 
“so you recommend——”
 
“i recommend you to be prudent.”
 
“then you advise to go alone to beauchamp?”
 
“i do, and i will tell you why. when you wish to obtain some concession
 from man’s self-love, you must avoid even the appearance of wishing
 to wound it.”
 
“i believe you are right.”
 
“i am glad of it.”
 
“then i will go alone.”
 
“go; but you would do better still by not going at all.”
 
“that is impossible.”
 
“do so, then; it will be wiser plan than the first which you
 proposed.”
 
“but if, in spite of all my precautions, i am at last obliged to fight,
 will you not be my second?”
 
“my dear viscount,” said monte cristo gravely, “you must have seen
 before today that at all times and in all places i have been at your
 disposal, but the service which you have just demanded of is one
 which it is out of my power to render you.”
 
“why?”
 
“perhaps you may know at some future period, and in the mean time i
 request you to excuse my declining to put you in possession of my
 reasons.”
 
“well, i will have franz and château-renaud; they will be the very men
 for it.”
 
“do so, then.”
 
“but if i do fight, you will surely not object to giving lesson or
 two in shooting and fencing?”
 
“that, too, is impossible.”
 
“what singular being you are!—you will not interfere in anything.”
 
“you are right—that is the principle on which i wish to act.”
 
“we will say more about it, then. good-bye, count.”
 
morcerf took his hat, and left the room. found his carriage at the
 door, and doing his utmost to restrain his anger went at once to
 find beauchamp, who was in his office. it was gloomy, dusty-looking
 apartment, such as journalists’ offices have always been from time
 immemorial. the servant announced m. albert morcerf. beauchamp
 repeated the name to himself, as though could scarcely believe that
 had heard aright, and then gave orders for him to be admitted.
 albert entered.
 
beauchamp uttered an exclamation of surprise on seeing his friend leap
 over and trample under foot all the newspapers which were strewed about
 the room.
 
“this way, this way, my dear albert!” said he, holding out his hand to
 the young man. “are you out of your senses, or do you come peaceably to
 take breakfast with me? try and find seat—there is one by that
 geranium, which is the only thing in the room to remind that there
 are other leaves in the world besides leaves of paper.”
 
“beauchamp,” said albert, “it is of your journal that i come to speak.”
 
“indeed? what do you wish to say about it?”
 
“i desire that statement contained in it should be rectified.”
 
“to what do you refer? but pray sit down.”
 
“thank you,” said albert, with cold and formal bow.
 
“will you now have the kindness to explain the nature of the statement
 which has displeased you?”
 
“an announcement has been made which implicates the honor of member
 of my family.”
 
“what is it?” said beauchamp, much surprised; “surely you must be
 mistaken.”
 
“the story sent you from yanina.”
 
“yanina?”
 
“yes; really you appear to be totally ignorant of the cause which
 brings here.”
 
“such is really the case, i assure you, upon my honor! baptiste, give
 yesterday’s paper,” cried beauchamp.
 
“here, i have brought mine with me,” replied albert.
 
beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to which albert pointed
 in an undertone.
 
“you see it is serious annoyance,” said morcerf, when beauchamp had
 finished the perusal of the paragraph.
 
“is the officer referred to relation of yours, then?” demanded the
 journalist.
 
“yes,” said albert, blushing.
 
“well, what do you wish to do for you?” said beauchamp mildly.
 
“my dear beauchamp, i wish you to contradict this statement.” beauchamp
 looked at albert with benevolent expression.
 
“come,” said he, “this matter will want good deal of talking over; a
 retractation is always serious thing, you know. sit down, and i will
 read it again.”
 
albert resumed his seat, and beauchamp read, with more attention than
 at first, the lines denounced by his friend.
 
“well,” said albert in determined tone, “you see that your paper has
 insulted member of my family, and i insist on retractation being
 made.”
 
“you insist?”
 
“yes, i insist.”
 
“permit to remind you that you are not in the chamber, my dear
 viscount.”
 
“nor do i wish to be there,” replied the young man, rising. “i repeat
 that i am determined to have the announcement of yesterday
 contradicted. you have known long enough,” continued albert, biting
 his lips convulsively, for saw that beauchamp’s anger was beginning
 to rise,—“you have been my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimate
 with to be aware that i am likely to maintain my resolution on this
 point.”
 
“if i have been your friend, morcerf, your present manner of speaking
 would almost lead to forget that i ever bore that title. but wait a
 moment, do not let us get angry, or at least not yet. you are irritated
 and vexed—tell how this fernand is related to you?”
 
“he is merely my father,” said albert—“m. fernand mondego, count of
 morcerf, an old soldier who has fought in twenty battles and whose
 honorable scars they would denounce as badges of disgrace.”
 
“is it your father?” said beauchamp; “that is quite another thing. then
 i can well understand your indignation, my dear albert. i will look at
 it again;” and read the paragraph for the third time, laying a
 stress on each word as proceeded. “but the paper nowhere identifies
 this fernand with your father.”
 
40100m
 


“no; but the connection will be seen by others, and therefore i will
 have the article contradicted.”
 
at the words _i will_, beauchamp steadily raised his eyes to albert’s
 countenance, and then as gradually lowering them, remained
 thoughtful for few moments.
 
“you will retract this assertion, will you not, beauchamp?” said albert
 with increased though stifled anger.
 
“yes,” replied beauchamp.
 
“immediately?” said albert.
 
“when i am convinced that the statement is false.”
 
“what?”
 
“the thing is worth looking into, and i will take pains to investigate
 the matter thoroughly.”
 
“but what is there to investigate, sir?” said albert, enraged beyond
 measure at beauchamp’s last remark. “if you do not believe that it is
 my father, say so immediately; and if, on the contrary, you believe it
 to be him, state your reasons for doing so.”
 
beauchamp looked at albert with the smile which was so peculiar to him,
 and which in its numerous modifications served to express every varied
 emotion of his mind.
 
“sir,” replied he, “if you came to with the idea of demanding
 satisfaction, you should have gone at once to the point, and not have
 entertained with the idle conversation to which i have been
 patiently listening for the last half hour. am i to put this
 construction on your visit?”
 
“yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamous calumny.”
 
“wait moment—no threats, if you please, m. fernand mondego, vicomte
 morcerf; i never allow them from my enemies, and therefore shall not
 put up with them from my friends. you insist on my contradicting the
 article relating to general fernand, an article with which, i assure
 you on my word of honor, i had nothing whatever to do?”
 
“yes, i insist on it,” said albert, whose mind was beginning to get
 bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.
 
“and if i refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?” said beauchamp
 in calm tone.
 
“yes,” replied albert, raising his voice.
 
“well,” said beauchamp, “here is my answer, my dear sir. the article
 was not inserted by me—i was not even aware of it; but you have, by the
 step you have taken, called my attention to the paragraph in question,
 and it will remain until it shall be either contradicted or confirmed
 by someone who has right to do so.”
 
“sir,” said albert, rising, “i will do myself the honor of sending my
 seconds to you, and you will be kind enough to arrange with them the
 place of meeting and the weapons.”
 
“certainly, my dear sir.”
 
“and this evening, if you please, or tomorrow at the latest, we will
 meet.”
 
“no, no, i will be on the ground at the proper time; but in my opinion
 (and i have right to dictate the preliminaries, as it is i who have
 received the provocation)—in my opinion the time ought not to be yet. i
 know you to be well skilled in the management of the sword, while i am
 only moderately so; i know, too, that you are good marksman—there we
 are about equal. i know that duel between us two would be serious
 affair, because you are brave, and i am brave also. i do not therefore
 wish either to kill you, or to be killed myself without cause. now, i
 am going to put question to you, and one very much to the purpose
 too. do you insist on this retractation so far as to kill if i do
 not make it, although i have repeated more than once, and affirmed on
 my honor, that i was ignorant of the thing with which you charge me,
 and although i still declare that it is impossible for anyone but you
 to recognize the count of morcerf under the name of fernand?”
 
“i maintain my original resolution.”
 
“very well, my dear sir; then i consent to cut throats with you. but i
 require three weeks’ preparation; at the end of that time i shall come
 and say to you, ‘the assertion is false, and i retract it,’ or ‘the
 assertion is true,’ when i shall immediately draw the sword from its
 sheath, or the pistols from the case, whichever you please.”
 
“three weeks!” cried albert; “they will pass as slowly as three
 centuries when i am all the time suffering dishonor.”
 
“had you continued to remain on amicable terms with me, i should have
 said, ‘patience, my friend;’ but you have constituted yourself my
 enemy, therefore i say, ‘what does that signify to me, sir?’”
 
“well, let it be three weeks then,” said morcerf; “but remember, at the
 expiration of that time delay or subterfuge will justify you in——”
 
“m. albert morcerf,” said beauchamp, rising in his turn, “i cannot
 throw you out of window for three weeks—that is to say, for twenty-four
 days to come—nor have you any right to split my skull open till that
 time has elapsed. today is the 29th of august; the 21st of september
 will, therefore, be the conclusion of the term agreed on, and till that
 time arrives—and it is the advice of gentleman which i am about to
 give you—till then we will refrain from growling and barking like two
 dogs chained within sight of each other.”
 
when had concluded his speech, beauchamp bowed coldly to albert,
 turned his back upon him, and went to the press-room. albert vented his
 anger on pile of newspapers, which sent flying all over the office
 by switching them violently with his stick; after which ebullition he
 departed—not, however, without walking several times to the door of the
 press-room, as if had half mind to enter.
 
40104m
 


while albert was lashing the front of his carriage in the same manner
 that had the newspapers which were the innocent agents of his
 discomfiture, as was crossing the barrier perceived morrel, who
 was walking with quick step and bright eye. was passing the
 chinese baths, and appeared to have come from the direction of the
 porte saint-martin, and to be going towards the madeleine.
 
“ah,” said morcerf, “there goes happy man!” and it so happened albert
 was not mistaken in his opinion.
 


chapter 79. the lemonade
 
morrel was, in fact, very happy. m. noirtier had just sent for him, and
 was in such haste to know the reason of his doing so that had not
 stopped to take cab, placing infinitely more dependence on his own
 two legs than on the four legs of cab-horse. had therefore set off
 at furious rate from the rue meslay, and was hastening with rapid
 strides in the direction of the faubourg saint-honoré.
 
morrel advanced with firm, manly tread, and poor barrois followed him
 as best might. morrel was only thirty-one, barrois was sixty years
 of age; morrel was deeply in love, and barrois was dying with heat and
 exertion. these two men, thus opposed in age and interests, resembled
 two parts of triangle, presenting the extremes of separation, yet
 nevertheless possessing their point of union. this point of union was
 noirtier, and it was who had just sent for morrel, with the request
 that the latter would lose time in coming to him—a command which
 morrel obeyed to the letter, to the great discomfiture of barrois. on
 arriving at the house, morrel was not even out of breath, for love
 lends wings to our desires; but barrois, who had long forgotten what it
 was to love, was sorely fatigued by the expedition had been
 constrained to use.
 
the old servant introduced morrel by private entrance, closed the
 door of the study, and soon the rustling of dress announced the
 arrival of valentine. she looked marvellously beautiful in her deep
 mourning dress, and morrel experienced such intense delight in gazing
 upon her that felt as if could almost have dispensed with the
 conversation of her grandfather.
 
but the easy-chair of the old man was heard rolling along the floor,
 and soon made his appearance in the room. noirtier acknowledged by a
 look of extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which morrel
 lavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf of valentine and
 himself—an intervention which had saved them from despair. morrel then
 cast on the invalid an interrogative look as to the new favor which he
 designed to bestow on him. valentine was sitting at little distance
 from them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should be obliged to
 speak. noirtier fixed his eyes on her.
 
“am i to say what you told me?” asked valentine. noirtier made sign
 that she was to do so.
 
“monsieur morrel,” said valentine to the young man, who was regarding
 her with the most intense interest, “my grandfather, m. noirtier, had a
 thousand things to say, which told three days ago; and now, he
 has sent for you, that i may repeat them to you. i will repeat them,
 then; and since has chosen as his interpreter, i will be faithful
 to the trust, and will not alter word of his intentions.”
 
“oh, i am listening with the greatest impatience,” replied the young
 man; “speak, i beg of you.”
 
valentine cast down her eyes; this was good omen for morrel, for he
 knew that nothing but happiness could have the power of thus overcoming
 valentine.
 
“my grandfather intends leaving this house,” said she, “and barrois is
 looking out for suitable apartments for him in another.”
 
“but you, mademoiselle villefort,—you, who are necessary to m.
 noirtier’s happiness——”
 
“i?” interrupted valentine; “i shall not leave my grandfather,—that is
 an understood thing between us. my apartment will be close to his. now,
 m. villefort must either give his consent to this plan or his
 refusal; in the first case, i shall leave directly, and in the second,
 i shall wait till i am of age, which will be in about ten months. then
 i shall be free, i shall have an independent fortune, and”—
 
“and what?” demanded morrel.
 
“and with my grandfather’s consent i shall fulfil the promise which i
 have made you.”
 
valentine pronounced these last few words in such low tone, that
 nothing but morrel’s intense interest in what she was saying could have
 enabled him to hear them.
 
“have i not explained your wishes, grandpapa?” said valentine,
 addressing noirtier.
 
“yes,” looked the old man.
 
“once under my grandfather’s roof, m. morrel can visit in the
 presence of my good and worthy protector, if we still feel that the
 union we contemplated will be likely to insure our future comfort and
 happiness; in that case i shall expect m. morrel to come and claim me
 at my own hands. but, alas, i have heard it said that hearts inflamed
 by obstacles to their desire grew cold in time of security; i trust we
 shall never find it so in our experience!”
 
“oh,” cried morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on his knees before
 noirtier and valentine, and to adore them as two superior beings, “what
 have i ever done in my life to merit such unbounded happiness?”
 
“until that time,” continued the young girl in calm and
 self-possessed tone of voice, “we will conform to circumstances, and be
 guided by the wishes of our friends, so long as those wishes do not
 tend finally to separate us; in word, and i repeat it, because it
 expresses all i wish to convey,—we will wait.”
 
“and i swear to make all the sacrifices which this word imposes, sir,”
 said morrel, “not only with resignation, but with cheerfulness.”
 
“therefore,” continued valentine, looking playfully at maximilian, “no
 more inconsiderate actions—no more rash projects; for you surely would
 not wish to compromise one who from this day regards herself as
 destined, honorably and happily, to bear your name?”
 
morrel looked obedience to her commands. noirtier regarded the lovers
 with look of ineffable tenderness, while barrois, who had remained in
 the room in the character of man privileged to know everything that
 passed, smiled on the youthful couple as wiped the perspiration from
 his bald forehead.
 
“how hot you look, my good barrois,” said valentine.
 
“ah, i have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but i must do m.
 morrel the justice to say that ran still faster.”
 
noirtier directed their attention to waiter, on which was placed a
 decanter containing lemonade and glass. the decanter was nearly full,
 with the exception of little, which had been already drunk by m.
 noirtier.
 
“come, barrois,” said the young girl, “take some of this lemonade; i
 see you are coveting good draught of it.”
 
“the fact is, mademoiselle,” said barrois, “i am dying with thirst, and
 since you are so kind as to offer it me, i cannot say i should at all
 object to drinking your health in glass of it.”
 
“take some, then, and come back immediately.”
 
barrois took away the waiter, and hardly was outside the door, which
 in his haste forgot to shut, than they saw him throw back his head
 and empty to the very dregs the glass which valentine had filled.
 valentine and morrel were exchanging their adieux in the presence of
 noirtier when ring was heard at the door-bell. it was the signal of a
 visit. valentine looked at her watch.
 
“it is past noon,” said she, “and today is saturday; i dare say it is
 the doctor, grandpapa.”
 
noirtier looked his conviction that she was right in her supposition.
 
“he will come in here, and m. morrel had better go,—do you not think
 so, grandpapa?”
 
“yes,” signed the old man.
 
“barrois,” cried valentine, “barrois!”
 
“i am coming, mademoiselle,” replied he.
 
“barrois will open the door for you,” said valentine, addressing
 morrel. “and now remember one thing, monsieur officer, that my
 grandfather commands you not to take any rash or ill-advised step which
 would be likely to compromise our happiness.”
 
40108m
 


“i promised him to wait,” replied morrel; “and i will wait.”
 
at this moment barrois entered. “who rang?” asked valentine.
 
“doctor d’avrigny,” said barrois, staggering as if would fall.
 
“what is the matter, barrois?” said valentine. the old man did not
 answer, but looked at his master with wild staring eyes, while with his
 cramped hand grasped piece of furniture to enable him to stand
 upright.
 
“he is going to fall!” cried morrel.
 
the rigors which had attacked barrois gradually increased, the features
 of the face became quite altered, and the convulsive movement of the
 muscles appeared to indicate the approach of most serious nervous
 disorder. noirtier, seeing barrois in this pitiable condition, showed
 by his looks all the various emotions of sorrow and sympathy which can
 animate the heart of man. barrois made some steps towards his master.
 
“ah, sir,” said he, “tell what is the matter with me. i am
 suffering—i cannot see. thousand fiery darts are piercing my brain.
 ah, don’t touch me, pray don’t.”
 
by this time his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to
 start from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lower extremities
 of the body began to stiffen. valentine uttered cry of horror; morrel
 took her in his arms, as if to defend her from some unknown danger.
 
“m. d’avrigny, m. d’avrigny,” cried she, in stifled voice. “help,
 help!”
 
barrois turned round and with great effort stumbled few steps, then
 fell at the feet of noirtier, and resting his hand on the knee of the
 invalid, exclaimed:
 
“my master, my good master!”
 
at this moment m. villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on the
 threshold. morrel relaxed his hold of valentine, and retreating to a
 distant corner of the room remained half hidden behind curtain. pale
 as if had been gazing on serpent, fixed his terrified eye on
 the agonized sufferer.
 
noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despair at his
 utter inability to help his old domestic, whom regarded more in the
 light of friend than servant. one might by the fearful swelling of
 the veins of his forehead and the contraction of the muscles round the
 eye, trace the terrible conflict which was going on between the living
 energetic mind and the inanimate and helpless body.
 
barrois, his features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, and his
 head thrown back, was lying at full length, beating the floor with his
 hands, while his legs had become so stiff, that they looked as if they
 would break rather than bend. slight appearance of foam was visible
 around the mouth, and breathed painfully, and with extreme
 difficulty.
 
villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing
 intently on the scene before him without uttering word. had not
 seen morrel. after moment of dumb contemplation, during which his
 face became pale and his hair seemed to stand on end, sprang towards
 the door, crying out:
 
“doctor, doctor! come instantly, pray come!”
 
“madame, madame!” cried valentine, calling her step-mother, and running
 upstairs to meet her; “come quick, quick!—and bring your bottle of
 smelling-salts with you.”
 
“what is the matter?” said madame villefort in harsh and
 constrained tone.
 
“oh! come! come!”
 
“but where is the doctor?” exclaimed villefort; “where is he?”
 
madame villefort now deliberately descended the staircase. in one
 hand she held her handkerchief, with which she appeared to be wiping
 her face, and in the other bottle of english smelling-salts. her
 first look on entering the room was at noirtier, whose face,
 independent of the emotion which such scene could not fail of
 producing, proclaimed him to be in possession of his usual health; her
 second glance was at the dying man. she turned pale, and her eye passed
 quickly from the servant and rested on the master.
 
“in the name of heaven, madame,” said villefort, “where is the doctor?
 was with you just now. you see this is fit of apoplexy, and he
 might be saved if could but be bled!”
 
“has eaten anything lately?” asked madame villefort, eluding her
 husband’s question.
 
“madame,” replied valentine, “he has not even breakfasted. has been
 running very fast on an errand with which my grandfather charged him,
 and when returned, took nothing but glass of lemonade.”
 
“ah,” said madame villefort, “why did not take wine? lemonade was
 very bad thing for him.”
 
“grandpapa’s bottle of lemonade was standing just by his side; poor
 barrois was very thirsty, and was thankful to drink anything could
 find.”
 
madame villefort started. noirtier looked at her with glance of
 the most profound scrutiny.
 
“he has such short neck,” said she.
 
“madame,” said villefort, “i ask where is m. d’avrigny? in god’s name
 answer me!”
 
“he is with edward, who is not quite well,” replied madame de
 villefort, longer being able to avoid answering.
 
villefort rushed upstairs to fetch him.
 
“take this,” said madame villefort, giving her smelling-bottle to
 valentine. “they will, doubt, bleed him; therefore i will retire,
 for i cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husband
 upstairs. morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where had
 remained quite unperceived, so great had been the general confusion.
 
“go away as quick as you can, maximilian,” said valentine, “and stay
 till i send for you. go.”
 
morrel looked towards noirtier for permission to retire. the old man,
 who had preserved all his usual coolness, made sign to him to do so.
 the young man pressed valentine’s hand to his lips, and then left the
 house by back staircase.
 
at the same moment that quitted the room, villefort and the doctor
 entered by an opposite door. barrois was now showing signs of returning
 consciousness. the crisis seemed past, low moaning was heard, and he
 raised himself on one knee. d’avrigny and villefort laid him on a
 couch.
 
“what do you prescribe, doctor?” demanded villefort.
 
“give some water and ether. you have some in the house, have you
 not?”
 
“yes.”
 
“send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic.”
 
villefort immediately despatched messenger. “and now let everyone
 retire.”
 
“must i go too?” asked valentine timidly.
 
“yes, mademoiselle, you especially,” replied the doctor abruptly.
 
valentine looked at m. d’avrigny with astonishment, kissed her
 grandfather on the forehead, and left the room. the doctor closed the
 door after her with gloomy air.
 
“look, look, doctor,” said villefort, “he is quite coming round again;
 i really do not think, after all, it is anything of consequence.”
 
m. d’avrigny answered by melancholy smile.
 
“how do you feel, barrois?” asked he.
 
“a little better, sir.”
 
“will you drink some of this ether and water?”
 
“i will try; but don’t touch me.”
 
“why not?”
 
“because i feel that if you were only to touch with the tip of your
 finger the fit would return.”
 
“drink.”
 
barrois took the glass, and, raising it to his purple lips, took about
 half of the liquid offered him.
 
“where do you suffer?” asked the doctor.
 
“everywhere. i feel cramps over my whole body.”
 
“do you find any dazzling sensation before the eyes?”
 
“yes.”
 
“any noise in the ears?”
 
“frightful.”
 
40112m
 


“when did you first feel that?”
 
“just now.”
 
“suddenly?”
 
“yes, like clap of thunder.”
 
“did you feel nothing of it yesterday or the day before?”
 
“nothing.”
 
“no drowsiness?”
 
“none.”
 
“what have you eaten today?”
 
“i have eaten nothing; i only drank glass of my master’s
 lemonade—that’s all.” and barrois turned towards noirtier, who,
 immovably fixed in his armchair, was contemplating this terrible scene
 without allowing word or movement to escape him.
 
“where is this lemonade?” asked the doctor eagerly.
 
“downstairs in the decanter.”
 
“whereabouts downstairs?”
 
“in the kitchen.”
 
“shall i go and fetch it, doctor?” inquired villefort.
 
“no, stay here and try to make barrois drink the rest of this glass of
 ether and water. i will go myself and fetch the lemonade.”
 
d’avrigny bounded towards the door, flew down the back staircase, and
 almost knocked down madame villefort, in his haste, who was herself
 going down to the kitchen. she cried out, but d’avrigny paid no
 attention to her; possessed with but one idea, cleared the last four
 steps with bound, and rushed into the kitchen, where saw the
 decanter about three parts empty still standing on the waiter, where it
 had been left. darted upon it as an eagle would seize upon its prey.
 panting with loss of breath, returned to the room had just left.
 madame villefort was slowly ascending the steps which led to her
 room.
 
“is this the decanter you spoke of?” asked d’avrigny.
 
“yes, doctor.”
 
“is this the same lemonade of which you partook?”
 
“i believe so.”
 
“what did it taste like?”
 
“it had bitter taste.”
 
the doctor poured some drops of the lemonade into the palm of his hand,
 put his lips to it, and after having rinsed his mouth as man does
 when is tasting wine, spat the liquor into the fireplace.
 
“it is doubt the same,” said he. “did you drink some too, m.
 noirtier?”
 
“yes.”
 
“and did you also discover bitter taste?”
 
“yes.”
 
“oh, doctor,” cried barrois, “the fit is coming on again. oh, do
 something for me.” the doctor flew to his patient.
 
“that emetic, villefort—see if it is coming.”
 
villefort sprang into the passage, exclaiming, “the emetic! the
 emetic!—is it come yet?” one answered. the most profound terror
 reigned throughout the house.
 
“if i had anything by means of which i could inflate the lungs,” said
 d’avrigny, looking around him, “perhaps i might prevent suffocation.
 but there is nothing which would do!—nothing!”
 
40114m
 


“oh, sir,” cried barrois, “are you going to let die without help?
 oh, i am dying! oh, save me!”
 
“a pen, pen!” said the doctor. there was one lying on the table; he
 endeavored to introduce it into the mouth of the patient, who, in the
 midst of his convulsions, was making vain attempts to vomit; but the
 jaws were so clenched that the pen could not pass them. this second
 attack was much more violent than the first, and had slipped from
 the couch to the ground, where was writhing in agony. the doctor
 left him in this paroxysm, knowing that could do nothing to
 alleviate it, and, going up to noirtier, said abruptly:
 
“how do you find yourself?—well?”
 
“yes.”
 
“have you any weight on the chest; or does your stomach feel light and
 comfortable—eh?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then you feel pretty much as you generally do after you have had the
 dose which i am accustomed to give you every sunday?”
 
“yes.”
 
“did barrois make your lemonade?”
 
“yes.”
 
“was it you who asked him to drink some of it?”
 
“no.”
 
“was it m. villefort?”
 
“no.”
 
“madame?”
 
“no.”
 
“it was your granddaughter, then, was it not?”
 
“yes.”
 
groan from barrois, accompanied by yawn which seemed to crack the
 very jawbones, attracted the attention of m. d’avrigny; left m.
 noirtier, and returned to the sick man.
 
“barrois,” said the doctor, “can you speak?” barrois muttered few
 unintelligible words. “try and make an effort to do so, my good man.”
 said d’avrigny. barrois reopened his bloodshot eyes.
 
“who made the lemonade?”
 
“i did.”
 
“did you bring it to your master directly it was made?”
 
“no.”
 
“you left it somewhere, then, in the meantime?”
 
“yes; i left it in the pantry, because i was called away.”
 
“who brought it into this room, then?”
 
“mademoiselle valentine.” d’avrigny struck his forehead with his hand.
 
“gracious heaven,” exclaimed he.
 
“doctor, doctor!” cried barrois, who felt another fit coming.
 
“will they never bring that emetic?” asked the doctor.
 
“here is glass with one already prepared,” said villefort, entering
 the room.
 
“who prepared it?”
 
“the chemist who came here with me.”
 
40116m
 


“drink it,” said the doctor to barrois.
 
“impossible, doctor; it is too late; my throat is closing up. i am
 choking! oh, my heart! ah, my head!—oh, what agony!—shall i suffer like
 this long?”
 
“no, no, friend,” replied the doctor, “you will soon cease to suffer.”
 
“ah, i understand you,” said the unhappy man. “my god, have mercy upon
 me!” and, uttering fearful cry, barrois fell back as if had been
 struck by lightning. d’avrigny put his hand to his heart, and placed a
 glass before his lips.
 
“well?” said villefort.
 
“go to the kitchen and get some syrup of violets.”
 
villefort went immediately.
 
“do not be alarmed, m. noirtier,” said d’avrigny; “i am going to take
 my patient into the next room to bleed him; this sort of attack is very
 frightful to witness.”
 
and taking barrois under the arms, dragged him into an adjoining
 room; but almost immediately returned to fetch the lemonade.
 noirtier closed his right eye.
 
“you want valentine, do you not? i will tell them to send her to you.”
 
villefort returned, and d’avrigny met him in the passage.
 
“well, how is now?” asked he.
 
“come in here,” said d’avrigny, and took him into the chamber where
 the sick man lay.
 
“is still in fit?” said the procureur.
 
“he is dead.”
 
villefort drew back few steps, and, clasping his hands, exclaimed,
 with real amazement and sympathy, “dead?—and so soon too!”
 
“yes, it is very soon,” said the doctor, looking at the corpse before
 him; “but that ought not to astonish you; monsieur and madame de
 saint-méran died as soon. people die very suddenly in your house, m. de
 villefort.”
 
“what?” cried the magistrate, with an accent of horror and
 consternation, “are you still harping on that terrible idea?”
 
“still, sir; and i shall always do so,” replied d’avrigny, “for it has
 never for one instant ceased to retain possession of my mind; and that
 you may be quite sure i am not mistaken this time, listen well to what
 i am going to say, m. villefort.”
 
the magistrate trembled convulsively.
 
“there is poison which destroys life almost without leaving any
 perceptible traces. i know it well; i have studied it in all its forms
 and in the effects which it produces. i recognized the presence of this
 poison in the case of poor barrois as well as in that of madame de
 saint-méran. there is way of detecting its presence. it restores the
 blue color of litmus-paper reddened by an acid, and it turns syrup of
 violets green. we have litmus-paper, but, see, here they come with
 the syrup of violets.”
 
the doctor was right; steps were heard in the passage. m. d’avrigny
 opened the door, and took from the hands of the chambermaid cup which
 contained two or three spoonfuls of the syrup, then carefully closed
 the door.
 
“look,” said to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly that it
 might almost be heard, “here is in this cup some syrup of violets, and
 this decanter contains the remainder of the lemonade of which m.
 noirtier and barrois partook. if the lemonade be pure and inoffensive,
 the syrup will retain its color; if, on the contrary, the lemonade be
 drugged with poison, the syrup will become green. look closely!”
 
the doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonade from the
 decanter into the cup, and in an instant light cloudy sediment began
 to form at the bottom of the cup; this sediment first took blue
 shade, then from the color of sapphire it passed to that of opal, and
 from opal to emerald. arrived at this last hue, it changed more. the
 result of the experiment left doubt whatever on the mind.
 
“the unfortunate barrois has been poisoned,” said d’avrigny, “and i
 will maintain this assertion before god and man.”
 
villefort said nothing, but clasped his hands, opened his haggard
 eyes, and, overcome with his emotion, sank into chair.
 


chapter 80. the accusation
 
m. d’avrigny soon restored the magistrate to consciousness, who had
 looked like second corpse in that chamber of death.
 
“oh, death is in my house!” cried villefort.
 
“say, rather, crime!” replied the doctor.
 
“m. d’avrigny,” cried villefort, “i cannot tell you all i feel at this
 moment,—terror, grief, madness.”
 
“yes,” said m. d’avrigny, with an imposing calmness, “but i think it is
 now time to act. i think it is time to stop this torrent of mortality.
 i can longer bear to be in possession of these secrets without the
 hope of seeing the victims and society generally revenged.”
 
villefort cast gloomy look around him. “in my house,” murmured he,
 “in my house!”
 
“come, magistrate,” said m. d’avrigny, “show yourself man; as an
 interpreter of the law, do honor to your profession by sacrificing your
 selfish interests to it.”
 
“you make shudder, doctor. do you talk of sacrifice?”
 
“i do.”
 
“do you then suspect anyone?”
 
“i suspect one; death raps at your door—it enters—it goes, not
 blindfolded, but circumspectly, from room to room. well, i follow its
 course, i track its passage; i adopt the wisdom of the ancients, and
 feel my way, for my friendship for your family and my respect for you
 are as twofold bandage over my eyes; well——”
 
“oh, speak, speak, doctor; i shall have courage.”
 
“well, sir, you have in your establishment, or in your family, perhaps,
 one of the frightful monstrosities of which each century produces only
 one. locusta and agrippina, living at the same time, were an exception,
 and proved the determination of providence to effect the entire ruin of
 the roman empire, sullied by so many crimes. brunhilda and fredegund
 were the results of the painful struggle of civilization in its
 infancy, when man was learning to control mind, were it even by an
 emissary from the realms of darkness. all these women had been, or
 were, beautiful. the same flower of innocence had flourished, or was
 still flourishing, on their brow, that is seen on the brow of the
 culprit in your house.”
 
40120m
 


villefort shrieked, clasped his hands, and looked at the doctor with a
 supplicating air. but the latter went on without pity:
 
“‘seek whom the crime will profit,’ says an axiom of jurisprudence.”
 
“doctor,” cried villefort, “alas, doctor, how often has man’s justice
 been deceived by those fatal words. i know not why, but i feel that
 this crime——”
 
“you acknowledge, then, the existence of the crime?”
 
“yes, i see too plainly that it does exist. but it seems that it is
 intended to affect personally. i fear an attack myself, after all
 these disasters.”
 
“oh, man!” murmured d’avrigny, “the most selfish of all animals, the
 most personal of all creatures, who believes the earth turns, the sun
 shines, and death strikes for him alone,—an ant cursing god from the
 top of blade of grass! and have those who have lost their lives lost
 nothing?—m. saint-méran, madame saint-méran, m. noirtier——”
 
“how? m. noirtier?”
 
“yes; think you it was the poor servant’s life was coveted? no, no;
 like shakespeare’s polonius, died for another. it was noirtier the
 lemonade was intended for—it is noirtier, logically speaking, who drank
 it. the other drank it only by accident, and, although barrois is dead,
 it was noirtier whose death was wished for.”
 
“but why did it not kill my father?”
 
“i told you one evening in the garden after madame saint-méran’s
 death—because his system is accustomed to that very poison, and the
 dose was trifling to him, which would be fatal to another; because no
 one knows, not even the assassin, that, for the last twelve months, i
 have given m. noirtier brucine for his paralytic affection, while the
 assassin is not ignorant, for has proved that brucine is violent
 poison.”
 
“oh, have pity—have pity!” murmured villefort, wringing his hands.
 
“follow the culprit’s steps; first kills m. saint-méran——”
 
“oh, doctor!”
 
“i would swear to it; what i heard of his symptoms agrees too well with
 what i have seen in the other cases.” villefort ceased to contend; he
 only groaned. “he first kills m. saint-méran,” repeated the doctor,
 “then madame saint-méran,—a double fortune to inherit.” villefort
 wiped the perspiration from his forehead. “listen attentively.”
 
“alas,” stammered villefort, “i do not lose single word.”
 
“m. noirtier,” resumed m. d’avrigny in the same pitiless tone,—“m.
 noirtier had once made will against you—against your family—in favor
 of the poor, in fact; m. noirtier is spared, because nothing is
 expected from him. but has sooner destroyed his first will and
 made second, than, for fear should make third, is struck
 down. the will was made the day before yesterday, i believe; you see
 there has been time lost.”
 
“oh, mercy, m. d’avrigny!”
 
“no mercy, sir! the physician has sacred mission on earth; and to
 fulfil it begins at the source of life, and goes down to the
 mysterious darkness of the tomb. when crime has been committed, and
 god, doubtless in anger, turns away his face, it is for the physician
 to bring the culprit to justice.”
 
40122m
 


“have mercy on my child, sir,” murmured villefort.
 
“you see it is yourself who have first named her—you, her father.”
 
“have pity on valentine! listen, it is impossible. i would as willingly
 accuse myself! valentine, whose heart is pure as diamond or lily!”
 
“no pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant. mademoiselle herself packed
 all the medicines which were sent to m. saint-méran; and m. de
 saint-méran is dead. mademoiselle villefort prepared all the cooling
 draughts which madame saint-méran took, and madame saint-méran is
 dead. mademoiselle villefort took from the hands of barrois, who was
 sent out, the lemonade which m. noirtier had every morning, and has
 escaped by miracle. mademoiselle villefort is the culprit—she is
 the poisoner! to you, as the king’s attorney, i denounce mademoiselle
 villefort, do your duty.”
 
“doctor, i resist longer—i can longer defend myself—i believe
 you; but, for pity’s sake, spare my life, my honor!”
 
“m. villefort,” replied the doctor, with increased vehemence, “there
 are occasions when i dispense with all foolish human circumspection. if
 your daughter had committed only one crime, and i saw her meditating
 another, i would say ‘warn her, punish her, let her pass the remainder
 of her life in convent, weeping and praying.’ if she had committed
 two crimes, i would say, ‘here, m. villefort, is poison that the
 prisoner is not acquainted with,—one that has known antidote, quick
 as thought, rapid as lightning, mortal as the thunderbolt; give her
 that poison, recommending her soul to god, and save your honor and your
 life, for it is yours she aims at; and i can picture her approaching
 your pillow with her hypocritical smiles and her sweet exhortations.
 woe to you, m. villefort, if you do not strike first!’ this is what
 i would say had she only killed two persons but she has seen three
 deaths,—has contemplated three murdered persons,—has knelt by three
 corpses! to the scaffold with the poisoner—to the scaffold! do you talk
 of your honor? do what i tell you, and immortality awaits you!”
 
villefort fell on his knees.
 
“listen,” said he; “i have not the strength of mind you have, or rather
 that which you would not have, if instead of my daughter valentine your
 daughter madeleine were concerned.” the doctor turned pale. “doctor,
 every of woman is born to suffer and to die; i am content to suffer
 and to await death.”
 
“beware,” said m. d’avrigny, “it may come slowly; you will see it
 approach after having struck your father, your wife, perhaps your son.”
 
villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor’s arm.
 
40124m
 


“listen,” cried he; “pity me—help me! no, my daughter is not guilty. if
 you drag us both before tribunal i will still say, ‘no, my daughter
 is not guilty;—there is crime in my house. i will not acknowledge a
 crime in my house; for when crime enters dwelling, it is like
 death—it does not come alone.’ listen. what does it signify to you if i
 am murdered? are you my friend? are you man? have you heart? no,
 you are physician! well, i tell you i will not drag my daughter
 before tribunal, and give her up to the executioner! the bare idea
 would kill me—would drive like madman to dig my heart out with my
 finger-nails! and if you were mistaken, doctor—if it were not my
 daughter—if i should come one day, pale as spectre, and say to you,
 ‘assassin, you have killed my child!’—hold—if that should happen,
 although i am christian, m. d’avrigny, i should kill myself.”
 
“well,” said the doctor, after moment’s silence, “i will wait.”
 
villefort looked at him as if had doubted his words.
 
“only,” continued m. d’avrigny, with slow and solemn tone, “if anyone
 falls ill in your house, if you feel yourself attacked, do not send for
 me, for i will come more. i will consent to share this dreadful
 secret with you, but i will not allow shame and remorse to grow and
 increase in my conscience, as crime and misery will in your house.”
 
“then you abandon me, doctor?”
 
“yes, for i can follow you farther, and i only stop at the foot of
 the scaffold. some further discovery will be made, which will bring
 this dreadful tragedy to close. adieu.”
 
“i entreat you, doctor!”
 
“all the horrors that disturb my thoughts make your house odious and
 fatal. adieu, sir.”
 
“one word—one single word more, doctor! you go, leaving in all the
 horror of my situation, after increasing it by what you have revealed
 to me. but what will be reported of the sudden death of the poor old
 servant?”
 
“true,” said m. d’avrigny; “we will return.”
 
the doctor went out first, followed by m. villefort. the terrified
 servants were on the stairs and in the passage where the doctor would
 pass.
 
“sir,” said d’avrigny to villefort, so loud that all might hear, “poor
 barrois has led too sedentary life of late; accustomed formerly to
 ride on horseback, or in the carriage, to the four corners of europe,
 the monotonous walk around that armchair has killed him—his blood has
 thickened. was stout, had short, thick neck; was attacked with
 apoplexy, and i was called in too late. by the way,” added in low
 tone, “take care to throw away that cup of syrup of violets in the
 ashes.”
 
the doctor, without shaking hands with villefort, without adding word
 to what had said, went out, amid the tears and lamentations of the
 whole household. the same evening all villefort’s servants, who had
 assembled in the kitchen, and had long consultation, came to tell
 madame villefort that they wished to leave. entreaty, no
 proposition of increased wages, could induce them to remain; to every
 argument they replied, “we must go, for death is in this house.”
 
they all left, in spite of prayers and entreaties, testifying their
 regret at leaving so good master and mistress, and especially
 mademoiselle valentine, so good, so kind, and so gentle.
 
villefort looked at valentine as they said this. she was in tears, and,
 strange as it was, in spite of the emotions felt at the sight of
 these tears, looked also at madame villefort, and it appeared to
 him as if slight gloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a
 meteor seen passing inauspiciously between two clouds in stormy sky.
 


chapter 81. the room of the retired baker
 
the evening of the day on which the count of morcerf had left danglars’
 house with feelings of shame and anger at the rejection of the
 projected alliance, m. andrea cavalcanti, with curled hair, moustaches
 in perfect order, and white gloves which fitted admirably, had entered
 the courtyard of the banker’s house in rue chaussée d’antin. he
 had not been more than ten minutes in the drawing-room before drew
 danglars aside into the recess of bow-window, and, after an ingenious
 preamble, related to him all his anxieties and cares since his noble
 father’s departure. acknowledged the extreme kindness which had been
 shown him by the banker’s family, in which had been received as a
 son, and where, besides, his warmest affections had found an object on
 which to centre in mademoiselle danglars.
 
danglars listened with the most profound attention; had expected
 this declaration for the last two or three days, and when at last it
 came his eyes glistened as much as they had lowered on listening to
 morcerf. would not, however, yield immediately to the young man’s
 request, but made few conscientious objections.
 
“are you not rather young, m. andrea, to think of marrying?”
 
“i think not, sir,” replied m. cavalcanti; “in italy the nobility
 generally marry young. life is so uncertain, that we ought to secure
 happiness while it is within our reach.”
 
“well, sir,” said danglars, “in case your proposals, which do honor,
 are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whom shall the preliminary
 arrangements be settled? so important negotiation should, i think, be
 conducted by the respective fathers of the young people.”
 
“sir, my father is man of great foresight and prudence. thinking that
 i might wish to settle in france, left at his departure, together
 with the papers establishing my identity, letter promising, if he
 approved of my choice, 150,000 livres per annum from the day i was
 married. so far as i can judge, i suppose this to be quarter of my
 father’s revenue.”
 
“i,” said danglars, “have always intended giving my daughter 500,000
 francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my sole heiress.”
 
“all would then be easily arranged if the baroness and her daughter are
 willing. we should command an annuity of 175,000 livres. supposing,
 also, i should persuade the marquis to give my capital, which is not
 likely, but still is possible, we would place these two or three
 millions in your hands, whose talent might make it realize ten per
 cent.”
 
“i never give more than four per cent, and generally only three and a
 half; but to my son-in-law i would give five, and we would share the
 profits.”
 
“very good, father-in-law,” said cavalcanti, yielding to his low-born
 nature, which would escape sometimes through the aristocratic gloss
 with which sought to conceal it. correcting himself immediately, he
 said, “excuse me, sir; hope alone makes almost mad,—what will not
 reality do?”
 
“but,” said danglars, who, on his part, did not perceive how soon the
 conversation, which was at first disinterested, was turning to a
 business transaction, “there is, doubtless, part of your fortune your
 father could not refuse you?”
 
“which?” asked the young man.
 
“that you inherit from your mother.”
 
“truly, from my mother, leonora corsinari.”
 
“how much may it amount to?”
 
“indeed, sir,” said andrea, “i assure you i have never given the
 subject thought, but i suppose it must have been at least two
 millions.”
 
danglars felt as much overcome with joy as the miser who finds lost
 treasure, or as the shipwrecked mariner who feels himself on solid
 ground instead of in the abyss which expected would swallow him up.
 
“well, sir,” said andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully, “may i
 hope?”
 
“you may not only hope,” said danglars, “but consider it settled
 thing, if obstacle arises on your part.”
 
“i am, indeed, rejoiced,” said andrea.
 
“but,” said danglars thoughtfully, “how is it that your patron, m. de
 monte cristo, did not make his proposal for you?”
 
andrea blushed imperceptibly.
 
“i have just left the count, sir,” said he; “he is, doubtless, a
 delightful man but inconceivably peculiar in his ideas. esteems me
 highly. even told had not the slightest doubt that my father
 would give the capital instead of the interest of my property. he
 has promised to use his influence to obtain it for me; but also
 declared that never had taken on himself the responsibility of
 making proposals for another, and never would. i must, however, do
 him the justice to add that assured if ever had regretted the
 repugnance felt to such step it was on this occasion, because he
 thought the projected union would be happy and suitable one. besides,
 if will do nothing officially, will answer any questions you
 propose to him. and now,” continued he, with one of his most charming
 smiles, “having finished talking to the father-in-law, i must address
 myself to the banker.”
 
“and what may you have to say to him?” said danglars, laughing in his
 turn.
 
“that the day after tomorrow i shall have to draw upon you for about
 four thousand francs; but the count, expecting my bachelor’s revenue
 could not suffice for the coming month’s outlay, has offered draft
 for twenty thousand francs. it bears his signature, as you see, which
 is all-sufficient.”
 
“bring million such as that,” said danglars, “i shall be well
 pleased,” putting the draft in his pocket. “fix your own hour for
 tomorrow, and my cashier shall call on you with check for eighty
 thousand francs.”
 
“at ten o’clock then, if you please; i should like it early, as i am
 going into the country tomorrow.”
 
“very well, at ten o’clock; you are still at the hôtel des princes?”
 
“yes.”
 
the following morning, with the banker’s usual punctuality, the eighty
 thousand francs were placed in the young man’s hands, as was on the
 point of starting, after having left two hundred francs for caderousse.
 went out chiefly to avoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late
 as possible in the evening.
 
but scarcely had stepped out of his carriage when the porter met him
 with parcel in his hand.
 
“sir,” said he, “that man has been here.”
 
“what man?” said andrea carelessly, apparently forgetting him whom he
 but too well recollected.
 
“him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity.”
 
“oh,” said andrea, “my father’s old servant. well, you gave him the two
 hundred francs i had left for him?”
 
“yes, your excellency.” andrea had expressed wish to be thus
 addressed. “but,” continued the porter, “he would not take them.”
 
andrea turned pale, but as it was dark his pallor was not perceptible.
 “what? would not take them?” said with slight emotion.
 
40130m
 


“no, wished to speak to your excellency; i told him you were gone
 out, and after some dispute believed and gave this letter,
 which had brought with him already sealed.”
 
“give it me,” said andrea, and read by the light of his
 carriage-lamp:
 
“‘you know where i live; i expect you tomorrow morning at nine
 o’clock.’”
 
andrea examined it carefully, to ascertain if the letter had been
 opened, or if any indiscreet eyes had seen its contents; but it was so
 carefully folded, that one could have read it, and the seal was
 perfect.
 
“very well,” said he. “poor man, is worthy creature.” left the
 porter to ponder on these words, not knowing which most to admire, the
 master or the servant.
 
“take out the horses quickly, and come up to me,” said andrea to his
 groom. in two seconds the young man had reached his room and burnt
 caderousse’s letter. the servant entered just as had finished.
 
“you are about my height, pierre,” said he.
 
“i have that honor, your excellency.”
 
“you had new livery yesterday?”
 
“yes, sir.”
 
“i have an engagement with pretty little girl for this evening, and
 do not wish to be known; lend your livery till tomorrow. i may
 sleep, perhaps, at an inn.”
 
pierre obeyed. five minutes after, andrea left the hotel, completely
 disguised, took cabriolet, and ordered the driver to take him to the
 cheval rouge, at picpus. the next morning left that inn as had
 left the hôtel des princes, without being noticed, walked down the
 faubourg saint-antoine, along the boulevard to rue ménilmontant, and
 stopping at the door of the third house on the left looked for someone
 of whom to make inquiry in the porter’s absence.
 
“for whom are you looking, my fine fellow?” asked the fruiteress on the
 opposite side.
 
“monsieur pailletin, if you please, my good woman,” replied andrea.
 
“a retired baker?” asked the fruiteress.
 
“exactly.”
 
“he lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the third story.”
 
40132m
 


andrea went as she directed him, and on the third floor found a
 hare’s paw, which, by the hasty ringing of the bell, it was evident he
 pulled with considerable ill-temper. moment after caderousse’s face
 appeared at the grating in the door.
 
“ah! you are punctual,” said he, as drew back the door.
 
“confound you and your punctuality!” said andrea, throwing himself into
 chair in manner which implied that would rather have flung it at
 the head of his host.
 
“come, come, my little fellow, don’t be angry. see, i have thought
 about you—look at the good breakfast we are going to have; nothing but
 what you are fond of.”
 
andrea, indeed, inhaled the scent of something cooking which was not
 unwelcome to him, hungry as was; it was that mixture of fat and
 garlic peculiar to provençal kitchens of an inferior order, added to
 that of dried fish, and above all, the pungent smell of musk and
 cloves. these odors escaped from two deep dishes which were covered and
 placed on stove, and from copper pan placed in an old iron pot. in
 an adjoining room andrea saw also tolerably clean table prepared for
 two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one with green, the other with
 yellow, supply of brandy in decanter, and measure of fruit in a
 cabbage-leaf, cleverly arranged on an earthenware plate.
 
“what do you think of it, my little fellow?” said caderousse. “ay, that
 smells good! you know i used to be good cook; do you recollect how
 you used to lick your fingers? you were among the first who tasted any
 of my dishes, and i think you relished them tolerably.” while speaking,
 caderousse went on peeling fresh supply of onions.
 
“but,” said andrea, ill-temperedly, “by my faith, if it was only to
 breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, i wish the devil had taken
 you!”
 
“my boy,” said caderousse sententiously, “one can talk while eating.
 and then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleased to see an old
 friend? i am weeping with joy.”
 
was truly crying, but it would have been difficult to say whether
 joy or the onions produced the greatest effect on the lachrymal glands
 of the old innkeeper of the pont-du-gard.
 
“hold your tongue, hypocrite,” said andrea; “you love me!”
 
“yes, i do, or may the devil take me. i know it is weakness,” said
 caderousse, “but it overpowers me.”
 
“and yet it has not prevented your sending for to play some
 trick.”
 
“come,” said caderousse, wiping his large knife on his apron, “if i did
 not like you, do you think i should endure the wretched life you lead
 me? think for moment. you have your servant’s clothes on—you
 therefore keep servant; i have none, and am obliged to prepare my own
 meals. you abuse my cookery because you dine at the table d’hôte of the
 hôtel des princes, or the café paris. well, i too could keep a
 servant; i too could have tilbury; i too could dine where i like; but
 why do i not? because i would not annoy my little benedetto. come, just
 acknowledge that i could, eh?”
 
this address was accompanied by look which was by means difficult
 to understand.
 
“well,” said andrea, “admitting your love, why do you want to
 breakfast with you?”
 
“that i may have the pleasure of seeing you, my little fellow.”
 
“what is the use of seeing after we have made all our arrangements?”
 
“eh, dear friend,” said caderousse, “are wills ever made without
 codicils? but you first came to breakfast, did you not? well, sit down,
 and let us begin with these pilchards, and this fresh butter; which i
 have put on some vine-leaves to please you, wicked one. ah, yes; you
 look at my room, my four straw chairs, my images, three francs each.
 but what do you expect? this is not the hôtel des princes.”
 
“come, you are growing discontented, you are longer happy; you, who
 only wish to live like retired baker.”
 
caderousse sighed.
 
“well, what have you to say? you have seen your dream realized.”
 
“i can still say it is dream; retired baker, my poor benedetto, is
 rich—he has an annuity.”
 
“well, you have an annuity.”
 
“i have?”
 
40134m
 


“yes, since i bring you your two hundred francs.”
 
caderousse shrugged his shoulders.
 
“it is humiliating,” said he, “thus to receive money given
 grudgingly,—an uncertain supply which may soon fail. you see i am
 obliged to economize, in case your prosperity should cease. well, my
 friend, fortune is inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said. i
 know your prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to marry the
 daughter of danglars.”
 
“what? of danglars?”
 
“yes, to be sure; must i say baron danglars? i might as well say count
 benedetto. was an old friend of mine and if had not so bad a
 memory ought to invite to your wedding, seeing came to mine.
 yes, yes, to mine; gad, was not so proud then,—he was an under-clerk
 to the good m. morrel. i have dined many times with him and the count
 of morcerf, so you see i have some high connections and were i to
 cultivate them little, we might meet in the same drawing-rooms.”
 
“come, your jealousy represents everything to you in the wrong light.”
 
“that is all very fine, benedetto mio, but i know what i am saying.
 perhaps i may one day put on my best coat, and presenting myself at the
 great gate, introduce myself. meanwhile let us sit down and eat.”
 
caderousse set the example and attacked the breakfast with good
 appetite, praising each dish set before his visitor. the latter
 seemed to have resigned himself; drew the corks, and partook largely
 of the fish with the garlic and fat.
 
“ah, mate,” said caderousse, “you are getting on better terms with your
 old landlord!”
 
“faith, yes,” replied andrea, whose hunger prevailed over every other
 feeling.
 
“so you like it, you rogue?”
 
“so much that i wonder how man who can cook thus can complain of hard
 living.”
 
“do you see,” said caderousse, “all my happiness is marred by one
 thought?”
 
“what is that?”
 
“that i am dependent on another, i who have always gained my own
 livelihood honestly.”
 
“do not let that disturb you, i have enough for two.”
 
“no, truly; you may believe if you will; at the end of every month i
 am tormented by remorse.”
 
“good caderousse!”
 
“so much so, that yesterday i would not take the two hundred francs.”
 
“yes, you wished to speak to me; but was it indeed remorse, tell me?”
 
“true remorse; and, besides, an idea had struck me.”
 
andrea shuddered; always did so at caderousse’s ideas.
 
“it is miserable—do you see?—always to wait till the end of the month.”
 
“oh,” said andrea philosophically, determined to watch his companion
 narrowly, “does not life pass in waiting? do i, for instance, fare
 better? well, i wait patiently, do i not?”
 
“yes; because instead of expecting two hundred wretched francs, you
 expect five or six thousand, perhaps ten, perhaps even twelve, for you
 take care not to let anyone know the utmost. down there, you always had
 little presents and christmas-boxes, which you tried to hide from your
 poor friend caderousse. fortunately is cunning fellow, that friend
 caderousse.”
 
“there you are beginning again to ramble, to talk again and again of
 the past! but what is the use of teasing with going all over that
 again?”
 
“ah, you are only one-and-twenty, and can forget the past; i am fifty,
 and am obliged to recollect it. but let us return to business.”
 
“yes.”
 
“i was going to say, if i were in your place——”
 
“well.”
 
“i would realize——”
 
“how would you realize?”
 
“i would ask for six months’ in advance, under pretence of being able
 to purchase farm, then with my six months i would decamp.”
 
“well, well,” said andrea, “that isn’t bad idea.”
 
“my dear friend,” said caderousse, “eat of my bread, and take my
 advice; you will be none the worse off, physically or morally.”
 
“but,” said andrea, “why do you not act on the advice you gave me? why
 do you not realize six months’, year’s advance even, and retire to
 brussels? instead of living the retired baker, you might live as a
 bankrupt, using his privileges; that would be very good.”
 
“but how the devil would you have retire on twelve hundred francs?”
 
“ah, caderousse,” said andrea, “how covetous you are! two months ago
 you were dying with hunger.”
 
“the appetite grows by what it feeds on,” said caderousse, grinning and
 showing his teeth, like monkey laughing or tiger growling. “and,”
 added he, biting off with his large white teeth an enormous mouthful of
 bread, “i have formed plan.”
 
caderousse’s plans alarmed andrea still more than his ideas; ideas were
 but the germ, the plan was reality.
 
“let see your plan; i dare say it is pretty one.”
 
“why not? who formed the plan by which we left the establishment of
 m——! eh? was it not i? and it was bad one i believe, since here we
 are!”
 
“i do not say,” replied andrea, “that you never make good one; but
 let us see your plan.”
 
“well,” pursued caderousse, “can you without expending one sou, put me
 in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs? no, fifteen thousand are
 not enough,—i cannot again become an honest man with less than thirty
 thousand francs.”
 
“no,” replied andrea, dryly, “no, i cannot.”
 
“i do not think you understand me,” replied caderousse, calmly; “i said
 without your laying out sou.”
 
“do you want to commit robbery, to spoil all my good fortune—and
 yours with mine—and both of us to be dragged down there again?”
 
“it would make very little difference to me,” said caderousse, “if i
 were retaken, i am poor creature to live alone, and sometimes pine
 for my old comrades; not like you, heartless creature, who would be
 glad never to see them again.”
 
andrea did more than tremble this time, turned pale.
 
“come, caderousse, nonsense!” said he.
 
“don’t alarm yourself, my little benedetto, but just point out to me
 some means of gaining those thirty thousand francs without your
 assistance, and i will contrive it.”
 
“well, i’ll see—i’ll try to contrive some way,” said andrea.
 
“meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to five hundred francs,
 my little fellow? i have fancy, and mean to get housekeeper.”
 
“well, you shall have your five hundred francs,” said andrea; “but it
 is very hard for me, my poor caderousse—you take advantage——”
 
“bah,” said caderousse, “when you have access to countless stores.”
 
one would have said andrea anticipated his companion’s words, so did
 his eye flash like lightning, but it was but for moment.
 
“true,” replied, “and my protector is very kind.”
 
“that dear protector,” said caderousse; “and how much does give you
 monthly?”
 
“five thousand francs.”
 
“as many thousands as you give hundreds! truly, it is only bastards
 who are thus fortunate. five thousand francs per month! what the devil
 can you do with all that?”
 
“oh, it is trouble to spend that; and i am like you, i want
 capital.”
 
“capital?—yes—i understand—everyone would like capital.”
 
“well, and i shall get it.”
 
“who will give it to you—your prince?”
 
“yes, my prince. but unfortunately i must wait.”
 
40138m
 


“you must wait for what?” asked caderousse.
 
“for his death.”
 
“the death of your prince?”
 
“yes.”
 
“how so?”
 
“because has made his will in my favor.”
 
“indeed?”
 
“on my honor.”
 
“for how much?”
 
“for five hundred thousand.”
 
“only that? it’s little enough.”
 
“but so it is.”
 
“no, it cannot be!”
 
“are you my friend, caderousse?”
 
“yes, in life or death.”
 
“well, i will tell you secret.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“but remember——”
 
“ah! _pardieu!_ mute as carp.”
 
“well, i think——”
 
andrea stopped and looked around.
 
“you think? do not fear; _pardieu!_ we are alone.”
 
“i think i have discovered my father.”
 
“your true father?”
 
“yes.”
 
“not old cavalcanti?”
 
“no, for has gone again; the true one, as you say.”
 
“and that father is——”
 
“well, caderousse, it is monte cristo.”
 
“bah!”
 
“yes, you understand, that explains all. cannot acknowledge me
 openly, it appears, but does it through m. cavalcanti, and gives him
 fifty thousand francs for it.”
 
“fifty thousand francs for being your father? i would have done it for
 half that, for twenty thousand, for fifteen thousand; why did you not
 think of me, ungrateful man?”
 
“did i know anything about it, when it was all done when i was down
 there?”
 
“ah, truly? and you say that by his will——”
 
“he leaves five hundred thousand livres.”
 
“are you sure of it?”
 
“he showed it me; but that is not all—there is codicil, as i said
 just now.”
 
“probably.”
 
“and in that codicil acknowledges me.”
 
“oh, the good father, the brave father, the very honest father!” said
 caderousse, twirling plate in the air between his two hands.
 
“now, say if i conceal anything from you?”
 
“no, and your confidence makes you honorable in my opinion; and your
 princely father, is rich, very rich?”
 
“yes, is that; does not himself know the amount of his fortune.”
 
“is it possible?”
 
“it is evident enough to me, who am always at his house. the other day
 banker’s clerk brought him fifty thousand francs in portfolio about
 the size of your plate; yesterday his banker brought him hundred
 thousand francs in gold.”
 
caderousse was filled with wonder; the young man’s words sounded to him
 like metal, and thought could hear the rushing of cascades of
 louis.
 
“and you go into that house?” cried briskly.
 
“when i like.”
 
caderousse was thoughtful for moment. it was easy to perceive was
 revolving some unfortunate idea in his mind. then suddenly,—
 
“how i should like to see all that,” cried he; “how beautiful it must
 be!”
 
“it is, in fact, magnificent,” said andrea.
 
“and does not live in the champs-Élysées?”
 
“yes, no. 30.”
 
“ah,” said caderousse, “no. 30.”
 
“yes, fine house standing alone, between courtyard and a
 garden,—you must know it.”
 
“possibly; but it is not the exterior i care for, it is the interior.
 what beautiful furniture there must be in it!”
 
“have you ever seen the tuileries?”
 
“no.”
 
“well, it surpasses that.”
 
“it must be worth one’s while to stoop, andrea, when that good m. monte
 cristo lets fall his purse.”
 
“it is not worthwhile to wait for that,” said andrea; “money is as
 plentiful in that house as fruit in an orchard.”
 
“but you should take there one day with you.”
 
“how can i? on what plea?”
 
“you are right; but you have made my mouth water. i must absolutely see
 it; i shall find way.”
 
“no nonsense, caderousse!”
 
“i will offer myself as floor-polisher.”
 
“the rooms are all carpeted.”
 
“well, then, i must be contented to imagine it.”
 
“that is the best plan, believe me.”
 
“try, at least, to give an idea of what it is.”
 
“how can i?”
 
“nothing is easier. is it large?”
 
“middling.”
 
“how is it arranged?”
 
“faith, i should require pen, ink, and paper to make plan.”
 
“they are all here,” said caderousse, briskly. fetched from an old
 secretaire sheet of white paper and pen and ink. “here,” said
 caderousse, “draw all that on the paper, my boy.”
 
andrea took the pen with an imperceptible smile and began.
 
“the house, as i said, is between the court and the garden; in this
 way, do you see?” andrea drew the garden, the court and the house.
 
40142m
 


“high walls?”
 
“not more than eight or ten feet.”
 
“that is not prudent,” said caderousse.
 
“in the court are orange-trees in pots, turf, and clumps of flowers.”
 
“and steel-traps?”
 
“no.”
 
“the stables?”
 
“are on either side of the gate, which you see there.” and andrea
 continued his plan.
 
“let us see the ground floor,” said caderousse.
 
“on the ground floor, dining-room, two drawing-rooms, billiard-room,
 staircase in the hall, and little back staircase.”
 
“windows?”
 
“magnificent windows, so beautiful, so large, that i believe man of
 your size should pass through each frame.”
 
“why the devil have they any stairs with such windows?”
 
“luxury has everything.”
 
“but shutters?”
 
“yes, but they are never used. that count of monte cristo is an
 original, who loves to look at the sky even at night.”
 
“and where do the servants sleep?”
 
“oh, they have house to themselves. picture to yourself pretty
 coach-house at the right-hand side where the ladders are kept. well,
 over that coach-house are the servants’ rooms, with bells corresponding
 with the different apartments.”
 
“ah, _diable!_ bells did you say?”
 
“what do you mean?”
 
“oh, nothing! i only say they cost load of money to hang, and what is
 the use of them, i should like to know?”
 
“there used to be dog let loose in the yard at night, but it has been
 taken to the house at auteuil, to that you went to, you know.”
 
“yes.”
 
“i was saying to him only yesterday, ‘you are imprudent, monsieur
 count; for when you go to auteuil and take your servants the house is
 left unprotected.’ ‘well,’ said he, ‘what next?’ ‘well, next, some day
 you will be robbed.’”
 
“what did answer?”
 
“he quietly said, ‘what do i care if i am?’”
 
“andrea, has some secretaire with spring.”
 
“how do you know?”
 
“yes, which catches the thief in trap and plays tune. i was told
 there were such at the last exhibition.”
 
“he has simply mahogany secretaire, in which the key is always kept.”
 
“and is not robbed?”
 
“no; his servants are all devoted to him.”
 
“there ought to be some money in that secretaire?”
 
“there may be. one knows what there is.”
 
“and where is it?”
 
“on the first floor.”
 
“sketch the plan of that floor, as you have done of the ground
 floor, my boy.”
 
“that is very simple.” andrea took the pen. “on the first story, do you
 see, there is the anteroom and the drawing-room; to the right of the
 drawing-room, library and study; to the left, bedroom and a
 dressing-room. the famous secretaire is in the dressing-room.”
 
“is there window in the dressing-room?”
 
“two,—one here and one there.” andrea sketched two windows in the room,
 which formed an angle on the plan, and appeared as small square added
 to the rectangle of the bedroom. caderousse became thoughtful.
 
“does often go to auteuil?” added he.
 
“two or three times week. tomorrow, for instance, is going to
 spend the day and night there.”
 
“are you sure of it?”
 
“he has invited to dine there.”
 
“there’s life for you,” said caderousse; “a town house and country
 house.”
 
“that is what it is to be rich.”
 
“and shall you dine there?”
 
“probably.”
 
“when you dine there, do you sleep there?”
 
“if i like; i am at home there.”
 
caderousse looked at the young man, as if to get at the truth from the
 bottom of his heart. but andrea drew cigar-case from his pocket, took
 havana, quietly lit it, and began smoking.
 
“when do you want your twelve hundred francs?” said to caderousse.
 
“now, if you have them.” andrea took five-and-twenty louis from his
 pocket.
 
“yellow boys?” said caderousse; “no, i thank you.”
 
“oh, you despise them.”
 
“on the contrary, i esteem them, but will not have them.”
 
“you can change them, idiot; gold is worth five sous.”
 
“exactly; and who changes them will follow friend caderousse, lay
 hands on him, and demand what farmers pay him their rent in gold. no
 nonsense, my good fellow; silver simply, round coins with the head of
 some monarch or other on them. anybody may possess five-franc piece.”
 
“but do you suppose i carry five hundred francs about with me? i should
 want porter.”
 
“well, leave them with your porter; is to be trusted. i will call
 for them.”
 
“today?”
 
“no, tomorrow; i shall not have time today.”
 
“well, tomorrow i will leave them when i go to auteuil.”
 
“may i depend on it?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“because i shall secure my housekeeper on the strength of it.”
 
“now see here, will that be all? eh? and will you not torment any
 more?”
 
“never.”
 
caderousse had become so gloomy that andrea feared should be obliged
 to notice the change. redoubled his gayety and carelessness.
 
“how sprightly you are,” said caderousse; “one would say you were
 already in possession of your property.”
 
“no, unfortunately; but when i do obtain it——”
 
“well?”
 
“i shall remember old friends, i can tell you that.”
 
“yes, since you have such good memory.”
 
“what do you want? it looks as if you were trying to fleece me?”
 
“i? what an idea! i, who am going to give you another piece of good
 advice.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“to leave behind you the diamond you have on your finger. we shall both
 get into trouble. you will ruin both yourself and by your folly.”
 
“how so?” said andrea.
 
“how? you put on livery, you disguise yourself as servant, and yet
 keep diamond on your finger worth four or five thousand francs.”
 
“you guess well.”
 
“i know something of diamonds; i have had some.”
 
“you do well to boast of it,” said andrea, who, without becoming angry,
 as caderousse feared, at this new extortion, quietly resigned the ring.
 caderousse looked so closely at it that andrea well knew that was
 examining to see if all the edges were perfect.
 
“it is false diamond,” said caderousse.
 
“you are joking now,” replied andrea.
 
“do not be angry, we can try it.” caderousse went to the window,
 touched the glass with it, and found it would cut.
 
“_confiteor!_” said caderousse, putting the diamond on his little
 finger; “i was mistaken; but those thieves of jewellers imitate so well
 that it is longer worthwhile to rob jeweller’s shop—it is another
 branch of industry paralyzed.”
 
“have you finished?” said andrea,—“do you want anything more?—will you
 have my waistcoat or my hat? make free, now you have begun.”
 
“no; you are, after all, good companion; i will not detain you, and
 will try to cure myself of my ambition.”
 
“but take care the same thing does not happen to you in selling the
 diamond you feared with the gold.”
 
“i shall not sell it—do not fear.”
 
“not at least till the day after tomorrow,” thought the young man.
 
“happy rogue,” said caderousse; “you are going to find your servants,
 your horses, your carriage, and your betrothed!”
 
“yes,” said andrea.
 
“well, i hope you will make handsome wedding-present the day you
 marry mademoiselle danglars.”
 
“i have already told you it is fancy you have taken in your head.”
 
“what fortune has she?”
 
“but i tell you——”
 
“a million?”
 
andrea shrugged his shoulders.
 
“let it be million,” said caderousse; “you can never have so much as
 i wish you.”
 
“thank you,” said the young man.
 
“oh, i wish it you with all my heart!” added caderousse with his hoarse
 laugh. “stop, let show you the way.”
 
“it is not worthwhile.”
 
“yes, it is.”
 
“why?”
 
“because there is little secret, precaution i thought it desirable
 to take, one of huret & fichet’s locks, revised and improved by gaspard
 caderousse; i will manufacture you similar one when you are a
 capitalist.”
 
“thank you,” said andrea; “i will let you know week beforehand.”
 
they parted. caderousse remained on the landing until had not only
 seen andrea go down the three stories, but also cross the court. then
 returned hastily, shut his door carefully, and began to study, like
 clever architect, the plan andrea had left him.
 
“dear benedetto,” said he, “i think will not be sorry to inherit his
 fortune, and who hastens the day when can touch his five hundred
 thousand will not be his worst friend.”
 


chapter 82. the burglary
 
the day following that on which the conversation we have related took
 place, the count of monte cristo set out for auteuil, accompanied by
 ali and several attendants, and also taking with him some horses whose
 qualities was desirous of ascertaining. was induced to undertake
 this journey, of which the day before had not even thought and which
 had not occurred to andrea either, by the arrival of bertuccio from
 normandy with intelligence respecting the house and sloop. the house
 was ready, and the sloop which had arrived week before lay at anchor
 in small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all the
 requisite formalities and were ready again to put to sea.
 
the count praised bertuccio’s zeal, and ordered him to prepare for a
 speedy departure, as his stay in france would not be prolonged more
 than month.
 
“now,” said he, “i may require to go in one night from paris to
 tréport; let eight fresh horses be in readiness on the road, which will
 enable to go fifty leagues in ten hours.”
 
“your highness had already expressed that wish,” said bertuccio, “and
 the horses are ready. i have bought them, and stationed them myself at
 the most desirable posts, that is, in villages, where one generally
 stops.”
 
“that’s well,” said monte cristo; “i remain here day or two—arrange
 accordingly.”
 
as bertuccio was leaving the room to give the requisite orders,
 baptistin opened the door: held letter on silver waiter.
 
“what are you doing here?” asked the count, seeing him covered with
 dust; “i did not send for you, i think?”
 
baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and presented the
 letter. “important and urgent,” said he.
 
the count opened the letter, and read:
 
“‘m. monte cristo is apprised that this night man will enter his
 house in the champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some
 papers supposed to be in the secretaire in the dressing-room. the
 count’s well-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the
 police, whose interference might seriously affect him who sends this
 advice. the count, by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing
 himself in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property
 himself. many attendants or apparent precautions would prevent the
 villain from the attempt, and m. monte cristo would lose the
 opportunity of discovering an enemy whom chance has revealed to him who
 now sends this warning to the count,—a warning might not be able to
 send another time, if this first attempt should fail and another be
 made.’”
 

the count’s first idea was that this was an artifice—a gross deception,
 to draw his attention from minor danger in order to expose him to a
 greater. was on the point of sending the letter to the commissary of
 police, notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or perhaps
 because of that advice, when suddenly the idea occurred to him that it
 might be some personal enemy, whom alone should recognize and over
 whom, if such were the case, alone would gain any advantage, as
 fiesco17 had done over the moor who would have killed him. we know the
 count’s vigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible,
 with that energy which marks the great man.
 
from his past life, from his resolution to shrink from nothing, the
 count had acquired an inconceivable relish for the contests in which he
 had engaged, sometimes against nature, that is to say, against god, and
 sometimes against the world, that is, against the devil.
 
“they do not want my papers,” said monte cristo, “they want to kill me;
 they are robbers, but assassins. i will not allow the prefect of
 police to interfere with my private affairs. i am rich enough,
 forsooth, to distribute his authority on this occasion.”
 
the count recalled baptistin, who had left the room after delivering
 the letter.
 
“return to paris,” said he; “assemble the servants who remain there. i
 want all my household at auteuil.”
 
“but will one remain in the house, my lord?” asked baptistin.
 
“yes, the porter.”
 
“my lord will remember that the lodge is at distance from the house.”
 
“well?”
 
“the house might be stripped without his hearing the least noise.”
 
“by whom?”
 
“by thieves.”
 
“you are fool, m. baptistin. thieves might strip the house—it would
 annoy less than to be disobeyed.” baptistin bowed.
 
40150m
 


“you understand me?” said the count. “bring your comrades here, one and
 all; but let everything remain as usual, only close the shutters of the
 ground floor.”
 
“and those of the first floor?”
 
“you know they are never closed. go!”
 
the count signified his intention of dining alone, and that one but
 ali should attend him. having dined with his usual tranquillity and
 moderation, the count, making signal to ali to follow him, went out
 by the side-gate and on reaching the bois boulogne turned,
 apparently without design towards paris and at twilight; found himself
 opposite his house in the champs-Élysées. all was dark; one solitary,
 feeble light was burning in the porter’s lodge, about forty paces
 distant from the house, as baptistin had said.
 
monte cristo leaned against tree, and with that scrutinizing glance
 which was so rarely deceived, looked up and down the avenue, examined
 the passers-by, and carefully looked down the neighboring streets, to
 see that one was concealed. ten minutes passed thus, and was
 convinced that one was watching him. hastened to the side-door
 with ali, entered hurriedly, and by the servants’ staircase, of which
 had the key, gained his bedroom without opening or disarranging a
 single curtain, without even the porter having the slightest suspicion
 that the house, which supposed empty, contained its chief occupant.
 
arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to ali to stop; then he
 passed into the dressing-room, which examined. everything appeared
 as usual—the precious secretaire in its place, and the key in the
 secretaire. double locked it, took the key, returned to the bedroom
 door, removed the double staple of the bolt, and went in. meanwhile ali
 had procured the arms the count required—namely, short carbine and a
 pair of double-barrelled pistols, with which as sure an aim might be
 taken as with single-barrelled one. thus armed, the count held the
 lives of five men in his hands. it was about half-past nine.
 
the count and ali ate in haste crust of bread and drank glass of
 spanish wine; then monte cristo slipped aside one of the movable
 panels, which enabled him to see into the adjoining room. had within
 his reach his pistols and carbine, and ali, standing near him, held one
 of the small arabian hatchets, whose form has not varied since the
 crusades. through one of the windows of the bedroom, on line with
 that in the dressing-room, the count could see into the street.
 
two hours passed thus. it was intensely dark; still ali, thanks to his
 wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtless to his long confinement,
 could distinguish in the darkness the slightest movement of the trees.
 the little light in the lodge had long been extinct. it might be
 expected that the attack, if indeed an attack was projected, would be
 made from the staircase of the ground floor, and not from window; in
 monte cristo’s opinion, the villains sought his life, not his money. it
 would be his bedroom they would attack, and they must reach it by the
 back staircase, or by the window in the dressing-room.
 
the clock of the invalides struck quarter to twelve; the west wind
 bore on its moistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes.
 
40152m
 


as the last stroke died away, the count thought heard slight noise
 in the dressing-room; this first sound, or rather this first grinding,
 was followed by second, then third; at the fourth, the count knew
 what to expect. firm and well-practised hand was engaged in cutting
 the four sides of pane of glass with diamond. the count felt his
 heart beat more rapidly.
 
inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as they may be of peril,
 they understand, by the fluttering of the heart and the shuddering of
 the frame, the enormous difference between dream and reality,
 between the project and the execution. however, monte cristo only made
 sign to apprise ali, who, understanding that danger was approaching
 from the other side, drew nearer to his master. monte cristo was eager
 to ascertain the strength and number of his enemies.
 
the window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the opening by which
 the count could see into the dressing-room. fixed his eyes on that
 window—he distinguished shadow in the darkness; then one of the panes
 became quite opaque, as if sheet of paper were stuck on the outside,
 then the square cracked without falling. through the opening an arm was
 passed to find the fastening, then second; the window turned on its
 hinges, and man entered. was alone.
 
“that’s daring rascal,” whispered the count.
 
at that moment ali touched him slightly on the shoulder. turned; ali
 pointed to the window of the room in which they were, facing the
 street.
 
“i see!” said he, “there are two of them; one does the work while the
 other stands guard.” made sign to ali not to lose sight of the man
 in the street, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.
 
the glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his arms
 stretched out before him. at last appeared to have made himself
 familiar with his surroundings. there were two doors; bolted them
 both.
 
when drew near to the bedroom door, monte cristo expected that he
 was coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but simply heard the
 sound of the bolts sliding in their copper rings. it was only a
 precaution. the nocturnal visitor, ignorant of the fact that the count
 had removed the staples, might now think himself at home, and pursue
 his purpose with full security. alone and free to act as wished, the
 man then drew from his pocket something which the count could not
 discern, placed it on stand, then went straight to the secretaire,
 felt the lock, and contrary to his expectation found that the key was
 missing. but the glass-cutter was prudent man who had provided for
 all emergencies. the count soon heard the rattling of bunch of
 skeleton keys, such as the locksmith brings when called to force a
 lock, and which thieves call nightingales, doubtless from the music of
 their nightly song when they grind against the bolt.
 
“ah, ha,” whispered monte cristo with smile of disappointment, “he is
 only thief.”
 
but the man in the dark could not find the right key. reached the
 instrument had placed on the stand, touched spring, and
 immediately pale light, just bright enough to render objects
 distinct, was reflected on his hands and countenance.
 
“by heavens,” exclaimed monte cristo, starting back, “it is——”
 
ali raised his hatchet.
 
“don’t stir,” whispered monte cristo, “and put down your hatchet; we
 shall require arms.”
 
40154m
 


then added some words in low tone, for the exclamation which
 surprise had drawn from the count, faint as it had been, had startled
 the man who remained in the pose of the old knife-grinder.
 
it was an order the count had just given, for immediately ali went
 noiselessly, and returned, bearing black dress and three-cornered
 hat. meanwhile monte cristo had rapidly taken off his greatcoat,
 waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by the glimmering
 through the open panel that wore pliant tunic of steel mail, of
 which the last in france, where daggers are longer dreaded, was worn
 by king louis xvi., who feared the dagger at his breast, and whose head
 was cleft with hatchet. the tunic soon disappeared under long
 cassock, as did his hair under priest’s wig; the three-cornered hat
 over this effectually transformed the count into an abbé.
 
the man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while monte cristo was
 completing his disguise had advanced straight to the secretaire, whose
 lock was beginning to crack under his nightingale.
 
“try again,” whispered the count, who depended on the secret spring,
 which was unknown to the picklock, clever as might be—“try again,
 you have few minutes’ work there.”
 
and advanced to the window. the man whom had seen seated on a
 fence had got down, and was still pacing the street; but, strange as it
 appeared, cared not for those who might pass from the avenue of the
 champs-Élysées or by the faubourg saint-honoré; his attention was
 engrossed with what was passing at the count’s, and his only aim
 appeared to be to discern every movement in the dressing-room.
 
monte cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead and smile
 passed over his lips; then drawing near to ali, whispered:
 
“remain here, concealed in the dark, and whatever noise you hear,
 whatever passes, only come in or show yourself if i call you.”
 
ali bowed in token of strict obedience. monte cristo then drew a
 lighted taper from closet, and when the thief was deeply engaged with
 his lock, silently opened the door, taking care that the light should
 shine directly on his face. the door opened so quietly that the thief
 heard sound; but, to his astonishment, the room was suddenly
 illuminated. turned.
 
“ah, good-evening, my dear m. caderousse,” said monte cristo; “what are
 you doing here, at such an hour?”
 
40156m
 


“the abbé busoni!” exclaimed caderousse; and, not knowing how this
 strange apparition could have entered when had bolted the doors, he
 let fall his bunch of keys, and remained motionless and stupefied. the
 count placed himself between caderousse and the window, thus cutting
 off from the thief his only chance of retreat.
 
“the abbé busoni!” repeated caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze on the
 count.
 
“yes, undoubtedly, the abbé busoni himself,” replied monte cristo. “and
 i am very glad you recognize me, dear m. caderousse; it proves you have
 good memory, for it must be about ten years since we last met.”
 
this calmness of busoni, combined with his irony and boldness,
 staggered caderousse.
 
“the abbé, the abbé!” murmured he, clenching his fists, and his teeth
 chattering.
 
“so you would rob the count of monte cristo?” continued the false abbé.
 
“reverend sir,” murmured caderousse, seeking to regain the window,
 which the count pitilessly blocked—“reverend sir, i don’t know—believe
 me—i take my oath——”
 
“a pane of glass out,” continued the count, “a dark lantern, bunch of
 false keys, secretaire half forced—it is tolerably evident——”
 
caderousse was choking; looked around for some corner to hide in,
 some way of escape.
 
“come, come,” continued the count, “i see you are still the same,—an
 assassin.”
 
“reverend sir, since you know everything, you know it was not i—it was
 carconte; that was proved at the trial, since i was only condemned
 to the galleys.”
 
“is your time, then, expired, since i find you in fair way to return
 there?”
 
“no, reverend sir; i have been liberated by someone.”
 
“that someone has done society great kindness.”
 
“ah,” said caderousse, “i had promised——”
 
“and you are breaking your promise!” interrupted monte cristo.
 
“alas, yes!” said caderousse very uneasily.
 
“a bad relapse, that will lead you, if i mistake not, to the place de
 grève. so much the worse, so much the worse—_diavolo!_ as they say in
 my country.”
 
“reverend sir, i am impelled——”
 
“every criminal says the same thing.”
 
“poverty——”
 
“pshaw!” said busoni disdainfully; “poverty may make man beg, steal a
 loaf of bread at baker’s door, but not cause him to open secretaire
 in house supposed to be inhabited. and when the jeweller johannes had
 just paid you 45,000 francs for the diamond i had given you, and you
 killed him to get the diamond and the money both, was that also
 poverty?”
 
“pardon, reverend sir,” said caderousse; “you have saved my life once,
 save again!”
 
“that is but poor encouragement.”
 
“are you alone, reverend sir, or have you there soldiers ready to seize
 me?”
 
“i am alone,” said the abbé, “and i will again have pity on you, and
 will let you escape, at the risk of the fresh miseries my weakness may
 lead to, if you tell the truth.”
 
“ah, reverend sir,” cried caderousse, clasping his hands, and drawing
 nearer to monte cristo, “i may indeed say you are my deliverer!”
 
“you mean to say you have been freed from confinement?”
 
“yes, that is true, reverend sir.”
 
“who was your liberator?”
 
“an englishman.”
 
“what was his name?”
 
“lord wilmore.”
 
“i know him; i shall know if you lie.”
 
“ah, reverend sir, i tell you the simple truth.”
 
“was this englishman protecting you?”
 
“no, not me, but young corsican, my companion.”
 
“what was this young corsican’s name?”
 
“benedetto.”
 
“is that his christian name?”
 
“he had other; was foundling.”
 
“then this young man escaped with you?”
 
“he did.”
 
“in what way?”
 
“we were working at saint-mandrier, near toulon. do you know
 saint-mandrier?”
 
“i do.”
 
“in the hour of rest, between noon and one o’clock——”
 
“galley-slaves having nap after dinner! we may well pity the poor
 fellows!” said the abbé.
 
“nay,” said caderousse, “one can’t always work—one is not dog.”
 
“so much the better for the dogs,” said monte cristo.
 
“while the rest slept, then, we went away short distance; we severed
 our fetters with file the englishman had given us, and swam away.”
 
“and what is become of this benedetto?”
 
“i don’t know.”
 
“you ought to know.”
 
“no, in truth; we parted at hyères.” and, to give more weight to his
 protestation, caderousse advanced another step towards the abbé, who
 remained motionless in his place, as calm as ever, and pursuing his
 interrogation.
 
“you lie,” said the abbé busoni, with tone of irresistible authority.
 
“reverend sir!”
 
“you lie! this man is still your friend, and you, perhaps, make use of
 him as your accomplice.”
 
40160m
 


“oh, reverend sir!”
 
“since you left toulon what have you lived on? answer me!”
 
“on what i could get.”
 
“you lie,” repeated the abbé third time, with still more imperative
 tone. caderousse, terrified, looked at the count. “you have lived on
 the money has given you.”
 
“true,” said caderousse; “benedetto has become the of great
 lord.”
 
“how can be the of great lord?”
 
“a natural son.”
 
“and what is that great lord’s name?”
 
“the count of monte cristo, the very same in whose house we are.”
 
“benedetto the count’s son?” replied monte cristo, astonished in his
 turn.
 
“well, i should think so, since the count has found him false
 father—since the count gives him four thousand francs month, and
 leaves him 500,000 francs in his will.”
 
“ah, yes,” said the factitious abbé, who began to understand; “and what
 name does the young man bear meanwhile?”
 
“andrea cavalcanti.”
 
“is it, then, that young man whom my friend the count of monte cristo
 has received into his house, and who is going to marry mademoiselle
 danglars?”
 
“exactly.”
 
“and you suffer that, you wretch!—you, who know his life and his
 crime?”
 
“why should i stand in comrade’s way?” said caderousse.
 
“you are right; it is not you who should apprise m. danglars, it is i.”
 
“do not do so, reverend sir.”
 
“why not?”
 
“because you would bring us to ruin.”
 
“and you think that to save such villains as you i will become an
 abettor of their plot, an accomplice in their crimes?”
 
“reverend sir,” said caderousse, drawing still nearer.
 
“i will expose all.”
 
“to whom?”
 
“to m. danglars.”
 
“by heaven!” cried caderousse, drawing from his waistcoat an open
 knife, and striking the count in the breast, “you shall disclose
 nothing, reverend sir!”
 
to caderousse’s great astonishment, the knife, instead of piercing the
 count’s breast, flew back blunted. at the same moment the count seized
 with his left hand the assassin’s wrist, and wrung it with such
 strength that the knife fell from his stiffened fingers, and caderousse
 uttered cry of pain. but the count, disregarding his cry, continued
 to wring the bandit’s wrist, until, his arm being dislocated, fell
 first on his knees, then flat on the floor.
 
the count then placed his foot on his head, saying, “i know not what
 restrains from crushing thy skull, rascal.”
 
“ah, mercy—mercy!” cried caderousse.
 
the count withdrew his foot.
 
40162m
 


“rise!” said he. caderousse rose.
 
“what wrist you have, reverend sir!” said caderousse, stroking his
 arm, all bruised by the fleshy pincers which had held it; “what a
 wrist!”
 
“silence! god gives strength to overcome wild beast like you; in
 the name of that god i act,—remember that, wretch,—and to spare thee at
 this moment is still serving him.”
 
“oh!” said caderousse, groaning with pain.
 
“take this pen and paper, and write what i dictate.”
 
“i don’t know how to write, reverend sir.”
 
“you lie! take this pen, and write!”
 
caderousse, awed by the superior power of the abbé, sat down and wrote:
 
“sir,—the man whom you are receiving at your house, and to whom you
 intend to marry your daughter, is felon who escaped with from
 confinement at toulon. was no. 59, and i no. 58. was called
 benedetto, but is ignorant of his real name, having never known his
 parents.”
 

“sign it!” continued the count.
 
“but would you ruin me?”
 
“if i sought your ruin, fool, i should drag you to the first
 guard-house; besides, when that note is delivered, in all probability
 you will have more to fear. sign it, then!”
 
caderousse signed it.
 
“the address, ‘to monsieur the baron danglars, banker, rue la
 chaussée d’antin.’”
 
caderousse wrote the address. the abbé took the note.
 
“now,” said he, “that suffices—begone!”
 
“which way?”
 
“the way you came.”
 
“you wish to get out at that window?”
 
“you got in very well.”
 
“oh, you have some design against me, reverend sir.”
 
“idiot! what design can i have?”
 
“why, then, not let out by the door?”
 
“what would be the advantage of waking the porter?”
 
“ah, reverend sir, tell me, do you wish dead?”
 
“i wish what god wills.”
 
“but swear that you will not strike as i go down.”
 
“cowardly fool!”
 
“what do you intend doing with me?”
 
“i ask you what can i do? i have tried to make you happy man, and you
 have turned out murderer.”
 
“oh, monsieur,” said caderousse, “make one more attempt—try once
 more!”
 
“i will,” said the count. “listen—you know if i may be relied on.”
 
“yes,” said caderousse.
 
“if you arrive safely at home——”
 
“what have i to fear, except from you?”
 
“if you reach your home safely, leave paris, leave france, and wherever
 you may be, so long as you conduct yourself well, i will send you a
 small annuity; for, if you return home safely, then——”
 
“then?” asked caderousse, shuddering.
 
40164m
 


“then i shall believe god has forgiven you, and i will forgive you
 too.”
 
“as true as i am christian,” stammered caderousse, “you will make me
 die of fright!”
 
“now begone,” said the count, pointing to the window.
 
caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put his legs out of
 the window and stood on the ladder.
 
“now go down,” said the abbé, folding his arms. understanding had
 nothing more to fear from him, caderousse began to go down. then the
 count brought the taper to the window, that it might be seen in the
 champs-Élysées that man was getting out of the window while another
 held light.
 
“what are you doing, reverend sir? suppose watchman should pass?” and
 blew out the light. then descended, but it was only when felt
 his foot touch the ground that was satisfied of his safety.
 
monte cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly from the
 garden to the street, saw first caderousse, who after walking to the
 end of the garden, fixed his ladder against the wall at different
 part from where came in. the count then looking over into the
 street, saw the man who appeared to be waiting run in the same
 direction, and place himself against the angle of the wall where
 caderousse would come over. caderousse climbed the ladder slowly, and
 looked over the coping to see if the street was quiet. one could be
 seen or heard. the clock of the invalides struck one. then caderousse
 sat astride the coping, and drawing up his ladder passed it over the
 wall; then began to descend, or rather to slide down by the two
 stanchions, which did with an ease which proved how accustomed he
 was to the exercise. but, once started, could not stop. in vain did
 see man start from the shadow when was halfway down—in vain did
 see an arm raised as touched the ground.
 
before could defend himself that arm struck him so violently in the
 back that let go the ladder, crying, “help!” second blow struck
 him almost immediately in the side, and fell, calling, “help,
 murder!” then, as rolled on the ground, his adversary seized him by
 the hair, and struck him third blow in the chest.
 
this time caderousse endeavored to call again, but could only utter
 groan, and shuddered as the blood flowed from his three wounds.
 the assassin, finding that longer cried out, lifted his head up
 by the hair; his eyes were closed, and the mouth was distorted. the
 murderer, supposing him dead, let fall his head and disappeared.
 
then caderousse, feeling that was leaving him, raised himself on his
 elbow, and with dying voice cried with great effort:
 
“murder! i am dying! help, reverend sir,—help!”
 
this mournful appeal pierced the darkness. the door of the
 back-staircase opened, then the side-gate of the garden, and ali and
 his master were on the spot with lights.
 


chapter 83. the hand of god
 
caderousse continued to call piteously, “help, reverend sir, help!”
 
“what is the matter?” asked monte cristo.
 
“help,” cried caderousse; “i am murdered!”
 
“we are here;—take courage.”
 
“ah, it’s all over! you are come too late—you are come to see die.
 what blows, what blood!”
 
fainted. ali and his master conveyed the wounded man into room.
 monte cristo motioned to ali to undress him, and then examined his
 dreadful wounds.
 
“my god!” exclaimed, “thy vengeance is sometimes delayed, but only
 that it may fall the more effectually.” ali looked at his master for
 further instructions. “bring here immediately the king’s attorney, m.
 villefort, who lives in the faubourg saint-honoré. as you pass the
 lodge, wake the porter, and send him for surgeon.”
 
ali obeyed, leaving the abbé alone with caderousse, who had not yet
 revived.
 
when the wretched man again opened his eyes, the count looked at him
 with mournful expression of pity, and his lips moved as if in prayer.
 “a surgeon, reverend sir—a surgeon!” said caderousse.
 
“i have sent for one,” replied the abbé.
 
“i know cannot save my life, but may strengthen to give my
 evidence.”
 
“against whom?”
 
“against my murderer.”
 
“did you recognize him?”
 
“yes; it was benedetto.”
 
“the young corsican?”
 
“himself.”
 
“your comrade?”
 
“yes. after giving the plan of this house, doubtless hoping i should
 kill the count and thus become his heir, or that the count would
 kill and i should be out of his way, waylaid me, and has murdered
 me.”
 
“i have also sent for the procureur.”
 
“he will not come in time; i feel my life fast ebbing.”
 
“wait moment,” said monte cristo. left the room, and returned in
 five minutes with phial. the dying man’s eyes were all the time
 riveted on the door, through which hoped succor would arrive.
 
“hasten, reverend sir, hasten! i shall faint again!” monte cristo
 approached, and dropped on his purple lips three or four drops of the
 contents of the phial. caderousse drew deep breath. “oh,” said he,
 “that is life to me; more, more!”
 
“two drops more would kill you,” replied the abbé.
 
“oh, send for someone to whom i can denounce the wretch!”
 
“shall i write your deposition? you can sign it.”
 
“yes, yes,” said caderousse; and his eyes glistened at the thought of
 this posthumous revenge. monte cristo wrote:
 
“i die, murdered by the corsican benedetto, my comrade in the galleys
 at toulon, no. 59.”
 

“quick, quick!” said caderousse, “or i shall be unable to sign it.”
 
monte cristo gave the pen to caderousse, who collected all his
 strength, signed it, and fell back on his bed, saying:
 
“you will relate all the rest, reverend sir; you will say calls
 himself andrea cavalcanti. lodges at the hôtel des princes. oh, i am
 dying!” again fainted. the abbé made him smell the contents of the
 phial, and again opened his eyes. his desire for revenge had not
 forsaken him.
 
“ah, you will tell all i have said, will you not, reverend sir?”
 
“yes, and much more.”
 
“what more will you say?”
 
“i will say had doubtless given you the plan of this house, in the
 hope the count would kill you. i will say, likewise, had apprised
 the count, by note, of your intention, and, the count being absent, i
 read the note and sat up to await you.”
 
“and will be guillotined, will not?” said caderousse. “promise me
 that, and i will die with that hope.”
 
“i will say,” continued the count, “that followed and watched you
 the whole time, and when saw you leave the house, ran to the angle
 of the wall to conceal himself.”
 
“did you see all that?”
 
“remember my words: ‘if you return home safely, i shall believe god has
 forgiven you, and i will forgive you also.’”
 
“and you did not warn me!” cried caderousse, raising himself on his
 elbows. “you knew i should be killed on leaving this house, and did not
 warn me!”
 
40168m
 


“no; for i saw god’s justice placed in the hands of benedetto, and
 should have thought it sacrilege to oppose the designs of providence.”
 
“god’s justice! speak not of it, reverend sir. if god were just, you
 know how many would be punished who now escape.”
 
“patience,” said the abbé, in tone which made the dying man shudder;
 “have patience!”
 
caderousse looked at him with amazement.
 
“besides,” said the abbé, “god is merciful to all, as has been to
 you; is first father, then judge.”
 
“do you then believe in god?” said caderousse.
 
“had i been so unhappy as not to believe in him until now,” said monte
 cristo, “i must believe on seeing you.”
 
caderousse raised his clenched hands towards heaven.
 
“listen,” said the abbé, extending his hand over the wounded man, as if
 to command him to believe; “this is what the god in whom, on your
 death-bed, you refuse to believe, has done for you—he gave you health,
 strength, regular employment, even friends—a life, in fact, which man
 might enjoy with calm conscience. instead of improving these gifts,
 rarely granted so abundantly, this has been your course—you have given
 yourself up to sloth and drunkenness, and in fit of intoxication have
 ruined your best friend.”
 
“help!” cried caderousse; “i require surgeon, not priest; perhaps i
 am not mortally wounded—i may not die; perhaps they can yet save my
 life.”
 
“your wounds are so far mortal that, without the three drops i gave
 you, you would now be dead. listen, then.”
 
“ah,” murmured caderousse, “what strange priest you are; you drive
 the dying to despair, instead of consoling them.”
 
“listen,” continued the abbé. “when you had betrayed your friend, god
 began not to strike, but to warn you. poverty overtook you. you had
 already passed half your life in coveting that which you might have
 honorably acquired; and already you contemplated crime under the excuse
 of want, when god worked miracle in your behalf, sending you, by my
 hands, fortune—brilliant, indeed, for you, who had never possessed
 any. but this unexpected, unhoped-for, unheard-of fortune sufficed you
 longer when you once possessed it; you wished to double it, and
 how?—by murder! you succeeded, and then god snatched it from you, and
 brought you to justice.”
 
“it was not i who wished to kill the jew,” said caderousse; “it was la
 carconte.”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo, “and god,—i cannot say in justice, for his
 justice would have slain you,—but god, in his mercy, spared your life.”
 
“_pardieu!_ to transport for life, how merciful!”
 
“you thought it mercy then, miserable wretch! the coward who feared
 death rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for like all galley-slaves, you
 said, ‘i may escape from prison, i cannot from the grave.’ and you said
 truly; the way was opened for you unexpectedly. an englishman visited
 toulon, who had vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choice
 fell on you and your companion. you received second fortune, money
 and tranquillity were restored to you, and you, who had been condemned
 to felon’s life, might live as other men. then, wretched creature,
 then you tempted god third time. ‘i have not enough,’ you said, when
 you had more than you before possessed, and you committed third
 crime, without reason, without excuse. god is wearied; has punished
 you.”
 
caderousse was fast sinking. “give drink,” said he: “i thirst—i
 burn!” monte cristo gave him glass of water. “and yet that villain,
 benedetto, will escape!”
 
“no one, i tell you, will escape; benedetto will be punished.”
 
“then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do your duty as a
 priest—you should have prevented benedetto from killing me.”
 
“i?” said the count, with smile which petrified the dying man, “when
 you had just broken your knife against the coat of mail which protected
 my breast! yet perhaps if i had found you humble and penitent, i might
 have prevented benedetto from killing you; but i found you proud and
 blood-thirsty, and i left you in the hands of god.”
 
“i do not believe there is god,” howled caderousse; “you do not
 believe it; you lie—you lie!”
 
“silence,” said the abbé; “you will force the last drop of blood from
 your veins. what! you do not believe in god when is striking you
 dead? you will not believe in him, who requires but prayer, word, a
 tear, and will forgive? god, who might have directed the assassin’s
 dagger so as to end your career in moment, has given you this quarter
 of an hour for repentance. reflect, then, wretched man, and repent.”
 
“no,” said caderousse, “no; i will not repent. there is god; there
 is providence—all comes by chance.”
 
“there is providence; there is god,” said monte cristo, “of whom
 you are striking proof, as you lie in utter despair, denying him,
 while i stand before you, rich, happy, safe and entreating that god in
 whom you endeavor not to believe, while in your heart you still believe
 in him.”
 
“but who are you, then?” asked caderousse, fixing his dying eyes on the
 count.
 
“look well at me!” said monte cristo, putting the light near his face.
 
“well, the abbé—the abbé busoni.” monte cristo took off the wig which
 disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much to the
 beauty of his pallid features.
 
“oh?” said caderousse, thunderstruck, “but for that black hair, i
 should say you were the englishman, lord wilmore.”
 
“i am neither the abbé busoni nor lord wilmore,” said monte cristo;
 “think again,—do you not recollect me?”
 
there was magic effect in the count’s words, which once more revived
 the exhausted powers of the miserable man.
 
“yes, indeed,” said he; “i think i have seen you and known you
 formerly.”
 
“yes, caderousse, you have seen me; you knew once.”
 
“who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let die?”
 
“because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal. had it been
 possible to save you, i should have considered it another proof of
 god’s mercy, and i would again have endeavored to restore you, i swear
 by my father’s tomb.”
 
“by your father’s tomb!” said caderousse, supported by supernatural
 power, and half-raising himself to see more distinctly the man who had
 just taken the oath which all men hold sacred; “who, then, are you?”
 
the count had watched the approach of death. knew this was the last
 struggle. approached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a
 calm and melancholy look, whispered, “i am—i am——”
 
and his almost closed lips uttered name so low that the count himself
 appeared afraid to hear it. caderousse, who had raised himself on his
 knees, and stretched out his arm, tried to draw back, then clasping his
 hands, and raising them with desperate effort, “oh, my god, my god!”
 said he, “pardon for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou art
 indeed man’s father in heaven, and his judge on earth. my god, my lord,
 i have long despised thee! pardon me, my god; receive me, oh, my lord!”
 
caderousse sighed deeply, and fell back with groan. the blood no
 longer flowed from his wounds. was dead.
 
“_one!_” said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on the corpse,
 disfigured by so awful death.
 
ten minutes afterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the one
 accompanied by the porter, the other by ali, and were received by the
 abbé busoni, who was praying by the side of the corpse.
 


chapter 84. beauchamp
 
the daring attempt to rob the count was the topic of conversation
 throughout paris for the next fortnight. the dying man had signed a
 deposition declaring benedetto to be the assassin. the police had
 orders to make the strictest search for the murderer. caderousse’s
 knife, dark lantern, bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the
 waistcoat, which could not be found, were deposited at the registry;
 the corpse was conveyed to the morgue. the count told everyone that
 this adventure had happened during his absence at auteuil, and that he
 only knew what was related by the abbé busoni, who that evening, by
 mere chance, had requested to pass the night in his house, to examine
 some valuable books in his library.
 
bertuccio alone turned pale whenever benedetto’s name was mentioned in
 his presence, but there was reason why anyone should notice his
 doing so.
 
villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was preparing his brief
 with the same ardor that was accustomed to exercise when required to
 speak in criminal cases.
 
but three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent search had
 been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the murder of the robber
 by his comrade were almost forgotten in anticipation of the approaching
 marriage of mademoiselle danglars to the count andrea cavalcanti. it
 was expected that this wedding would shortly take place, as the young
 man was received at the banker’s as the betrothed.
 
letters had been despatched to m. cavalcanti, as the count’s father,
 who highly approved of the union, regretted his inability to leave
 parma at that time, and promised wedding gift of hundred and fifty
 thousand livres. it was agreed that the three millions should be
 intrusted to danglars to invest; some persons had warned the young man
 of the circumstances of his future father-in-law, who had of late
 sustained repeated losses; but with sublime disinterestedness and
 confidence the young man refused to listen, or to express single
 doubt to the baron.
 
the baron adored count andrea cavalcanti; not so mademoiselle eugénie
 danglars. with an instinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered
 andrea’s attentions in order to get rid of morcerf; but when andrea
 urged his suit, she betrayed an entire dislike to him. the baron might
 possibly have perceived it, but, attributing it to caprice, feigned
 ignorance.
 
the delay demanded by beauchamp had nearly expired. morcerf appreciated
 the advice of monte cristo to let things die away of their own accord.
 one had taken up the remark about the general, and one had
 recognized in the officer who betrayed the castle of yanina the noble
 count in the house of peers.
 
albert, however, felt less insulted; the few lines which had
 irritated him were certainly intended as an insult. besides, the manner
 in which beauchamp had closed the conference left bitter recollection
 in his heart. cherished the thought of the duel, hoping to conceal
 its true cause even from his seconds. beauchamp had not been seen since
 the day visited albert, and those of whom the latter inquired always
 told him was out on journey which would detain him some days.
 where was one knew.
 
one morning albert was awakened by his valet chambre, who announced
 beauchamp. albert rubbed his eyes, ordered his servant to introduce him
 into the small smoking-room on the ground floor, dressed himself
 quickly, and went down.
 
found beauchamp pacing the room; on perceiving him beauchamp
 stopped.
 
“your arrival here, without waiting my visit at your house today, looks
 well, sir,” said albert. “tell me, may i shake hands with you, saying,
 ‘beauchamp, acknowledge you have injured me, and retain my friendship,’
 or must i simply propose to you choice of arms?”
 
“albert,” said beauchamp, with look of sorrow which stupefied the
 young man, “let us first sit down and talk.”
 
“rather, sir, before we sit down, i must demand your answer.”
 
“albert,” said the journalist, “these are questions which it is
 difficult to answer.”
 
“i will facilitate it by repeating the question, ‘will you, or will you
 not, retract?’”
 
“morcerf, it is not enough to answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to questions which
 concern the honor, the social interest, and the life of such man as
 lieutenant-général the count of morcerf, peer of france.”
 
“what must then be done?”
 
40174m
 


“what i have done, albert. i reasoned thus—money, time, and fatigue are
 nothing compared with the reputation and interests of whole family;
 probabilities will not suffice, only facts will justify deadly combat
 with friend. if i strike with the sword, or discharge the contents of
 pistol at man with whom, for three years, i have been on terms of
 intimacy, i must, at least, know why i do so; i must meet him with a
 heart at ease, and that quiet conscience which man needs when his own
 arm must save his life.”
 
“well,” said morcerf, impatiently, “what does all this mean?”
 
“it means that i have just returned from yanina.”
 
“from yanina?”
 
“yes.”
 
“impossible!”
 
“here is my passport; examine the visa—geneva, milan, venice, trieste,
 delvino, yanina. will you believe the government of republic, a
 kingdom, and an empire?” albert cast his eyes on the passport, then
 raised them in astonishment to beauchamp.
 
“you have been to yanina?” said he.
 
“albert, had you been stranger, foreigner, simple lord, like that
 englishman who came to demand satisfaction three or four months since,
 and whom i killed to get rid of, i should not have taken this trouble;
 but i thought this mark of consideration due to you. i took week to
 go, another to return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours
 to stay there; that makes three weeks. i returned last night, and here
 i am.”
 
“what circumlocution! how long you are before you tell what i most
 wish to know?”
 
“because, in truth, albert——”
 
“you hesitate?”
 
“yes,—i fear.”
 
“you fear to acknowledge that your correspondent has deceived you? oh,
 self-love, beauchamp. acknowledge it, beauchamp; your courage cannot
 be doubted.”
 
“not so,” murmured the journalist; “on the contrary——”
 
albert turned frightfully pale; endeavored to speak, but the words
 died on his lips.
 
“my friend,” said beauchamp, in the most affectionate tone, “i should
 gladly make an apology; but, alas!——”
 
“but what?”
 
“the paragraph was correct, my friend.”
 
“what? that french officer——”
 
“yes.”
 
“fernand?”
 
“yes.”
 
“the traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose service he
 was——”
 
“pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!”
 
albert advanced furiously towards beauchamp, but the latter restrained
 him more by mild look than by his extended hand.
 
“my friend,” said he, “here is proof of it.”
 
40176m
 


albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable
 inhabitants of yanina, proving that colonel fernand mondego, in the
 service of ali tepelini, had surrendered the castle for two million
 crowns. the signatures were perfectly legal. albert tottered and fell
 overpowered in chair. it could longer be doubted; the family name
 was fully given. after moment’s mournful silence, his heart
 overflowed, and gave way to flood of tears. beauchamp, who had
 watched with sincere pity the young man’s paroxysm of grief, approached
 him.
 
“now, albert,” said he, “you understand me—do you not? i wished to see
 all, and to judge of everything for myself, hoping the explanation
 would be in your father’s favor, and that i might do him justice. but,
 on the contrary, the particulars which are given prove that fernand
 mondego, raised by ali pasha to the rank of governor-general, is no
 other than count fernand of morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you
 had done me, in admitting to your friendship, i hastened to you.”
 
albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both hands,
 as if to prevent the light from reaching him.
 
“i hastened to you,” continued beauchamp, “to tell you, albert, that in
 this changing age, the faults of father cannot revert upon his
 children. few have passed through this revolutionary period, in the
 midst of which we were born, without some stain of infamy or blood to
 soil the uniform of the soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. now i
 have these proofs, albert, and i am in your confidence, human power
 can force to duel which your own conscience would reproach you
 with as criminal, but i come to offer you what you can longer demand
 of me. do you wish these proofs, these attestations, which i alone
 possess, to be destroyed? do you wish this frightful secret to remain
 with us? confided to me, it shall never escape my lips; say, albert, my
 friend, do you wish it?”
 
albert threw himself on beauchamp’s neck.
 
“ah, noble fellow!” cried he.
 
“take these,” said beauchamp, presenting the papers to albert.
 
albert seized them with convulsive hand, tore them in pieces, and
 trembling lest the least vestige should escape and one day appear to
 confront him, approached the wax-light, always kept burning for
 cigars, and burned every fragment.
 
“dear, excellent friend,” murmured albert, still burning the papers.
 
“let all be forgotten as sorrowful dream,” said beauchamp; “let it
 vanish as the last sparks from the blackened paper, and disappear as
 the smoke from those silent ashes.”
 
“yes, yes,” said albert, “and may there remain only the eternal
 friendship which i promised to my deliverer, which shall be transmitted
 to our children’s children, and shall always remind that i owe my
 life and the honor of my name to you,—for had this been known, oh,
 beauchamp, i should have destroyed myself; or,—no, my poor mother! i
 could not have killed her by the same blow,—i should have fled from my
 country.”
 
“dear albert,” said beauchamp. but this sudden and factitious joy soon
 forsook the young man, and was succeeded by still greater grief.
 
“well,” said beauchamp, “what still oppresses you, my friend?”
 
40178m
 


“i am broken-hearted,” said albert. “listen, beauchamp! i cannot thus,
 in moment relinquish the respect, the confidence, and pride with
 which father’s untarnished name inspires son. oh, beauchamp,
 beauchamp, how shall i now approach mine? shall i draw back my forehead
 from his embrace, or withhold my hand from his? i am the most wretched
 of men. ah, my mother, my poor mother!” said albert, gazing through his
 tears at his mother’s portrait; “if you know this, how much must you
 suffer!”
 
“come,” said beauchamp, taking both his hands, “take courage, my
 friend.”
 
“but how came that first note to be inserted in your journal? some
 unknown enemy—an invisible foe—has done this.”
 
“the more must you fortify yourself, albert. let trace of emotion be
 visible on your countenance, bear your grief as the cloud bears within
 it ruin and death—a fatal secret, known only when the storm bursts. go,
 my friend, reserve your strength for the moment when the crash shall
 come.”
 
40179m
 


“you think, then, all is not over yet?” said albert, horror-stricken.
 
“i think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible. by the way——”
 
“what?” said albert, seeing that beauchamp hesitated.
 
“are you going to marry mademoiselle danglars?”
 
“why do you ask now?”
 
“because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement is connected with
 the person of whom we were speaking.”
 
“how?” said albert, whose brow reddened; “you think m. danglars——”
 
“i ask you only how your engagement stands? pray put construction on
 my words i do not mean they should convey, and give them undue
 weight.”
 
“no.” said albert, “the engagement is broken off.”
 
“well,” said beauchamp. then, seeing the young man was about to relapse
 into melancholy, “let us go out, albert,” said he; “a ride in the wood
 in the phaeton, or on horseback, will refresh you; we will then return
 to breakfast, and you shall attend to your affairs, and i to mine.”
 
“willingly,” said albert; “but let us walk. i think little exertion
 would do good.”
 
the two friends walked out on the fortress. when they arrived at the
 madeleine:
 
“since we are out,” said beauchamp, “let us call on m. monte cristo;
 is admirably adapted to revive one’s spirits, because never
 interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask questions are the best
 comforters.”
 
“gladly,” said albert; “let us call—i love him.”
 


chapter 85. the journey
 
monte cristo uttered joyful exclamation on seeing the young men
 together. “ah, ha!” said he, “i hope all is over, explained and
 settled.”
 
“yes,” said beauchamp; “the absurd reports have died away, and should
 they be renewed, i would be the first to oppose them; so let us speak
 more of it.”
 
“albert will tell you,” replied the count “that i gave him the same
 advice. look,” added he. “i am finishing the most execrable morning’s
 work.”
 
“what is it?” said albert; “arranging your papers, apparently.”
 
“my papers, thank god, no,—my papers are all in capital order, because
 i have none; but m. cavalcanti’s.”
 
“m. cavalcanti’s?” asked beauchamp.
 
“yes; do you not know that this is young man whom the count is
 introducing?” said morcerf.
 
“let us not misunderstand each other,” replied monte cristo; “i
 introduce one, and certainly not m. cavalcanti.”
 
“and who,” said albert with forced smile, “is to marry mademoiselle
 danglars instead of me, which grieves cruelly.”
 
“what? cavalcanti is going to marry mademoiselle danglars?” asked
 beauchamp.
 
“certainly! do you come from the end of the world?” said monte cristo;
 “you, journalist, the husband of renown? it is the talk of all
 paris.”
 
“and you, count, have made this match?” asked beauchamp.
 
“i? silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report. i make a
 match? no, you do not know me; i have done all in my power to oppose
 it.”
 
“ah, i understand,” said beauchamp, “on our friend albert’s account.”
 
“on my account?” said the young man; “oh, no, indeed, the count will do
 the justice to assert that i have, on the contrary, always entreated
 him to break off my engagement, and happily it is ended. the count
 pretends i have not him to thank;—so be it—i will erect an altar _deo
 ignoto_.”
 
“listen,” said monte cristo; “i have had little to do with it, for i am
 at variance both with the father-in-law and the young man; there is
 only mademoiselle eugénie, who appears but little charmed with the
 thoughts of matrimony, and who, seeing how little i was disposed to
 persuade her to renounce her dear liberty, retains any affection for
 me.”
 
“and do you say this wedding is at hand?”
 
“oh, yes, in spite of all i could say. i do not know the young man; he
 is said to be of good family and rich, but i never trust to vague
 assertions. i have warned m. danglars of it till i am tired, but is
 fascinated with his luccanese. i have even informed him of a
 circumstance i consider very serious; the young man was either charmed
 by his nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost by his tutor, i scarcely know
 which. but i do know his father lost sight of him for more than ten
 years; what did during these ten years, god only knows. well, all
 that was useless. they have commissioned to write to the major to
 demand papers, and here they are. i send them, but like pilate—washing
 my hands.”
 
“and what does mademoiselle d’armilly say to you for robbing her of her
 pupil?”
 
“oh, well, i don’t know; but i understand that she is going to italy.
 madame danglars asked for letters of recommendation for the
 _impresari_; i gave her few lines for the director of the valle
 theatre, who is under some obligation to me. but what is the matter,
 albert? you look dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with
 mademoiselle eugénie?”
 
“i am not aware of it,” said albert, smiling sorrowfully. beauchamp
 turned to look at some paintings.
 
“but,” continued monte cristo, “you are not in your usual spirits?”
 
“i have dreadful headache,” said albert.
 
“well, my dear viscount,” said monte cristo, “i have an infallible
 remedy to propose to you.”
 
“what is that?” asked the young man.
 
“a change.”
 
“indeed?” said albert.
 
“yes; and as i am just now excessively annoyed, i shall go from home.
 shall we go together?”
 
“you annoyed, count?” said beauchamp; “and by what?”
 
“ah, you think very lightly of it; i should like to see you with a
 brief preparing in your house.”
 
“what brief?”
 
“the one m. villefort is preparing against my amiable assassin—some
 brigand escaped from the gallows apparently.”
 
“true,” said beauchamp; “i saw it in the paper. who is this
 caderousse?”
 
“some provençal, it appears. m. villefort heard of him at
 marseilles, and m. danglars recollects having seen him. consequently,
 the procureur is very active in the affair, and the prefect of police
 very much interested; and, thanks to that interest, for which i am very
 grateful, they send all the robbers of paris and the neighborhood,
 under pretence of their being caderousse’s murderers, so that in three
 months, if this continues, every robber and assassin in france will
 have the plan of my house at his fingers’ ends. i am resolved to desert
 them and go to some remote corner of the earth, and shall be happy if
 you will accompany me, viscount.”
 
“willingly.”
 
“then it is settled?”
 
“yes, but where?”
 
“i have told you, where the air is pure, where every sound soothes,
 where one is sure to be humbled, however proud may be his nature. i
 love that humiliation, i, who am master of the universe, as was
 augustus.”
 
“but where are you really going?”
 
“to sea, viscount; you know i am sailor. i was rocked when an infant
 in the arms of old ocean, and on the bosom of the beautiful amphitrite;
 i have sported with the green mantle of the one and the azure robe of
 the other; i love the as mistress, and pine if i do not often see
 her.”
 
“let us go, count.”
 
“to sea?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you accept my proposal?”
 
“i do.”
 
“well, viscount, there will be in my courtyard this evening good
 travelling britzka, with four post-horses, in which one may rest as in
 bed. m. beauchamp, it holds four very well, will you accompany us?”
 
“thank you, i have just returned from sea.”
 
“what? you have been to sea?”
 
“yes; i have just made little excursion to the borromean islands18.”
 
“what of that? come with us,” said albert.
 
“no, dear morcerf; you know i only refuse when the thing is impossible.
 besides, it is important,” added in low tone, “that i should
 remain in paris just now to watch the paper.”
 
“ah, you are good and an excellent friend,” said albert; “yes, you
 are right; watch, watch, beauchamp, and try to discover the enemy who
 made this disclosure.”
 
albert and beauchamp parted, the last pressure of their hands
 expressing what their tongues could not before stranger.
 
“beauchamp is worthy fellow,” said monte cristo, when the journalist
 was gone; “is not, albert?”
 
“yes, and sincere friend; i love him devotedly. but now we are
 alone,—although it is immaterial to me,—where are we going?”
 
“into normandy, if you like.”
 
“delightful; shall we be quite retired? have society, neighbors?”
 
“our companions will be riding-horses, dogs to hunt with, and a
 fishing-boat.”
 
“exactly what i wish for; i will apprise my mother of my intention, and
 return to you.”
 
“but shall you be allowed to go into normandy?”
 
“i may go where i please.”
 
“yes, i am aware you may go alone, since i once met you in italy—but to
 accompany the mysterious monte cristo?”
 
“you forget, count, that i have often told you of the deep interest my
 mother takes in you.”
 
“‘woman is fickle.’ said francis i.; ‘woman is like wave of the sea,’
 said shakespeare; both the great king and the great poet ought to have
 known woman’s nature well.”
 
“woman’s, yes; my mother is not woman, but _a_ woman.”
 
“as i am only humble foreigner, you must pardon if i do not
 understand all the subtle refinements of your language.”
 
“what i mean to say is, that my mother is not quick to give her
 confidence, but when she does she never changes.”
 
“ah, yes, indeed,” said monte cristo with sigh; “and do you think she
 is in the least interested in me?”
 
“i repeat it, you must really be very strange and superior man, for
 my mother is so absorbed by the interest you have excited, that when i
 am with her she speaks of one else.”
 
“and does she try to make you dislike me?”
 
“on the contrary, she often says, ‘morcerf, i believe the count has a
 noble nature; try to gain his esteem.’”
 
“indeed?” said monte cristo, sighing.
 
“you see, then,” said albert, “that instead of opposing, she will
 encourage me.”
 
“adieu, then, until five o’clock; be punctual, and we shall arrive at
 twelve or one.”
 
“at tréport?”
 
“yes; or in the neighborhood.”
 
“but can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?”
 
“easily,” said monte cristo.
 
“you are certainly prodigy; you will soon not only surpass the
 railway, which would not be very difficult in france, but even the
 telegraph.”
 
“but, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in less than seven
 or eight hours, do not keep waiting.”
 
“do not fear, i have little to prepare.”
 
monte cristo smiled as nodded to albert, then remained moment
 absorbed in deep meditation. but passing his hand across his forehead
 as if to dispel his reverie, rang the bell twice and bertuccio
 entered.
 
“bertuccio,” said he, “i intend going this evening to normandy, instead
 of tomorrow or the next day. you will have sufficient time before five
 o’clock; despatch messenger to apprise the grooms at the first
 station. m. morcerf will accompany me.”
 
bertuccio obeyed and despatched courier to pontoise to say the
 travelling-carriage would arrive at six o’clock. from pontoise another
 express was sent to the next stage, and in six hours all the horses
 stationed on the road were ready.
 
before his departure, the count went to haydée’s apartments, told her
 his intention, and resigned everything to her care.
 
albert was punctual. the journey soon became interesting from its
 rapidity, of which morcerf had formed previous idea.
 
“truly,” said monte cristo, “with your post-horses going at the rate of
 two leagues an hour, and that absurd law that one traveller shall not
 pass another without permission, so that an invalid or ill-tempered
 traveller may detain those who are well and active, it is impossible to
 move; i escape this annoyance by travelling with my own postilion and
 horses; do i not, ali?”
 
the count put his head out of the window and whistled, and the horses
 appeared to fly. the carriage rolled with thundering noise over the
 pavement, and everyone turned to notice the dazzling meteor. ali,
 smiling, repeated the sound, grasped the reins with firm hand, and
 spurred his horses, whose beautiful manes floated in the breeze. this
 child of the desert was in his element, and with his black face and
 sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud of dust raised, like the
 genius of the simoom and the god of the hurricane.
 
“i never knew till now the delight of speed,” said morcerf, and the
 last cloud disappeared from his brow; “but where the devil do you get
 such horses? are they made to order?”
 
“precisely,” said the count; “six years since i bought horse in
 hungary remarkable for its swiftness. the thirty-two that we shall use
 tonight are its progeny; they are all entirely black, with the
 exception of star upon the forehead.”
 
“that is perfectly admirable; but what do you do, count, with all these
 horses?”
 
“you see, i travel with them.”
 
“but you are not always travelling.”
 
“when i longer require them, bertuccio will sell them, and he
 expects to realize thirty or forty thousand francs by the sale.”
 
“but monarch in europe will be wealthy enough to purchase them.”
 
“then will sell them to some eastern vizier, who will empty his
 coffers to purchase them, and refill them by applying the bastinado to
 his subjects.”
 
“count, may i suggest one idea to you?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“it is that, next to you, bertuccio must be the richest gentleman in
 europe.”
 
“you are mistaken, viscount; i believe has not franc in his
 possession.”
 
“then must be wonder. my dear count, if you tell many more
 marvellous things, i warn you i shall not believe them.”
 
“i countenance nothing that is marvellous, m. albert. tell me, why does
 steward rob his master?”
 
“because, i suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the love of
 robbing.”
 
“you are mistaken; it is because has wife and family, and
 ambitious desires for himself and them. also because is not sure of
 always retaining his situation, and wishes to provide for the future.
 now, m. bertuccio is alone in the world; uses my property without
 accounting for the use makes of it; is sure never to leave my
 service.”
 
“why?”
 
“because i should never get better.”
 
“probabilities are deceptive.”
 
“but i deal in certainties; is the best servant over whom one has
 the power of life and death.”
 
“do you possess that right over bertuccio?”
 
“yes.”
 
there are words which close conversation with an iron door; such was
 the count’s “yes.”
 
the whole journey was performed with equal rapidity; the thirty-two
 horses, dispersed over seven stages, brought them to their destination
 in eight hours. at midnight they arrived at the gate of beautiful
 park. the porter was in attendance; had been apprised by the groom
 of the last stage of the count’s approach. at half past two in the
 morning morcerf was conducted to his apartments, where bath and
 supper were prepared. the servant who had travelled at the back of the
 carriage waited on him; baptistin, who rode in front, attended the
 count.
 
albert bathed, took his supper, and went to bed. all night was
 lulled by the melancholy noise of the surf. on rising, went to his
 window, which opened on terrace, having the in front, and at the
 back pretty park bounded by small forest.
 
in creek lay little sloop, with narrow keel and high masts,
 bearing on its flag the monte cristo arms which were mountain _or_,
 on _azure_, with cross _gules_ in chief which might be an
 allusion to his name that recalled calvary, the mount rendered by our
 lord’s passion more precious than gold, and to the degrading cross
 which his blood had rendered holy; or it might be some personal
 remembrance of suffering and regeneration buried in the night of this
 mysterious personage’s past life.
 
around the schooner lay number of small fishing-boats belonging to
 the fishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting
 orders from their queen. there, as in every spot where monte cristo
 stopped, if but for two days, luxury abounded and life went on with the
 utmost ease.
 
albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for
 hunting; lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious
 instruments the english—eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are
 patient and sluggish—have invented for fishing. the day passed in
 pursuing those exercises in which monte cristo excelled. they killed a
 dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout in the stream, dined in a
 summer-house overlooking the ocean, and took tea in the library.
 
towards the evening of the third day. albert, completely exhausted with
 the exercise which invigorated monte cristo, was sleeping in an
 armchair near the window, while the count was designing with his
 architect the plan of conservatory in his house, when the sound of a
 horse at full speed on the high road made albert look up. was
 disagreeably surprised to see his own valet chambre, whom had not
 brought, that might not inconvenience monte cristo.
 
40188m
 


“florentin here!” cried he, starting up; “is my mother ill?” and he
 hastened to the door. monte cristo watched and saw him approach the
 valet, who drew small sealed parcel from his pocket, containing a
 newspaper and letter.
 
“from whom is this?” said eagerly.
 
“from m. beauchamp,” replied florentin.
 
“did send you?”
 
“yes, sir; sent for to his house, gave money for my journey,
 procured horse, and made promise not to stop till i had reached
 you, i have come in fifteen hours.”
 
albert opened the letter with fear, uttered shriek on reading the
 first line, and seized the paper. his sight was dimmed, his legs sank
 under him, and would have fallen had not florentin supported him.
 
“poor young man,” said monte cristo in low voice; “it is then true
 that the of the father shall fall on the children to the third and
 fourth generation.”
 
meanwhile albert had revived, and, continuing to read, threw back
 his head, saying:
 
“florentin, is your horse fit to return immediately?”
 
“it is poor, lame post-horse.”
 
“in what state was the house when you left?”
 
“all was quiet, but on returning from m. beauchamp’s, i found madame in
 tears; she had sent for to know when you would return. i told her my
 orders from m. beauchamp; she first extended her arms to prevent me,
 but after moment’s reflection, ‘yes, go, florentin,’ said she, ‘and
 may come quickly.’”
 
“yes, my mother,” said albert, “i will return, and woe to the infamous
 wretch! but first of all i must get there.”
 
went back to the room where had left monte cristo. five minutes
 had sufficed to make complete transformation in his appearance. his
 voice had become rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles;
 his eyes burned under the blue-veined lids, and tottered like a
 drunken man.
 
“count,” said he, “i thank you for your hospitality, which i would
 gladly have enjoyed longer; but i must return to paris.”
 
“what has happened?”
 
“a great misfortune, more important to than life. don’t question me,
 i beg of you, but lend horse.”
 
“my stables are at your command, viscount; but you will kill yourself
 by riding on horseback. take post-chaise or carriage.”
 
“no, it would delay me, and i need the fatigue you warn of; it will
 do good.”
 
albert reeled as if had been shot, and fell on chair near the
 door. monte cristo did not see this second manifestation of physical
 exhaustion; was at the window, calling:
 
“ali, horse for m. morcerf—quick! is in hurry!”
 
40190m
 


these words restored albert; darted from the room, followed by the
 count.
 
“thank you!” cried he, throwing himself on his horse.
 
“return as soon as you can, florentin. must i use any password to
 procure horse?”
 
“only dismount; another will be immediately saddled.”
 
albert hesitated moment. “you may think my departure strange and
 foolish,” said the young man; “you do not know how paragraph in a
 newspaper may exasperate one. read that,” said he, “when i am gone,
 that you may not be witness of my anger.”
 
while the count picked up the paper put spurs to his horse, which
 leaped in astonishment at such an unusual stimulus, and shot away with
 the rapidity of an arrow. the count watched him with feeling of
 compassion, and when had completely disappeared, read as follows:
 
“the french officer in the service of ali pasha of yanina alluded to
 three weeks since in _l’impartial_, who not only surrendered the castle
 of yanina, but sold his benefactor to the turks, styled himself truly
 at that time fernand, as our esteemed contemporary states; but has
 since added to his christian name title of nobility and family
 name. now calls himself the count of morcerf, and ranks among the
 peers.”
 
thus the terrible secret, which beauchamp had so generously destroyed,
 appeared again like an armed phantom; and another paper, deriving its
 information from some malicious source, had published two days after
 albert’s departure for normandy the few lines which had rendered the
 unfortunate young man almost crazy.
 


chapter 86. the trial
 
at eight o’clock in the morning albert had arrived at beauchamp’s door.
 the valet chambre had received orders to usher him in at once.
 beauchamp was in his bath.
 
“here i am,” albert said.
 
“well, my poor friend,” replied beauchamp, “i expected you.”
 
“i need not say i think you are too faithful and too kind to have
 spoken of that painful circumstance. your having sent for is another
 proof of your affection. so, without losing time, tell me, have you the
 slightest idea whence this terrible blow proceeds?”
 
“i think i have some clew.”
 
“but first tell all the particulars of this shameful plot.”
 
beauchamp proceeded to relate to the young man, who was overwhelmed
 with shame and grief, the following facts. two days previously, the
 article had appeared in another paper besides _ l’impartial_, and, what
 was more serious, one that was well known as government paper.
 beauchamp was breakfasting when read the paragraph. sent
 immediately for cabriolet, and hastened to the publisher’s office.
 although professing diametrically opposite principles from those of the
 editor of the other paper, beauchamp—as it sometimes, we may say often,
 happens—was his intimate friend. the editor was reading, with apparent
 delight, leading article in the same paper on beet-sugar, probably a
 composition of his own.
 
“ah, _pardieu!_” said beauchamp, “with the paper in your hand, my
 friend, i need not tell you the cause of my visit.”
 
“are you interested in the sugar question?” asked the editor of the
 ministerial paper.
 
“no,” replied beauchamp, “i have not considered the question; totally
 different subject interests me.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“the article relative to morcerf.”
 
“indeed? is it not curious affair?”
 
“so curious, that i think you are running great risk of prosecution
 for defamation of character.”
 
“not at all; we have received with the information all the requisite
 proofs, and we are quite sure m. morcerf will not raise his voice
 against us; besides, it is rendering service to one’s country to
 denounce these wretched criminals who are unworthy of the honor
 bestowed on them.”
 
beauchamp was thunderstruck.
 
“who, then, has so correctly informed you?” asked he; “for my paper,
 which gave the first information on the subject, has been obliged to
 stop for want of proof; and yet we are more interested than you in
 exposing m. morcerf, as is peer of france, and we are of the
 opposition.”
 
“oh, that is very simple; we have not sought to scandalize. this news
 was brought to us. man arrived yesterday from yanina, bringing a
 formidable array of documents; and when we hesitated to publish the
 accusatory article, told us it should be inserted in some other
 paper.”
 
beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit, and left the
 office to despatch courier to morcerf. but had been unable to send
 to albert the following particulars, as the events had transpired after
 the messenger’s departure; namely, that the same day great agitation
 was manifest in the house of peers among the usually calm members of
 that dignified assembly. everyone had arrived almost before the usual
 hour, and was conversing on the melancholy event which was to attract
 the attention of the public towards one of their most illustrious
 colleagues. some were perusing the article, others making comments and
 recalling circumstances which substantiated the charges still more.
 
the count of morcerf was favorite with his colleagues. like all
 upstarts, had had recourse to great deal of haughtiness to
 maintain his position. the true nobility laughed at him, the talented
 repelled him, and the honorable instinctively despised him. was, in
 fact, in the unhappy position of the victim marked for sacrifice; the
 finger of god once pointed at him, everyone was prepared to raise the
 hue and cry.
 
the count of morcerf alone was ignorant of the news. did not take in
 the paper containing the defamatory article, and had passed the morning
 in writing letters and in trying horse. arrived at his usual hour,
 with proud look and insolent demeanor; alighted, passed through
 the corridors, and entered the house without observing the hesitation
 of the door-keepers or the coolness of his colleagues.
 
40194m
 


business had already been going on for half an hour when entered.
 everyone held the accusing paper, but, as usual, one liked to take
 upon himself the responsibility of the attack. at length an honorable
 peer, morcerf’s acknowledged enemy, ascended the tribune with that
 solemnity which announced that the expected moment had arrived. there
 was an impressive silence; morcerf alone knew not why such profound
 attention was given to an orator who was not always listened to with so
 much complacency.
 
the count did not notice the introduction, in which the speaker
 announced that his communication would be of that vital importance that
 it demanded the undivided attention of the house; but at the mention of
 yanina and colonel fernand, turned so frightfully pale that every
 member shuddered and fixed his eyes upon him. moral wounds have this
 peculiarity,—they may be hidden, but they never close; always painful,
 always ready to bleed when touched, they remain fresh and open in the
 heart.
 
the article having been read during the painful hush that followed, a
 universal shudder pervaded the assembly, and immediately the closest
 attention was given to the orator as resumed his remarks. stated
 his scruples and the difficulties of the case; it was the honor of m.
 morcerf, and that of the whole house, proposed to defend, by
 provoking debate on personal questions, which are always such painful
 themes of discussion. concluded by calling for an investigation,
 which might dispose of the calumnious report before it had time to
 spread, and restore m. morcerf to the position had long held in
 public opinion.
 
morcerf was so completely overwhelmed by this great and unexpected
 calamity that could scarcely stammer few words as looked around
 on the assembly. this timidity, which might proceed from the
 astonishment of innocence as well as the shame of guilt, conciliated
 some in his favor; for men who are truly generous are always ready to
 compassionate when the misfortune of their enemy surpasses the limits
 of their hatred.
 
the president put it to the vote, and it was decided that the
 investigation should take place. the count was asked what time he
 required to prepare his defence. morcerf’s courage had revived when he
 found himself alive after this horrible blow.
 
“my lords,” answered he, “it is not by time i could repel the attack
 made on by enemies unknown to me, and, doubtless, hidden in
 obscurity; it is immediately, and by thunderbolt, that i must repel
 the flash of lightning which, for moment, startled me. oh, that i
 could, instead of taking up this defence, shed my last drop of blood to
 prove to my noble colleagues that i am their equal in worth.”
 
these words made favorable impression on behalf of the accused.
 
“i demand, then, that the examination shall take place as soon as
 possible, and i will furnish the house with all necessary information.”
 
“what day do you fix?” asked the president.
 
“today i am at your service,” replied the count.
 
the president rang the bell. “does the house approve that the
 examination should take place today?”
 
40196m
 


“yes,” was the unanimous answer.
 
committee of twelve members was chosen to examine the proofs brought
 forward by morcerf. the investigation would begin at eight o’clock that
 evening in the committee-room, and if postponement were necessary, the
 proceedings would be resumed each evening at the same hour. morcerf
 asked leave to retire; had to collect the documents had long been
 preparing against this storm, which his sagacity had foreseen.
 
beauchamp related to the young man all the facts we have just narrated;
 his story, however, had over ours all the advantage of the animation of
 living things over the coldness of dead things.
 
albert listened, trembling now with hope, then with anger, and then
 again with shame, for from beauchamp’s confidence knew his father
 was guilty, and asked himself how, since was guilty, could
 prove his innocence. beauchamp hesitated to continue his narrative.
 
“what next?” asked albert.
 
“what next? my friend, you impose painful task on me. must you know
 all?”
 
“absolutely; and rather from your lips than another’s.”
 
“muster up all your courage, then, for never have you required it
 more.”
 
albert passed his hand over his forehead, as if to try his strength, as
 man who is preparing to defend his life proves his shield and bends
 his sword. thought himself strong enough, for mistook fever for
 energy. “go on,” said he.
 
“the evening arrived; all paris was in expectation. many said your
 father had only to show himself to crush the charge against him; many
 others said would not appear; while some asserted that they had seen
 him start for brussels; and others went to the police-office to inquire
 if had taken out passport. i used all my influence with one of the
 committee, young peer of my acquaintance, to get admission to one of
 the galleries. called for at seven o’clock, and, before anyone
 had arrived, asked one of the door-keepers to place in box. i was
 concealed by column, and might witness the whole of the terrible
 scene which was about to take place. at eight o’clock all were in their
 places, and m. morcerf entered at the last stroke. held some
 papers in his hand; his countenance was calm, and his step firm, and he
 was dressed with great care in his military uniform, which was buttoned
 completely up to the chin. his presence produced good effect. the
 committee was made up of liberals, several of whom came forward to
 shake hands with him.”
 
albert felt his heart bursting at these particulars, but gratitude
 mingled with his sorrow: would gladly have embraced those who had
 given his father this proof of esteem at moment when his honor was so
 powerfully attacked.
 
“at this moment one of the door-keepers brought in letter for the
 president. ‘you are at liberty to speak, m. morcerf,’ said the
 president, as unsealed the letter; and the count began his defence,
 i assure you, albert, in most eloquent and skilful manner. he
 produced documents proving that the vizier of yanina had up to the last
 moment honored him with his entire confidence, since had interested
 him with negotiation of life and death with the emperor. produced
 the ring, his mark of authority, with which ali pasha generally sealed
 his letters, and which the latter had given him, that might, on his
 return at any hour of the day or night, gain access to the presence,
 even in the harem. unfortunately, the negotiation failed, and when he
 returned to defend his benefactor, was dead. ‘but,’ said the count,
 ‘so great was ali pasha’s confidence, that on his death-bed resigned
 his favorite mistress and her daughter to my care.’”
 
albert started on hearing these words; the history of haydée recurred
 to him, and remembered what she had said of that message and the
 ring, and the manner in which she had been sold and made slave.
 
“and what effect did this discourse produce?” anxiously inquired
 albert.
 
“i acknowledge it affected me, and, indeed, all the committee also,”
 said beauchamp.
 
“meanwhile, the president carelessly opened the letter which had been
 brought to him; but the first lines aroused his attention; read them
 again and again, and fixing his eyes on m. morcerf, ‘count,’ said
 he, ‘you have said that the vizier of yanina confided his wife and
 daughter to your care?’—‘yes, sir,’ replied morcerf; ‘but in that, like
 all the rest, misfortune pursued me. on my return, vasiliki and her
 daughter haydée had disappeared.’—‘did you know them?’—‘my intimacy
 with the pasha and his unlimited confidence had gained an
 introduction to them, and i had seen them above twenty times.’
 
“‘have you any idea what became of them?’—‘yes, sir; i heard they had
 fallen victims to their sorrow, and, perhaps, to their poverty. i was
 not rich; my life was in constant danger; i could not seek them, to my
 great regret.’ the president frowned imperceptibly. ‘gentlemen,’ said
 he, ‘you have heard the comte morcerf’s defence. can you, sir,
 produce any witnesses to the truth of what you have asserted?’—‘alas,
 no, monsieur,’ replied the count; ‘all those who surrounded the vizier,
 or who knew at his court, are either dead or gone away, i know not
 where. i believe that i alone, of all my countrymen, survived that
 dreadful war. i have only the letters of ali tepelini, which i have
 placed before you; the ring, token of his good-will, which is here;
 and, lastly, the most convincing proof i can offer, after an anonymous
 attack, and that is the absence of any witness against my veracity and
 the purity of my military life.’
 
“a murmur of approbation ran through the assembly; and at this moment,
 albert, had nothing more transpired, your father’s cause had been
 gained. it only remained to put it to the vote, when the president
 resumed: ‘gentlemen and you, monsieur,—you will not be displeased, i
 presume, to listen to one who calls himself very important witness,
 and who has just presented himself. is, doubtless, come to prove the
 perfect innocence of our colleague. here is letter i have just
 received on the subject; shall it be read, or shall it be passed over?
 and shall we take notice of this incident?’ m. morcerf turned
 pale, and clenched his hands on the papers held. the committee
 decided to hear the letter; the count was thoughtful and silent. the
 president read:
 
“‘mr. president,—i can furnish the committee of inquiry into the
 conduct of the lieutenant-general the count of morcerf in epirus and in
 macedonia with important particulars.’
 
“the president paused, and the count turned pale. the president looked
 at his auditors. ‘proceed,’ was heard on all sides. the president
 resumed:
 
“‘i was on the spot at the death of ali pasha. i was present during his
 last moments. i know what is become of vasiliki and haydée. i am at the
 command of the committee, and even claim the honor of being heard. i
 shall be in the lobby when this note is delivered to you.’
 
“‘and who is this witness, or rather this enemy?’ asked the count, in a
 tone in which there was visible alteration. ‘we shall know, sir,’
 replied the president. ‘is the committee willing to hear this
 witness?’—‘yes, yes,’ they all said at once. the door-keeper was
 called. ‘is there anyone in the lobby?’ said the president.
 
“‘yes, sir.’—‘who is it?’—‘a woman, accompanied by servant.’ everyone
 looked at his neighbor. ‘bring her in,’ said the president. five
 minutes after the door-keeper again appeared; all eyes were fixed on
 the door, and i,” said beauchamp, “shared the general expectation and
 anxiety. behind the door-keeper walked woman enveloped in large
 veil, which completely concealed her. it was evident, from her figure
 and the perfumes she had about her, that she was young and fastidious
 in her tastes, but that was all. the president requested her to throw
 aside her veil, and it was then seen that she was dressed in the
 grecian costume, and was remarkably beautiful.”
 
“ah,” said albert, “it was she.”
 
“who?”
 
“haydée.”
 
“who told you that?”
 
“alas, i guess it. but go on, beauchamp. you see i am calm and strong.
 and yet we must be drawing near the disclosure.”
 
“m. morcerf,” continued beauchamp, “looked at this woman with
 surprise and terror. her lips were about to pass his sentence of life
 or death. to the committee the adventure was so extraordinary and
 curious, that the interest they had felt for the count’s safety became
 now quite secondary matter. the president himself advanced to place a
 seat for the young lady; but she declined availing herself of it. as
 for the count, had fallen on his chair; it was evident that his legs
 refused to support him.
 
“‘madame,’ said the president, ‘you have engaged to furnish the
 committee with some important particulars respecting the affair at
 yanina, and you have stated that you were an eyewitness of the
 event.’—‘i was, indeed,’ said the stranger, with tone of sweet
 melancholy, and with the sonorous voice peculiar to the east.
 
“‘but allow to say that you must have been very young then.’—‘i was
 four years old; but as those events deeply concerned me, not single
 detail has escaped my memory.’—‘in what manner could these events
 concern you? and who are you, that they should have made so deep an
 impression on you?’—‘on them depended my father’s life,’ replied she.
 ‘i am haydée, the daughter of ali tepelini, pasha of yanina, and of
 vasiliki, his beloved wife.’
 
40202m
 


“the blush of mingled pride and modesty which suddenly suffused the
 cheeks of the young woman, the brilliancy of her eye, and her highly
 important communication, produced an indescribable effect on the
 assembly. as for the count, could not have been more overwhelmed if
 thunderbolt had fallen at his feet and opened an immense gulf before
 him.
 
“‘madame,’ replied the president, bowing with profound respect, ‘allow
 to ask one question; it shall be the last: can you prove the
 authenticity of what you have now stated?’
 
“‘i can, sir,’ said haydée, drawing from under her veil satin satchel
 highly perfumed; ‘for here is the register of my birth, signed by my
 father and his principal officers, and that of my baptism, my father
 having consented to my being brought up in my mother’s faith,—this
 latter has been sealed by the grand primate of macedonia and epirus;
 and lastly (and perhaps the most important), the record of the sale of
 my person and that of my mother to the armenian merchant el-kobbir, by
 the french officer, who, in his infamous bargain with the porte, had
 reserved as his part of the booty the wife and daughter of his
 benefactor, whom sold for the sum of four hundred thousand francs.’
 greenish pallor spread over the count’s cheeks, and his eyes became
 bloodshot at these terrible imputations, which were listened to by the
 assembly with ominous silence.
 
“haydée, still calm, but with calmness more dreadful than the anger
 of another would have been, handed to the president the record of her
 sale, written in arabic. it had been supposed some of the papers might
 be in the arabian, romaic, or turkish language, and the interpreter of
 the house was in attendance. one of the noble peers, who was familiar
 with the arabic language, having studied it during the famous egyptian
 campaign, followed with his eye as the translator read aloud:
 
“‘i, el-kobbir, slave-merchant, and purveyor of the harem of his
 highness, acknowledge having received for transmission to the sublime
 emperor, from the french lord, the count of monte cristo, an emerald
 valued at eight hundred thousand francs; as the ransom of young
 christian slave of eleven years of age, named haydée, the acknowledged
 daughter of the late lord ali tepelini, pasha of yanina, and of
 vasiliki, his favorite; she having been sold to seven years
 previously, with her mother, who had died on arriving at
 constantinople, by french colonel in the service of the vizier ali
 tepelini, named fernand mondego. the above-mentioned purchase was made
 on his highness’s account, whose mandate i had, for the sum of four
 hundred thousand francs.
 
“‘given at constantinople, by authority of his highness, in the year
 1247 of the hegira.
 
“‘signed, el-kobbir.’
 
“‘that this record should have all due authority, it shall bear the
 imperial seal, which the vendor is bound to have affixed to it.’
 
“near the merchant’s signature there was, indeed, the seal of the
 sublime emperor. dreadful silence followed the reading of this
 document; the count could only stare, and his gaze, fixed as if
 unconsciously on haydée, seemed one of fire and blood. ‘madame,’ said
 the president, ‘may reference be made to the count of monte cristo, who
 is now, i believe, in paris?’
 
“‘sir,’ replied haydée, ‘the count of monte cristo, my foster-father,
 has been in normandy the last three days.’
 
“‘who, then, has counselled you to take this step, one for which the
 court is deeply indebted to you, and which is perfectly natural,
 considering your birth and your misfortunes?’—‘sir,’ replied haydée, ‘i
 have been led to take this step from feeling of respect and grief.
 although christian, may god forgive me, i have always sought to
 revenge my illustrious father. since i set my foot in france, and knew
 the traitor lived in paris, i have watched carefully. i live retired in
 the house of my noble protector, but i do it from choice. i love
 retirement and silence, because i can live with my thoughts and
 recollections of past days. but the count of monte cristo surrounds me
 with every paternal care, and i am ignorant of nothing which passes in
 the world. i learn all in the silence of my apartments,—for instance, i
 see all the newspapers, every periodical, as well as every new piece of
 music; and by thus watching the course of the life of others, i learned
 what had transpired this morning in the house of peers, and what was to
 take place this evening; then i wrote.’
 
40204m
 


“‘then,’ remarked the president, ‘the count of monte cristo knows
 nothing of your present proceedings?’—‘he is quite unaware of them, and
 i have but one fear, which is that should disapprove of what i have
 done. but it is glorious day for me,’ continued the young girl,
 raising her ardent gaze to heaven, ‘that on which i find at last an
 opportunity of avenging my father!’
 
“the count had not uttered one word the whole of this time. his
 colleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied his prospects, blighted
 under the perfumed breath of woman. his misery was depicted in
 sinister lines on his countenance. ‘m. morcerf,’ said the president,
 ‘do you recognize this lady as the daughter of ali tepelini, pasha of
 yanina?’—‘no,’ said morcerf, attempting to rise, ‘it is base plot,
 contrived by my enemies.’ haydée, whose eyes had been fixed on the
 door, as if expecting someone, turned hastily, and, seeing the count
 standing, shrieked, ‘you do not know me?’ said she. ‘well, i
 fortunately recognize you! you are fernand mondego, the french officer
 who led the troops of my noble father! it is you who surrendered the
 castle of yanina! it is you who, sent by him to constantinople, to
 treat with the emperor for the life or death of your benefactor,
 brought back false mandate granting full pardon! it is you who, with
 that mandate, obtained the pasha’s ring, which gave you authority over
 selim, the fire-keeper! it is you who stabbed selim. it is you who sold
 us, my mother and me, to the merchant, el-kobbir! assassin, assassin,
 assassin, you have still on your brow your master’s blood! look,
 gentlemen, all!’
 
“these words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm and evident
 truth, that every eye was fixed on the count’s forehead, and himself
 passed his hand across it, as if felt ali’s blood still lingering
 there. ‘you positively recognize m. morcerf as the officer, fernand
 mondego?’—‘indeed i do!’ cried haydée. ‘oh, my mother, it was you who
 said, “you were free, you had beloved father, you were destined to be
 almost queen. look well at that man; it is who raised your
 father’s head on the point of spear; it is who sold us; it is he
 who forsook us! look well at his right hand, on which has large
 wound; if you forgot his features, you would know him by that hand,
 into which fell, one by one, the gold pieces of the merchant
 el-kobbir!” i know him! ah, let him say now if does not recognize
 me!’ each word fell like dagger on morcerf, and deprived him of a
 portion of his energy; as she uttered the last, hid his mutilated
 hand hastily in his bosom, and fell back on his seat, overwhelmed by
 wretchedness and despair. this scene completely changed the opinion of
 the assembly respecting the accused count.
 
“‘count of morcerf,’ said the president, ‘do not allow yourself to be
 cast down; answer. the justice of the court is supreme and impartial as
 that of god; it will not suffer you to be trampled on by your enemies
 without giving you an opportunity of defending yourself. shall further
 inquiries be made? shall two members of the house be sent to yanina?
 speak!’ morcerf did not reply. then all the members looked at each
 other with terror. they knew the count’s energetic and violent temper;
 it must be, indeed, dreadful blow which would deprive him of courage
 to defend himself. they expected that his stupefied silence would be
 followed by fiery outburst. ‘well,’ asked the president, ‘what is
 your decision?’
 
40206m
 


“‘i have reply to make,’ said the count in low tone.
 
“‘has the daughter of ali tepelini spoken the truth?’ said the
 president. ‘is she, then, the terrible witness to whose charge you dare
 not plead “not guilty”? have you really committed the crimes of which
 you are accused?’ the count looked around him with an expression which
 might have softened tigers, but which could not disarm his judges. then
 raised his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then, immediately,
 as if feared the roof would open and reveal to his distressed view
 that second tribunal called heaven, and that other judge named god.
 then, with hasty movement, tore open his coat, which seemed to
 stifle him, and flew from the room like madman; his footstep was
 heard one moment in the corridor, then the rattling of his
 carriage-wheels as was driven rapidly away. ‘gentlemen,’ said the
 president, when silence was restored, ‘is the count of morcerf
 convicted of felony, treason, and conduct unbecoming member of this
 house?’—‘yes,’ replied all the members of the committee of inquiry with
 unanimous voice.
 
“haydée had remained until the close of the meeting. she heard the
 count’s sentence pronounced without betraying an expression of joy or
 pity; then drawing her veil over her face she bowed majestically to the
 councillors, and left with that dignified step which virgil attributes
 to his goddesses.”
 


chapter 87. the challenge
 
then,” continued beauchamp, “i took advantage of the silence and the
 darkness to leave the house without being seen. the usher who had
 introduced was waiting for at the door, and conducted me
 through the corridors to private entrance opening into the rue de
 vaugirard. i left with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight. excuse
 me, albert,—sorrow on your account, and delight with that noble girl,
 thus pursuing paternal vengeance. yes, albert, from whatever source the
 blow may have proceeded—it may be from an enemy, but that enemy is only
 the agent of providence.”
 
albert held his head between his hands; raised his face, red with
 shame and bathed in tears, and seizing beauchamp’s arm:
 
“my friend,” said he, “my life is ended. i cannot calmly say with you,
 ‘providence has struck the blow;’ but i must discover who pursues me
 with this hatred, and when i have found him i shall kill him, or he
 will kill me. i rely on your friendship to assist me, beauchamp, if
 contempt has not banished it from your heart.”
 
“contempt, my friend? how does this misfortune affect you? no, happily
 that unjust prejudice is forgotten which made the responsible for
 the father’s actions. review your life, albert; although it is only
 just beginning, did lovely summer’s day ever dawn with greater purity
 than has marked the commencement of your career? no, albert, take my
 advice. you are young and rich—leave paris—all is soon forgotten in
 this great babylon of excitement and changing tastes. you will return
 after three or four years with russian princess for bride, and no
 one will think more of what occurred yesterday than if it had happened
 sixteen years ago.”
 
“thank you, my dear beauchamp, thank you for the excellent feeling
 which prompts your advice; but it cannot be. i have told you my wish,
 or rather my determination. you understand that, interested as i am in
 this affair, i cannot see it in the same light as you do. what appears
 to you to emanate from celestial source, seems to to proceed from
 one far less pure. providence appears to to have share in this
 affair; and happily so, for instead of the invisible, impalpable agent
 of celestial rewards and punishments, i shall find one both palpable
 and visible, on whom i shall revenge myself, i assure you, for all i
 have suffered during the last month. now, i repeat, beauchamp, i wish
 to return to human and material existence, and if you are still the
 friend you profess to be, help to discover the hand that struck the
 blow.”
 
“be it so,” said beauchamp; “if you must have descend to earth, i
 submit; and if you will seek your enemy, i will assist you, and i will
 engage to find him, my honor being almost as deeply interested as
 yours.”
 
“well, then, you understand, beauchamp, that we begin our search
 immediately. each moment’s delay is an eternity for me. the calumniator
 is not yet punished, and may hope that will not be; but, on my
 honor, if thinks so, deceives himself.”
 
“well, listen, morcerf.”
 
“ah, beauchamp, i see you know something already; you will restore me
 to life.”
 
“i do not say there is any truth in what i am going to tell you, but it
 is, at least, ray of light in dark night; by following it we may,
 perhaps, discover something more certain.”
 
“tell me; satisfy my impatience.”
 
“well, i will tell you what i did not like to mention on my return from
 yanina.”
 
“say on.”
 
“i went, of course, to the chief banker of the town to make inquiries.
 at the first word, before i had even mentioned your father’s name”—
 
“‘ah,’ said he. ‘i guess what brings you here.’
 
“‘how, and why?’
 
“‘because fortnight since i was questioned on the same subject.’
 
“‘by whom?’
 
“‘by banker of paris, my correspondent.’
 
“‘whose name is——’
 
“‘danglars.’”
 
“he!” cried albert; “yes, it is indeed who has so long pursued my
 father with jealous hatred. he, the man who would be popular, cannot
 forgive the count of morcerf for being created peer; and this
 marriage broken off without reason being assigned—yes, it is all from
 the same cause.”
 
“make inquiries, albert, but do not be angry without reason; make
 inquiries, and if it be true——”
 
“oh, yes, if it be true,” cried the young man, “he shall pay all i
 have suffered.”
 
“beware, morcerf, is already an old man.”
 
“i will respect his age as has respected the honor of my family; if
 my father had offended him, why did not attack him personally? oh,
 no, was afraid to encounter him face to face.”
 
“i do not condemn you, albert; i only restrain you. act prudently.”
 
“oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me. beauchamp, solemn
 transactions should be sanctioned by witness. before this day closes,
 if m. danglars is guilty, shall cease to live, or i shall die.
 _pardieu_, beauchamp, mine shall be splendid funeral!”
 
“when such resolutions are made, albert, they should be promptly
 executed. do you wish to go to m. danglars? let us go immediately.”
 
they sent for cabriolet. on entering the banker’s mansion, they
 perceived the phaeton and servant of m. andrea cavalcanti.
 
“ah! _parbleu!_ that’s good,” said albert, with gloomy tone. “if m.
 danglars will not fight with me, i will kill his son-in-law; cavalcanti
 will certainly fight.”
 
the servant announced the young man; but the banker, recollecting what
 had transpired the day before, did not wish him admitted. it was,
 however, too late; albert had followed the footman, and, hearing the
 order given, forced the door open, and followed by beauchamp found
 himself in the banker’s study.
 
“sir,” cried the latter, “am i longer at liberty to receive whom i
 choose in my house? you appear to forget yourself sadly.”
 
“no, sir,” said albert, coldly; “there are circumstances in which one
 cannot, except through cowardice,—i offer you that refuge,—refuse to
 admit certain persons at least.”
 
“what is your errand, then, with me, sir?”
 
“i mean,” said albert, drawing near, and without apparently noticing
 cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards the fireplace—“i mean to
 propose meeting in some retired corner where one will interrupt us
 for ten minutes; that will be sufficient—where two men having met, one
 of them will remain on the ground.”
 
danglars turned pale; cavalcanti moved step forward, and albert
 turned towards him.
 
“and you, too,” said he, “come, if you like, monsieur; you have a
 claim, being almost one of the family, and i will give as many
 rendezvous of that kind as i can find persons willing to accept them.”
 
cavalcanti looked at danglars with stupefied air, and the latter,
 making an effort, arose and stepped between the two young men. albert’s
 attack on andrea had placed him on different footing, and hoped
 this visit had another cause than that had at first supposed.
 
“indeed, sir,” said to albert, “if you are come to quarrel with this
 gentleman because i have preferred him to you, i shall resign the case
 to the king’s attorney.”
 
“you mistake, sir,” said morcerf with gloomy smile; “i am not
 referring in the least to matrimony, and i only addressed myself to m.
 cavalcanti because appeared disposed to interfere between us. in one
 respect you are right, for i am ready to quarrel with everyone today;
 but you have the first claim, m. danglars.”
 
40212m
 


“sir,” replied danglars, pale with anger and fear, “i warn you, when i
 have the misfortune to meet with mad dog, i kill it; and far from
 thinking myself guilty of crime, i believe i do society kindness.
 now, if you are mad and try to bite me, i will kill you without pity.
 is it my fault that your father has dishonored himself?”
 
“yes, miserable wretch!” cried morcerf, “it is your fault.”
 
danglars retreated few steps. “my fault?” said he; “you must be mad!
 what do i know of the grecian affair? have i travelled in that country?
 did i advise your father to sell the castle of yanina—to betray——”
 
“silence!” said albert, with thundering voice. “no; it is not you who
 have directly made this exposure and brought this sorrow on us, but you
 hypocritically provoked it.”
 
“i?”
 
“yes; you! how came it known?”
 
“i suppose you read it in the paper in the account from yanina?”
 
“who wrote to yanina?”
 
“to yanina?”
 
“yes. who wrote for particulars concerning my father?”
 
“i imagine anyone may write to yanina.”
 
“but one person only wrote!”
 
“one only?”
 
“yes; and that was you!”
 
“i, doubtless, wrote. it appears to that when about to marry your
 daughter to young man, it is right to make some inquiries respecting
 his family; it is not only right, but duty.”
 
“you wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive.”
 
“i, indeed? i assure you,” cried danglars, with confidence and
 security proceeding less from fear than from the interest really
 felt for the young man, “i solemnly declare to you, that i should never
 have thought of writing to yanina, did i know anything of ali pasha’s
 misfortunes.”
 
“who, then, urged you to write? tell me.”
 
“_pardieu!_ it was the most simple thing in the world. i was speaking
 of your father’s past history. i said the origin of his fortune
 remained obscure. the person to whom i addressed my scruples asked me
 where your father had acquired his property? i answered, ‘in
 greece.’—‘then,’ said he, ‘write to yanina.’”
 
“and who thus advised you?”
 
“no other than your friend, monte cristo.”
 
“the count of monte cristo told you to write to yanina?”
 
“yes; and i wrote, and will show you my correspondence, if you like.”
 
albert and beauchamp looked at each other.
 
“sir,” said beauchamp, who had not yet spoken, “you appear to accuse
 the count, who is absent from paris at this moment, and cannot justify
 himself.”
 
“i accuse one, sir,” said danglars; “i relate, and i will repeat
 before the count what i have said to you.”
 
“does the count know what answer you received?”
 
“yes; i showed it to him.”
 
“did know my father’s christian name was fernand, and his family
 name mondego?”
 
“yes, i had told him that long since, and i did only what any other
 would have done in my circumstances, and perhaps less. when, the day
 after the arrival of this answer, your father came by the advice of
 monte cristo to ask my daughter’s hand for you, i decidedly refused
 him, but without any explanation or exposure. in short, why should i
 have any more to do with the affair? how did the honor or disgrace of
 m. morcerf affect me? it neither increased nor decreased my income.”
 
albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was doubt upon the
 subject. danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same
 time with the assurance, of man who speaks the truth, at least in
 part, if not wholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear.
 besides, what was morcerf seeking? it was not whether danglars or monte
 cristo was more or less guilty; it was man who would answer for the
 offence, whether trifling or serious; it was man who would fight, and
 it was evident danglars would not fight.
 
in addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before
 presented itself now to his recollection. monte cristo knew everything,
 as had bought the daughter of ali pasha; and, knowing everything, he
 had advised danglars to write to yanina. the answer known, had
 yielded to albert’s wish to be introduced to haydée, and allowed the
 conversation to turn on the death of ali, and had not opposed haydée’s
 recital (but having, doubtless, warned the young girl, in the few
 romaic words spoke to her, not to implicate morcerf’s father).
 besides, had not begged of morcerf not to mention his father’s name
 before haydée? lastly, had taken albert to normandy when knew the
 final blow was near. there could be doubt that all had been
 calculated and previously arranged; monte cristo then was in league
 with his father’s enemies. albert took beauchamp aside, and
 communicated these ideas to him.
 
“you are right,” said the latter; “m. danglars has only been a
 secondary agent in this sad affair, and it is of m. monte cristo
 that you must demand an explanation.”
 
albert turned.
 
“sir,” said to danglars, “understand that i do not take final
 leave of you; i must ascertain if your insinuations are just, and am
 going now to inquire of the count of monte cristo.”
 
bowed to the banker, and went out with beauchamp, without appearing
 to notice cavalcanti. danglars accompanied him to the door, where he
 again assured albert that motive of personal hatred had influenced
 him against the count of morcerf.
 


chapter 88. the insult
 
at the banker’s door beauchamp stopped morcerf.
 
“listen,” said he; “just now i told you it was of m. monte cristo
 you must demand an explanation.”
 
“yes; and we are going to his house.”
 
“reflect, morcerf, one moment before you go.”
 
“on what shall i reflect?”
 
“on the importance of the step you are taking.”
 
“is it more serious than going to m. danglars?”
 
“yes; m. danglars is money-lover, and those who love money, you know,
 think too much of what they risk to be easily induced to fight duel.
 the other is, on the contrary, to all appearance true nobleman; but
 do you not fear to find him bully?”
 
“i only fear one thing; namely, to find man who will not fight.”
 
“do not be alarmed,” said beauchamp; “he will meet you. my only fear is
 that will be too strong for you.”
 
“my friend,” said morcerf, with sweet smile, “that is what i wish.
 the happiest thing that could occur to me, would be to die in my
 father’s stead; that would save us all.”
 
“your mother would die of grief.”
 
“my poor mother!” said albert, passing his hand across his eyes, “i
 know she would; but better so than die of shame.”
 
“are you quite decided, albert?”
 
“yes; let us go.”
 
“but do you think we shall find the count at home?”
 
“he intended returning some hours after me, and doubtless is now at
 home.”
 
they ordered the driver to take them to no. 30 champs-Élysées.
 beauchamp wished to go in alone, but albert observed that as this was
 an unusual circumstance might be allowed to deviate from the usual
 etiquette of duels. the cause which the young man espoused was one so
 sacred that beauchamp had only to comply with all his wishes; he
 yielded and contented himself with following morcerf. albert sprang
 from the porter’s lodge to the steps. was received by baptistin. the
 count had, indeed, just arrived, but was in his bath, and had
 forbidden that anyone should be admitted.
 
“but after his bath?” asked morcerf.
 
“my master will go to dinner.”
 
“and after dinner?”
 
“he will sleep an hour.”
 
“then?”
 
“he is going to the opera.”
 
“are you sure of it?” asked albert.
 
“quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eight o’clock
 precisely.”
 
“very good,” replied albert; “that is all i wished to know.”
 
then, turning towards beauchamp, “if you have anything to attend to,
 beauchamp, do it directly; if you have any appointment for this
 evening, defer it till tomorrow. i depend on you to accompany to the
 opera; and if you can, bring château-renaud with you.”
 
beauchamp availed himself of albert’s permission, and left him,
 promising to call for him at quarter before eight. on his return
 home, albert expressed his wish to franz debray, and morrel, to see
 them at the opera that evening. then went to see his mother, who
 since the events of the day before had refused to see anyone, and had
 kept her room. found her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this
 public humiliation.
 
the sight of albert produced the effect which might naturally be
 expected on mercédès; she pressed her son’s hand and sobbed aloud, but
 her tears relieved her. albert stood one moment speechless by the side
 of his mother’s bed. it was evident from his pale face and knit brows
 that his resolution to revenge himself was growing weaker.
 
“my dear mother,” said he, “do you know if m. morcerf has any
 enemy?”
 
mercédès started; she noticed that the young man did not say “my
 father.”
 
“my son,” she said, “persons in the count’s situation have many secret
 enemies. those who are known are not the most dangerous.”
 
“i know it, and appeal to your penetration. you are of so superior a
 mind, nothing escapes you.”
 
“why do you say so?”
 
“because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball we gave,
 that m. monte cristo would eat nothing in our house.”
 
mercédès raised herself on her feverish arm.
 
“m. monte cristo!” she exclaimed; “and how is connected with the
 question you asked me?”
 
40219m
 


“you know, mother, m. monte cristo is almost an oriental, and it is
 customary with the orientals to secure full liberty for revenge by not
 eating or drinking in the houses of their enemies.”
 
“do you say m. monte cristo is our enemy?” replied mercédès,
 becoming paler than the sheet which covered her. “who told you so? why,
 you are mad, albert! m. monte cristo has only shown us kindness. m.
 monte cristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. oh,
 i entreat you, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it;
 and my counsel to you—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.”
 
“mother,” replied the young man, “you have special reasons for telling
 to conciliate that man.”
 
“i?” said mercédès, blushing as rapidly as she had turned pale, and
 again becoming paler than ever.
 
“yes, doubtless; and is it not that may never do us any harm?”
 
mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her scrutinizing gaze, “you
 speak strangely,” said she to albert, “and you appear to have some
 singular prejudices. what has the count done? three days since you were
 with him in normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our
 best friend.”
 
an ironical smile passed over albert’s lips. mercédès saw it and with
 the double instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was
 prudent and strong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears.
 albert was silent; an instant after, the countess resumed:
 
“you came to inquire after my health; i will candidly acknowledge that
 i am not well. you should install yourself here, and cheer my solitude.
 i do not wish to be left alone.”
 
“mother,” said the young man, “you know how gladly i would obey your
 wish, but an urgent and important affair obliges to leave you for
 the whole evening.”
 
“well,” replied mercédès, sighing, “go, albert; i will not make you a
 slave to your filial piety.”
 
albert pretended did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her.
 scarcely had shut her door, when mercédès called confidential
 servant, and ordered him to follow albert wherever should go that
 evening, and to come and tell her immediately what observed. then
 she rang for her lady’s maid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in
 order to be ready for whatever might happen. the footman’s mission was
 an easy one. albert went to his room, and dressed with unusual care. at
 ten minutes to eight beauchamp arrived; had seen château-renaud, who
 had promised to be in the orchestra before the curtain was raised. both
 got into albert’s _coupé_; and, as the young man had reason to
 conceal where was going, called aloud, “to the opera.” in his
 impatience arrived before the beginning of the performance.
 
40221m
 


château-renaud was at his post; apprised by beauchamp of the
 circumstances, required explanation from albert. the conduct of
 the in seeking to avenge his father was so natural that
 château-renaud did not seek to dissuade him, and was content with
 renewing his assurances of devotion. debray was not yet come, but
 albert knew that seldom lost scene at the opera.
 
albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up. he
 hoped to meet with m. monte cristo either in the lobby or on the
 stairs. the bell summoned him to his seat, and entered the orchestra
 with château-renaud and beauchamp. but his eyes scarcely quitted the
 box between the columns, which remained obstinately closed during the
 whole of the first act. at last, as albert was looking at his watch for
 about the hundredth time, at the beginning of the second act the door
 opened, and monte cristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over
 the front of the box, looked around the pit. morrel followed him, and
 looked also for his sister and brother in-law; soon discovered them
 in another box, and kissed his hand to them.
 
the count, in his survey of the pit, encountered pale face and
 threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention. he
 recognized albert, but thought it better not to notice him, as he
 looked so angry and discomposed. without communicating his thoughts to
 his companion, sat down, drew out his opera-glass, and looked
 another way. although apparently not noticing albert, did not,
 however, lose sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end of the
 second act, saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends. then
 his head was seen passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew
 that the approaching storm was intended to fall on him. was at the
 moment conversing cheerfully with morrel, but was well prepared for
 what might happen.
 
the door opened, and monte cristo, turning round, saw albert, pale and
 trembling, followed by beauchamp and château-renaud.
 
“well,” cried he, with that benevolent politeness which distinguished
 his salutation from the common civilities of the world, “my cavalier
 has attained his object. good-evening, m. morcerf.”
 
the countenance of this man, who possessed such extraordinary control
 over his feelings, expressed the most perfect cordiality. morrel only
 then recollected the letter had received from the viscount, in
 which, without assigning any reason, begged him to go to the opera,
 but understood that something terrible was brooding.
 
“we are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical expressions of
 politeness, or false professions of friendship,” said albert, “but to
 demand an explanation.”
 
the young man’s trembling voice was scarcely audible.
 
“an explanation at the opera?” said the count, with that calm tone and
 penetrating eye which characterize the man who knows his cause is good.
 “little acquainted as i am with the habits of parisians, i should not
 have thought this the place for such demand.”
 
“still, if people will shut themselves up,” said albert, “and cannot be
 seen because they are bathing, dining, or asleep, we must avail
 ourselves of the opportunity whenever they are to be seen.”
 
“i am not difficult of access, sir; for yesterday, if my memory does
 not deceive me, you were at my house.”
 
“yesterday i was at your house, sir,” said the young man; “because then
 i knew not who you were.”
 
in pronouncing these words albert had raised his voice so as to be
 heard by those in the adjoining boxes and in the lobby. thus the
 attention of many was attracted by this altercation.
 
“where are you come from, sir? “ said monte cristo “you do not appear
 to be in the possession of your senses.”
 
“provided i understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed in making you
 understand that i will be revenged, i shall be reasonable enough,” said
 albert furiously.
 
“i do not understand you, sir,” replied monte cristo; “and if i did,
 your tone is too high. i am at home here, and i alone have right to
 raise my voice above another’s. leave the box, sir!”
 
monte cristo pointed towards the door with the most commanding dignity.
 
“ah, i shall know how to make you leave your home!” replied albert,
 clasping in his convulsed grasp the glove, which monte cristo did not
 lose sight of.
 
“well, well,” said monte cristo quietly, “i see you wish to quarrel
 with me; but i would give you one piece of advice, which you will do
 well to keep in mind. it is in poor taste to make display of a
 challenge. display is not becoming to everyone, m. morcerf.”
 
at this name murmur of astonishment passed around the group of
 spectators of this scene. they had talked of one but morcerf the
 whole day. albert understood the allusion in moment, and was about to
 throw his glove at the count, when morrel seized his hand, while
 beauchamp and château-renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the
 limits of challenge, held him back. but monte cristo, without rising,
 and leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched out his arm and,
 taking the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the young man:
 
“sir,” said in solemn tone, “i consider your glove thrown, and
 will return it to you wrapped around bullet. now leave or i will
 summon my servants to throw you out at the door.”
 
wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, albert stepped back,
 and morrel closed the door. monte cristo took up his glass again as if
 nothing had happened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like
 bronze. morrel whispered, “what have you done to him?”
 
“i? nothing—at least personally,” said monte cristo.
 
“but there must be some cause for this strange scene.”
 
“the count of morcerf’s adventure exasperates the young man.”
 
“have you anything to do with it?”
 
“it was through haydée that the chamber was informed of his father’s
 treason.”
 
“indeed?” said morrel. “i had been told, but would not credit it, that
 the grecian slave i have seen with you here in this very box was the
 daughter of ali pasha.”
 
“it is true, nevertheless.”
 
“then,” said morrel, “i understand it all, and this scene was
 premeditated.”
 
“how so?”
 
“yes. albert wrote to request to come to the opera, doubtless that i
 might be witness to the insult meant to offer you.”
 
“probably,” said monte cristo with his imperturbable tranquillity.
 
“but what shall you do with him?”
 
“with whom?”
 
“with albert.”
 
“what shall i do with albert? as certainly, maximilian, as i now press
 your hand, i shall kill him before ten o’clock tomorrow morning.”
 morrel, in his turn, took monte cristo’s hand in both of his, and he
 shuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.
 
“ah, count,” said he, “his father loves him so much!”
 
“do not speak to of that,” said monte cristo, with the first
 movement of anger had betrayed; “i will make him suffer.”
 
morrel, amazed, let fall monte cristo’s hand. “count, count!” said he.
 
“dear maximilian,” interrupted the count, “listen how adorably duprez
 is singing that line,—
 
‘o mathilde! idole mon âme!’
 

“i was the first to discover duprez at naples, and the first to applaud
 him. bravo, bravo!”
 
morrel saw it was useless to say more, and refrained. the curtain,
 which had risen at the close of the scene with albert, again fell, and
 rap was heard at the door.
 
“come in,” said monte cristo with voice that betrayed not the least
 emotion; and immediately beauchamp appeared. “good-evening, m.
 beauchamp,” said monte cristo, as if this was the first time had
 seen the journalist that evening; “be seated.”
 
beauchamp bowed, and, sitting down, “sir,” said he, “i just now
 accompanied m. morcerf, as you saw.”
 
“and that means,” replied monte cristo, laughing, “that you had,
 probably, just dined together. i am happy to see, m. beauchamp, that
 you are more sober than was.”
 
“sir,” said m. beauchamp, “albert was wrong, i acknowledge, to betray
 so much anger, and i come, on my own account, to apologize for him. and
 having done so, entirely on my own account, be it understood, i would
 add that i believe you too gentlemanly to refuse giving him some
 explanation concerning your connection with yanina. then i will add two
 words about the young greek girl.”
 
monte cristo motioned him to be silent. “come,” said he, laughing,
 “there are all my hopes about to be destroyed.”
 
“how so?” asked beauchamp.
 
“doubtless you wish to make appear very eccentric character. i am,
 in your opinion, lara, manfred, lord ruthven; then, just as i am
 arriving at the climax, you defeat your own end, and seek to make an
 ordinary man of me. you bring down to your own level, and demand
 explanations! indeed, m. beauchamp, it is quite laughable.”
 
“yet,” replied beauchamp haughtily, “there are occasions when probity
 commands——”
 
“m. beauchamp,” interposed this strange man, “the count of monte cristo
 bows to none but the count of monte cristo himself. say more, i
 entreat you. i do what i please, m. beauchamp, and it is always well
 done.”
 
“sir,” replied the young man, “honest men are not to be paid with such
 coin. i require honorable guaranties.”
 
“i am, sir, living guaranty,” replied monte cristo, motionless, but
 with threatening look; “we have both blood in our veins which we wish
 to shed—that is our mutual guaranty. tell the viscount so, and that
 tomorrow, before ten o’clock, i shall see what color his is.”
 
“then i have only to make arrangements for the duel,” said beauchamp.
 
“it is quite immaterial to me,” said monte cristo, “and it was very
 unnecessary to disturb at the opera for such trifle. in france
 people fight with the sword or pistol, in the colonies with the
 carbine, in arabia with the dagger. tell your client that, although i
 am the insulted party, in order to carry out my eccentricity, i leave
 him the choice of arms, and will accept without discussion, without
 dispute, anything, even combat by drawing lots, which is always stupid,
 but with different from other people, as i am sure to gain.”
 
“sure to gain!” repeated beauchamp, looking with amazement at the
 count.
 
“certainly,” said monte cristo, slightly shrugging his shoulders;
 “otherwise i would not fight with m. morcerf. i shall kill him—i
 cannot help it. only by single line this evening at my house let me
 know the arms and the hour; i do not like to be kept waiting.”
 
“pistols, then, at eight o’clock, in the bois vincennes,” said
 beauchamp, quite disconcerted, not knowing if was dealing with an
 arrogant braggadocio or supernatural being.
 
“very well, sir,” said monte cristo. “now all that is settled, do let
 see the performance, and tell your friend albert not to come any
 more this evening; will hurt himself with all his ill-chosen
 barbarisms: let him go home and go to sleep.”
 
beauchamp left the box, perfectly amazed.
 
“now,” said monte cristo, turning towards morrel, “i may depend upon
 you, may i not?”
 
“certainly,” said morrel, “i am at your service, count; still——”
 
“what?”
 
“it is desirable i should know the real cause.”
 
“that is to say, you would rather not?”
 
“no.”
 
“the young man himself is acting blindfolded, and knows not the true
 cause, which is known only to god and to me; but i give you my word,
 morrel, that god, who does know it, will be on our side.”
 
“enough,” said morrel; “who is your second witness?”
 
“i know one in paris, morrel, on whom i could confer that honor
 besides you and your brother emmanuel. do you think emmanuel would
 oblige me?”
 
“i will answer for him, count.”
 
“well? that is all i require. tomorrow morning, at seven o’clock, you
 will be with me, will you not?”
 
“we will.”
 
“hush, the curtain is rising. listen! i never lose note of this opera
 if i can avoid it; the music of _william tell_ is so sweet.”
 


chapter 89. the night
 
monte cristo waited, according to his usual custom, until duprez had
 sung his famous “_suivez-moi!_” then rose and went out. morrel took
 leave of him at the door, renewing his promise to be with him the next
 morning at seven o’clock, and to bring emmanuel. then stepped into
 his _coupé_, calm and smiling, and was at home in five minutes. one
 who knew the count could mistake his expression when, on entering, he
 said:
 
“ali, bring my pistols with the ivory cross.”
 
ali brought the box to his master, who examined the weapons with a
 solicitude very natural to man who is about to intrust his life to a
 little powder and shot. these were pistols of an especial pattern,
 which monte cristo had had made for target practice in his own room. a
 cap was sufficient to drive out the bullet, and from the adjoining room
 one would have suspected that the count was, as sportsmen would say,
 keeping his hand in.
 
was just taking one up and looking for the point to aim at on a
 little iron plate which served him as target, when his study door
 opened, and baptistin entered. before had spoken word, the count
 saw in the next room veiled woman, who had followed closely after
 baptistin, and now, seeing the count with pistol in his hand and
 swords on the table, rushed in. baptistin looked at his master, who
 made sign to him, and went out, closing the door after him.
 
“who are you, madame?” said the count to the veiled woman.
 
40227m
 


the stranger cast one look around her, to be certain that they were
 quite alone; then bending as if she would have knelt, and joining her
 hands, she said with an accent of despair:
 
“edmond, you will not kill my son!”
 
the count retreated step, uttered slight exclamation, and let fall
 the pistol held.
 
“what name did you pronounce then, madame morcerf?” said he.
 
“yours!” cried she, throwing back her veil,—“yours, which i alone,
 perhaps, have not forgotten. edmond, it is not madame morcerf who is
 come to you, it is mercédès.”
 
“mercédès is dead, madame,” said monte cristo; “i know one now of
 that name.”
 
“mercédès lives, sir, and she remembers, for she alone recognized you
 when she saw you, and even before she saw you, by your voice,
 edmond,—by the simple sound of your voice; and from that moment she has
 followed your steps, watched you, feared you, and she needs not to
 inquire what hand has dealt the blow which now strikes m. morcerf.”
 
“fernand, do you mean?” replied monte cristo, with bitter irony; “since
 we are recalling names, let us remember them all.” monte cristo had
 pronounced the name of fernand with such an expression of hatred that
 mercédès felt thrill of horror run through every vein.
 
“you see, edmond, i am not mistaken, and have cause to say, ‘spare my
 son!’”
 
“and who told you, madame, that i have any hostile intentions against
 your son?”
 
“no one, in truth; but mother has twofold sight. i guessed all; i
 followed him this evening to the opera, and, concealed in parquet
 box, have seen all.”
 
“if you have seen all, madame, you know that the of fernand has
 publicly insulted me,” said monte cristo with awful calmness.
 
“oh, for pity’s sake!”
 
“you have seen that would have thrown his glove in my face if
 morrel, one of my friends, had not stopped him.”
 
“listen to me, my has also guessed who you are,—he attributes his
 father’s misfortunes to you.”
 
“madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes,—it is a
 punishment. it is not i who strike m. morcerf; it is providence
 which punishes him.”
 
“and why do you represent providence?” cried mercédès. “why do you
 remember when it forgets? what are yanina and its vizier to you,
 edmond? what injury has fernand mondego done you in betraying ali
 tepelini?”
 
“ah, madame,” replied monte cristo, “all this is an affair between the
 french captain and the daughter of vasiliki. it does not concern me,
 you are right; and if i have sworn to revenge myself, it is not on the
 french captain, or the count of morcerf, but on the fisherman fernand,
 the husband of mercédès the catalane.”
 
“ah, sir!” cried the countess, “how terrible vengeance for fault
 which fatality made commit!—for i am the only culprit, edmond, and
 if you owe revenge to anyone, it is to me, who had not fortitude to
 bear your absence and my solitude.”
 
“but,” exclaimed monte cristo, “why was i absent? and why were you
 alone?”
 
40231m
 


“because you had been arrested, edmond, and were prisoner.”
 
“and why was i arrested? why was i prisoner?”
 
“i do not know,” said mercédès.
 
“you do not, madame; at least, i hope not. but i will tell you. i was
 arrested and became prisoner because, under the arbor of réserve,
 the day before i was to marry you, man named danglars wrote this
 letter, which the fisherman fernand himself posted.”
 
monte cristo went to secretaire, opened drawer by spring, from
 which took paper which had lost its original color, and the ink of
 which had become of rusty hue—this placed in the hands of
 mercédès. it was danglars’ letter to the king’s attorney, which the
 count of monte cristo, disguised as clerk from the house of thomson &
 french, had taken from the file against edmond dantès, on the day he
 had paid the two hundred thousand francs to m. boville. mercédès
 read with terror the following lines:
 
“the king’s attorney is informed by friend to the throne and religion
 that one edmond dantès, second in command on board the _pharaon_, this
 day arrived from smyrna, after having touched at naples and
 porto-ferrajo, is the bearer of letter from murat to the usurper, and
 of another letter from the usurper to the bonapartist club in paris.
 ample corroboration of this statement may be obtained by arresting the
 above-mentioned edmond dantès, who either carries the letter for paris
 about with him, or has it at his father’s abode. should it not be found
 in possession of either father or son, then it will assuredly be
 discovered in the cabin belonging to the said dantès on board the
 _pharaon_.”
 

“how dreadful!” said mercédès, passing her hand across her brow, moist
 with perspiration; “and that letter——”
 
“i bought it for two hundred thousand francs, madame,” said monte
 cristo; “but that is trifle, since it enables to justify myself to
 you.”
 
“and the result of that letter——”
 
“you well know, madame, was my arrest; but you do not know how long
 that arrest lasted. you do not know that i remained for fourteen years
 within quarter of league of you, in dungeon in the château d’if.
 you do not know that every day of those fourteen years i renewed the
 vow of vengeance which i had made the first day; and yet i was not
 aware that you had married fernand, my calumniator, and that my father
 had died of hunger!”
 
“can it be?” cried mercédès, shuddering.
 
“that is what i heard on leaving my prison fourteen years after i had
 entered it; and that is why, on account of the living mercédès and my
 deceased father, i have sworn to revenge myself on fernand, and—i have
 revenged myself.”
 
“and you are sure the unhappy fernand did that?”
 
“i am satisfied, madame, that did what i have told you; besides,
 that is not much more odious than that frenchman by adoption should
 pass over to the english; that spaniard by birth should have fought
 against the spaniards; that stipendiary of ali should have betrayed
 and murdered ali. compared with such things, what is the letter you
 have just read?—a lover’s deception, which the woman who has married
 that man ought certainly to forgive; but not so the lover who was to
 have married her. well, the french did not avenge themselves on the
 traitor, the spaniards did not shoot the traitor, ali in his tomb left
 the traitor unpunished; but i, betrayed, sacrificed, buried, have risen
 from my tomb, by the grace of god, to punish that man. sends for
 that purpose, and here i am.”
 
the poor woman’s head and arms fell; her legs bent under her, and she
 fell on her knees.
 
“forgive, edmond, forgive for my sake, who love you still!”
 
the dignity of the wife checked the fervor of the lover and the mother.
 her forehead almost touched the carpet, when the count sprang forward
 and raised her. then seated on chair, she looked at the manly
 countenance of monte cristo, on which grief and hatred still impressed
 threatening expression.
 
“not crush that accursed race?” murmured he; “abandon my purpose at the
 moment of its accomplishment? impossible, madame, impossible!”
 
“edmond,” said the poor mother, who tried every means, “when i call you
 edmond, why do you not call mercédès?”
 
“mercédès!” repeated monte cristo; “mercédès! well yes, you are right;
 that name has still its charms, and this is the first time for long
 period that i have pronounced it so distinctly. oh, mercédès, i have
 uttered your name with the sigh of melancholy, with the groan of
 sorrow, with the last effort of despair; i have uttered it when frozen
 with cold, crouched on the straw in my dungeon; i have uttered it,
 consumed with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison. mercédès,
 i must revenge myself, for i suffered fourteen years,—fourteen years i
 wept, i cursed; now i tell you, mercédès, i must revenge myself.”
 
the count, fearing to yield to the entreaties of her had so ardently
 loved, called his sufferings to the assistance of his hatred.
 
“revenge yourself, then, edmond,” cried the poor mother; “but let your
 vengeance fall on the culprits,—on him, on me, but not on my son!”
 
“it is written in the good book,” said monte cristo, “that the sins of
 the fathers shall fall upon their children to the third and fourth
 generation. since god himself dictated those words to his prophet, why
 should i seek to make myself better than god?”
 
“edmond,” continued mercédès, with her arms extended towards the count,
 “since i first knew you, i have adored your name, have respected your
 memory. edmond, my friend, do not compel to tarnish that noble and
 pure image reflected incessantly on the mirror of my heart. edmond, if
 you knew all the prayers i have addressed to god for you while i
 thought you were living and since i have thought you must be dead! yes,
 dead, alas! i imagined your dead body buried at the foot of some gloomy
 tower, or cast to the bottom of pit by hateful jailers, and i wept!
 what could i do for you, edmond, besides pray and weep? listen; for ten
 years i dreamed each night the same dream. i had been told that you had
 endeavored to escape; that you had taken the place of another prisoner;
 that you had slipped into the winding sheet of dead body; that you
 had been thrown alive from the top of the château d’if, and that the
 cry you uttered as you dashed upon the rocks first revealed to your
 jailers that they were your murderers. well, edmond, i swear to you, by
 the head of that for whom i entreat your pity,—edmond, for ten
 years i saw every night every detail of that frightful tragedy, and for
 ten years i heard every night the cry which awoke me, shuddering and
 cold. and i, too, edmond—oh! believe me—guilty as i was—oh, yes, i,
 too, have suffered much!”
 
“have you known what it is to have your father starve to death in your
 absence?” cried monte cristo, thrusting his hands into his hair; “have
 you seen the woman you loved giving her hand to your rival, while you
 were perishing at the bottom of dungeon?”
 
“no,” interrupted mercédès, “but i have seen him whom i loved on the
 point of murdering my son.”
 
mercédès uttered these words with such deep anguish, with an accent of
 such intense despair, that monte cristo could not restrain sob. the
 lion was daunted; the avenger was conquered.
 
“what do you ask of me?” said he,—“your son’s life? well, shall
 live!”
 
mercédès uttered cry which made the tears start from monte cristo’s
 eyes; but these tears disappeared almost instantaneously, for,
 doubtless, god had sent some angel to collect them—far more precious
 were they in his eyes than the richest pearls of guzerat and ophir.
 
“oh,” said she, seizing the count’s hand and raising it to her lips;
 “oh, thank you, thank you, edmond! now you are exactly what i dreamt
 you were,—the man i always loved. oh, now i may say so!”
 
“so much the better,” replied monte cristo; “as that poor edmond will
 not have long to be loved by you. death is about to return to the tomb,
 the phantom to retire in darkness.”
 
“what do you say, edmond?”
 
“i say, since you command me, mercédès, i must die.”
 
“die? and why so? who talks of dying? whence have you these ideas of
 death?”
 
“you do not suppose that, publicly outraged in the face of whole
 theatre, in the presence of your friends and those of your
 son—challenged by boy who will glory in my forgiveness as if it were
 victory—you do not suppose that i can for one moment wish to live.
 what i most loved after you, mercédès, was myself, my dignity, and that
 strength which rendered superior to other men; that strength was my
 life. with one word you have crushed it, and i die.”
 
“but the duel will not take place, edmond, since you forgive?”
 
“it will take place,” said monte cristo, in most solemn tone; “but
 instead of your son’s blood to stain the ground, mine will flow.”
 
mercédès shrieked, and sprang towards monte cristo, but, suddenly
 stopping, “edmond,” said she, “there is god above us, since you live
 and since i have seen you again; i trust to him from my heart. while
 waiting his assistance i trust to your word; you have said that my son
 should live, have you not?”
 
“yes, madame, shall live,” said monte cristo, surprised that without
 more emotion mercédès had accepted the heroic sacrifice made for
 her. mercédès extended her hand to the count.
 
“edmond,” said she, and her eyes were wet with tears while looking at
 him to whom she spoke, “how noble it is of you, how great the action
 you have just performed, how sublime to have taken pity on poor woman
 who appealed to you with every chance against her, alas, i am grown old
 with grief more than with years, and cannot now remind my edmond by a
 smile, or by look, of that mercédès whom once spent so many hours
 in contemplating. ah, believe me, edmond, as i told you, i too have
 suffered much; i repeat, it is melancholy to pass one’s life without
 having one joy to recall, without preserving single hope; but that
 proves that all is not yet over. no, it is not finished; i feel it by
 what remains in my heart. oh, i repeat it, edmond; what you have just
 done is beautiful—it is grand; it is sublime.”
 
“do you say so now, mercédès?—then what would you say if you knew the
 extent of the sacrifice i make to you? suppose that the supreme being,
 after having created the world and fertilized chaos, had paused in the
 work to spare an angel the tears that might one day flow for mortal
 sins from her immortal eyes; suppose that when everything was in
 readiness and the moment had come for god to look upon his work and see
 that it was good—suppose had snuffed out the sun and tossed the
 world back into eternal night—then—even then, mercédès, you could not
 imagine what i lose in sacrificing my life at this moment.”
 
mercédès looked at the count in way which expressed at the same time
 her astonishment, her admiration, and her gratitude. monte cristo
 pressed his forehead on his burning hands, as if his brain could no
 longer bear alone the weight of its thoughts.
 
“edmond,” said mercédès, “i have but one word more to say to you.”
 
the count smiled bitterly.
 
“edmond,” continued she, “you will see that if my face is pale, if my
 eyes are dull, if my beauty is gone; if mercédès, in short, longer
 resembles her former self in her features, you will see that her heart
 is still the same. adieu, then, edmond; i have nothing more to ask of
 heaven—i have seen you again, and have found you as noble and as great
 as formerly you were. adieu, edmond, adieu, and thank you.”
 
but the count did not answer. mercédès opened the door of the study and
 had disappeared before had recovered from the painful and profound
 reverie into which his thwarted vengeance had plunged him.
 
the clock of the invalides struck one when the carriage which conveyed
 madame morcerf rolled away on the pavement of the champs-Élysées,
 and made monte cristo raise his head.
 
“what fool i was,” said he, “not to tear my heart out on the day when
 i resolved to avenge myself!”
 


chapter 90. the meeting
 
after mercédès had left monte cristo, fell into profound gloom.
 around him and within him the flight of thought seemed to have stopped;
 his energetic mind slumbered, as the body does after extreme fatigue.
 
“what?” said to himself, while the lamp and the wax lights were
 nearly burnt out, and the servants were waiting impatiently in the
 anteroom; “what? this edifice which i have been so long preparing,
 which i have reared with so much care and toil, is to be crushed by a
 single touch, word, breath! yes, this self, of whom i thought so
 much, of whom i was so proud, who had appeared so worthless in the
 dungeons of the château d’if, and whom i had succeeded in making so
 great, will be but lump of clay tomorrow. alas, it is not the death
 of the body i regret; for is not the destruction of the vital
 principle, the repose to which everything is tending, to which every
 unhappy being aspires,—is not this the repose of matter after which i
 so long sighed, and which i was seeking to attain by the painful
 process of starvation when faria appeared in my dungeon? what is death
 for me? one step farther into rest,—two, perhaps, into silence. no, it
 is not existence, then, that i regret, but the ruin of projects so
 slowly carried out, so laboriously framed. providence is now opposed to
 them, when i most thought it would be propitious. it is not god’s will
 that they should be accomplished. this burden, almost as heavy as a
 world, which i had raised, and i had thought to bear to the end, was
 too great for my strength, and i was compelled to lay it down in the
 middle of my career. oh, shall i then, again become fatalist, whom
 fourteen years of despair and ten of hope had rendered believer in
 providence?
 
“and all this—all this, because my heart, which i thought dead, was
 only sleeping; because it has awakened and has begun to beat again,
 because i have yielded to the pain of the emotion excited in my breast
 by woman’s voice.
 
“yet,” continued the count, becoming each moment more absorbed in the
 anticipation of the dreadful sacrifice for the morrow, which mercédès
 had accepted, “yet, it is impossible that so noble-minded woman
 should thus through selfishness consent to my death when i am in the
 prime of life and strength; it is impossible that she can carry to such
 point maternal love, or rather delirium. there are virtues which
 become crimes by exaggeration. no, she must have conceived some
 pathetic scene; she will come and throw herself between us; and what
 would be sublime here will there appear ridiculous.”
 
the blush of pride mounted to the count’s forehead as this thought
 passed through his mind.
 
“ridiculous?” repeated he; “and the ridicule will fall on me. i
 ridiculous? no, i would rather die.”
 
by thus exaggerating to his own mind the anticipated ill-fortune of the
 next day, to which had condemned himself by promising mercédès to
 spare her son, the count at last exclaimed:
 
“folly, folly, folly!—to carry generosity so far as to put myself up as
 mark for that young man to aim at. will never believe that my
 death was suicide; and yet it is important for the honor of my
 memory,—and this surely is not vanity, but justifiable pride,—it is
 important the world should know that i have consented, by my free will,
 to stop my arm, already raised to strike, and that with the arm which
 has been so powerful against others i have struck myself. it must be;
 it shall be.”
 
seizing pen, drew paper from secret drawer in his desk, and
 wrote at the bottom of the document (which was other than his will,
 made since his arrival in paris) sort of codicil, clearly explaining
 the nature of his death.
 
“i do this, oh, my god,” said he, with his eyes raised to heaven, “as
 much for thy honor as for mine. i have during ten years considered
 myself the agent of thy vengeance, and other wretches, like morcerf,
 danglars, villefort, even morcerf himself, must not imagine that chance
 has freed them from their enemy. let them know, on the contrary, that
 their punishment, which had been decreed by providence, is only delayed
 by my present determination, and although they escape it in this world,
 it awaits them in another, and that they are only exchanging time for
 eternity.”
 
while was thus agitated by gloomy uncertainties,—wretched waking
 dreams of grief,—the first rays of morning pierced his windows, and
 shone upon the pale blue paper on which had just inscribed his
 justification of providence.
 
it was just five o’clock in the morning when slight noise like a
 stifled sigh reached his ear. turned his head, looked around him,
 and saw one; but the sound was repeated distinctly enough to
 convince him of its reality.
 
arose, and quietly opening the door of the drawing-room, saw haydée,
 who had fallen on chair, with her arms hanging down and her beautiful
 head thrown back. she had been standing at the door, to prevent his
 going out without seeing her, until sleep, which the young cannot
 resist, had overpowered her frame, wearied as she was with watching.
 the noise of the door did not awaken her, and monte cristo gazed at her
 with affectionate regret.
 
“she remembered that she had son,” said he; “and i forgot i had a
 daughter.” then, shaking his head sorrowfully, “poor haydée,” said he;
 “she wished to see me, to speak to me; she has feared or guessed
 something. oh, i cannot go without taking leave of her; i cannot die
 without confiding her to someone.”
 
quietly regained his seat, and wrote under the other lines:
 
“i bequeath to maximilian morrel, captain of spahis,—and of my
 former patron, pierre morrel, shipowner at marseilles,—the sum of
 twenty millions, part of which may be offered to his sister julie and
 brother-in-law emmanuel, if does not fear this increase of fortune
 may mar their happiness. these twenty millions are concealed in my
 grotto at monte cristo, of which bertuccio knows the secret. if his
 heart is free, and will marry haydée, the daughter of ali pasha of
 yanina, whom i have brought up with the love of father, and who has
 shown the love and tenderness of daughter for me, will thus
 accomplish my last wish. this will has already constituted haydée
 heiress of the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in
 england, austria, and holland, furniture in my different palaces and
 houses, and which without the twenty millions and the legacies to my
 servants, may still amount to sixty millions.”
 

40241m
 


was finishing the last line when cry behind him made him start,
 and the pen fell from his hand.
 
“haydée,” said he, “did you read it?”
 
“oh, my lord,” said she, “why are you writing thus at such an hour? why
 are you bequeathing all your fortune to me? are you going to leave me?”
 
“i am going on journey, dear child,” said monte cristo, with an
 expression of infinite tenderness and melancholy; “and if any
 misfortune should happen to me——”
 
the count stopped.
 
“well?” asked the young girl, with an authoritative tone the count had
 never observed before, and which startled him.
 
“well, if any misfortune happen to me,” replied monte cristo, “i wish
 my daughter to be happy.” haydée smiled sorrowfully, and shook her
 head.
 
“do you think of dying, my lord?” said she.
 
“the wise man, my child, has said, ‘it is good to think of death.’”
 
“well, if you die,” said she, “bequeath your fortune to others, for if
 you die i shall require nothing;” and, taking the paper, she tore it in
 four pieces, and threw it into the middle of the room. then, the effort
 having exhausted her strength, she fell, not asleep this time, but
 fainting on the floor.
 
the count leaned over her and raised her in his arms; and seeing that
 sweet pale face, those lovely eyes closed, that beautiful form
 motionless and to all appearance lifeless, the idea occurred to him for
 the first time, that perhaps she loved him otherwise than as daughter
 loves father.
 
“alas,” murmured he, with intense suffering, “i might, then, have been
 happy yet.”
 
then carried haydée to her room, resigned her to the care of her
 attendants, and returning to his study, which shut quickly this
 time, again copied the destroyed will. as was finishing, the
 sound of cabriolet entering the yard was heard. monte cristo
 approached the window, and saw maximilian and emmanuel alight. “good,”
 said he; “it was time,”—and sealed his will with three seals.
 
moment afterwards heard noise in the drawing-room, and went to
 open the door himself. morrel was there; had come twenty minutes
 before the time appointed.
 
“i am perhaps come too soon, count,” said he, “but i frankly
 acknowledge that i have not closed my eyes all night, nor has anyone in
 my house. i need to see you strong in your courageous assurance, to
 recover myself.”
 
monte cristo could not resist this proof of affection; not only
 extended his hand to the young man, but flew to him with open arms.
 
“morrel,” said he, “it is happy day for me, to feel that i am beloved
 by such man as you. good-morning, emmanuel; you will come with me
 then, maximilian?”
 
“did you doubt it?” said the young captain.
 
“but if i were wrong——”
 
“i watched you during the whole scene of that challenge yesterday; i
 have been thinking of your firmness all night, and i said to myself
 that justice must be on your side, or man’s countenance is longer to
 be relied on.”
 
“but, morrel, albert is your friend?”
 
“simply an acquaintance, sir.”
 
“you met on the same day you first saw me?”
 
“yes, that is true; but i should not have recollected it if you had not
 reminded me.”
 
“thank you, morrel.” then ringing the bell once, “look.” said to
 ali, who came immediately, “take that to my solicitor. it is my will,
 morrel. when i am dead, you will go and examine it.”
 
“what?” said morrel, “you dead?”
 
“yes; must i not be prepared for everything, dear friend? but what did
 you do yesterday after you left me?”
 
“i went to tortoni’s, where, as i expected, i found beauchamp and
 château-renaud. i own i was seeking them.”
 
“why, when all was arranged?”
 
“listen, count; the affair is serious and unavoidable.”
 
“did you doubt it!”
 
“no; the offence was public, and everyone is already talking of it.”
 
“well?”
 
“well, i hoped to get an exchange of arms,—to substitute the sword for
 the pistol; the pistol is blind.”
 
“have you succeeded?” asked monte cristo quickly, with an imperceptible
 gleam of hope.
 
“no; for your skill with the sword is so well known.”
 
“ah?—who has betrayed me?”
 
“the skilful swordsman whom you have conquered.”
 
“and you failed?”
 
“they positively refused.”
 
“morrel,” said the count, “have you ever seen fire pistol?”
 
“never.”
 
“well, we have time; look.” monte cristo took the pistols held in
 his hand when mercédès entered, and fixing an ace of clubs against the
 iron plate, with four shots successively shot off the four sides of
 the club. at each shot morrel turned pale. examined the bullets with
 which monte cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw that they
 were larger than buckshot.
 
“it is astonishing,” said he. “look, emmanuel.” then turning towards
 monte cristo, “count,” said he, “in the name of all that is dear to
 you, i entreat you not to kill albert!—the unhappy youth has mother.”
 
“you are right,” said monte cristo; “and i have none.” these words were
 uttered in tone which made morrel shudder.
 
“you are the offended party, count.”
 
“doubtless; what does that imply?”
 
“that you will fire first.”
 
“i fire first?”
 
“oh, i obtained, or rather claimed that; we had conceded enough for
 them to yield us that.”
 
“and at what distance?”
 
“twenty paces.” smile of terrible import passed over the count’s
 lips.
 
“morrel,” said he, “do not forget what you have just seen.”
 
“the only chance for albert’s safety, then, will arise from your
 emotion.”
 
“i suffer from emotion?” said monte cristo.
 
“or from your generosity, my friend; to so good marksman as you are,
 i may say what would appear absurd to another.”
 
“what is that?”
 
“break his arm—wound him—but do not kill him.”
 
“i will tell you, morrel,” said the count, “that i do not need
 entreating to spare the life of m. morcerf; shall be so well
 spared, that will return quietly with his two friends, while i——”
 
“and you?”
 
“that will be another thing; i shall be brought home.”
 
“no, no,” cried maximilian, quite unable to restrain his feelings.
 
“as i told you, my dear morrel, m. morcerf will kill me.”
 
morrel looked at him in utter amazement. “but what has happened, then,
 since last evening, count?”
 
“the same thing that happened to brutus the night before the battle of
 philippi; i have seen ghost.”
 
“and that ghost——”
 
“told me, morrel, that i had lived long enough.”
 
maximilian and emmanuel looked at each other. monte cristo drew out his
 watch. “let us go,” said he; “it is five minutes past seven, and the
 appointment was for eight o’clock.”
 
carriage was in readiness at the door. monte cristo stepped into it
 with his two friends. had stopped moment in the passage to listen
 at door, and maximilian and emmanuel, who had considerately passed
 forward few steps, thought they heard him answer by sigh to sob
 from within. as the clock struck eight they drove up to the place of
 meeting.
 
“we are first,” said morrel, looking out of the window.
 
“excuse me, sir,” said baptistin, who had followed his master with
 indescribable terror, “but i think i see carriage down there under
 the trees.”
 
monte cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offered his hand to
 assist emmanuel and maximilian. the latter retained the count’s hand
 between his.
 
“i like,” said he, “to feel hand like this, when its owner relies on
 the goodness of his cause.”
 
“it seems to me,” said emmanuel, “that i see two young men down there,
 who are evidently, waiting.”
 
monte cristo drew morrel step or two behind his brother-in-law.
 
“maximilian,” said he, “are your affections disengaged?” morrel looked
 at monte cristo with astonishment. “i do not seek your confidence, my
 dear friend. i only ask you simple question; answer it;—that is all i
 require.”
 
“i love young girl, count.”
 
“do you love her much?”
 
“more than my life.”
 
“another hope defeated!” said the count. then, with sigh, “poor
 haydée!” murmured he.
 
“to tell the truth, count, if i knew less of you, i should think that
 you were less brave than you are.”
 
“because i sigh when thinking of someone i am leaving? come, morrel, it
 is not like soldier to be so bad judge of courage. do i regret
 life? what is it to me, who have passed twenty years between life and
 death? moreover, do not alarm yourself, morrel; this weakness, if it is
 such, is betrayed to you alone. i know the world is drawing-room,
 from which we must retire politely and honestly; that is, with bow,
 and our debts of honor paid.”
 
“that is to the purpose. have you brought your arms?”
 
“i?—what for? i hope these gentlemen have theirs.”
 
“i will inquire,” said morrel.
 
“do; but make treaty—you understand me?”
 
“you need not fear.” morrel advanced towards beauchamp and
 château-renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to meet him. the three
 young men bowed to each other courteously, if not affably.
 
“excuse me, gentlemen,” said morrel, “but i do not see m. morcerf.”
 
“he sent us word this morning,” replied château-renaud, “that would
 meet us on the ground.”
 
“ah,” said morrel. beauchamp pulled out his watch.
 
“it is only five minutes past eight,” said to morrel; “there is not
 much time lost yet.”
 
“oh, i made allusion of that kind,” replied morrel.
 
“there is carriage coming,” said château-renaud. it advanced rapidly
 along one of the avenues leading towards the open space where they were
 assembled.
 
“you are doubtless provided with pistols, gentlemen? m. monte cristo
 yields his right of using his.”
 
“we had anticipated this kindness on the part of the count,” said
 beauchamp, “and i have brought some weapons which i bought eight or ten
 days since, thinking to want them on similar occasion. they are quite
 new, and have not yet been used. will you examine them.”
 
“oh, m. beauchamp, if you assure that m. morcerf does not know
 these pistols, you may readily believe that your word will be quite
 sufficient.”
 
“gentlemen,” said château-renaud, “it is not morcerf coming in that
 carriage;—faith, it is franz and debray!”
 
the two young men announced were indeed approaching. “what chance
 brings you here, gentlemen?” said château-renaud, shaking hands with
 each of them.
 
“because,” said debray, “albert sent this morning to request us to
 come.” beauchamp and château-renaud exchanged looks of astonishment. “i
 think i understand his reason,” said morrel.
 
“what is it?”
 
“yesterday afternoon i received letter from m. morcerf, begging me
 to attend the opera.”
 
“and i,” said debray.
 
“and i also,” said franz.
 
“and we, too,” added beauchamp and château-renaud.
 
“having wished you all to witness the challenge, now wishes you to
 be present at the combat.”
 
“exactly so,” said the young men; “you have probably guessed right.”
 
“but, after all these arrangements, does not come himself,” said
 château-renaud. “albert is ten minutes after time.”
 
“there comes,” said beauchamp, “on horseback, at full gallop,
 followed by servant.”
 
“how imprudent,” said château-renaud, “to come on horseback to fight a
 duel with pistols, after all the instructions i had given him.”
 
“and besides,” said beauchamp, “with collar above his cravat, an open
 coat and white waistcoat! why has not painted spot upon his
 heart?—it would have been more simple.”
 
meanwhile albert had arrived within ten paces of the group formed by
 the five young men. jumped from his horse, threw the bridle on his
 servant’s arms, and joined them. was pale, and his eyes were red and
 swollen; it was evident that had not slept. shade of melancholy
 gravity overspread his countenance, which was not natural to him.
 
“i thank you, gentlemen,” said he, “for having complied with my
 request; i feel extremely grateful for this mark of friendship.” morrel
 had stepped back as morcerf approached, and remained at short
 distance. “and to you also, m. morrel, my thanks are due. come, there
 cannot be too many.”
 
40248m
 


“sir,” said maximilian, “you are not perhaps aware that i am m. de
 monte cristo’s friend?”
 
“i was not sure, but i thought it might be so. so much the better; the
 more honorable men there are here the better i shall be satisfied.”
 
“m. morrel,” said château-renaud, “will you apprise the count of monte
 cristo that m. morcerf is arrived, and we are at his disposal?”
 
morrel was preparing to fulfil his commission. beauchamp had meanwhile
 drawn the box of pistols from the carriage.
 
“stop, gentlemen,” said albert; “i have two words to say to the count
 of monte cristo.”
 
“in private?” asked morrel.
 
“no, sir; before all who are here.”
 
albert’s witnesses looked at each other. franz and debray exchanged
 some words in whisper, and morrel, rejoiced at this unexpected
 incident, went to fetch the count, who was walking in retired path
 with emmanuel.
 
“what does want with me?” said monte cristo.
 
“i do not know, but wishes to speak to you.”
 
“ah?” said monte cristo, “i trust is not going to tempt by some
 fresh insult!”
 
“i do not think that such is his intention,” said morrel.
 
the count advanced, accompanied by maximilian and emmanuel. his calm
 and serene look formed singular contrast to albert’s grief-stricken
 face, who approached also, followed by the other four young men.
 
when at three paces distant from each other, albert and the count
 stopped.
 
“approach, gentlemen,” said albert; “i wish you not to lose one word of
 what i am about to have the honor of saying to the count of monte
 cristo, for it must be repeated by you to all who will listen to it,
 strange as it may appear to you.”
 
“proceed, sir,” said the count.
 
“sir,” said albert, at first with tremulous voice, but which
 gradually became firmer, “i reproached you with exposing the conduct of
 m. morcerf in epirus, for guilty as i knew was, i thought you had
 right to punish him; but i have since learned that you had that
 right. it is not fernand mondego’s treachery towards ali pasha which
 induces so readily to excuse you, but the treachery of the fisherman
 fernand towards you, and the almost unheard-of miseries which were its
 consequences; and i say, and proclaim it publicly, that you were
 justified in revenging yourself on my father, and i, his son, thank you
 for not using greater severity.”
 
had thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this
 unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them more than did
 albert’s declaration. as for monte cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards
 heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. could not
 understand how albert’s fiery nature, of which had seen so much
 among the roman bandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. he
 recognized the influence of mercédès, and saw why her noble heart had
 not opposed the sacrifice she knew beforehand would be useless.
 
“now, sir,” said albert, “if you think my apology sufficient, pray give
 your hand. next to the merit of infallibility which you appear to
 possess, i rank that of candidly acknowledging fault. but this
 confession concerns only. i acted well as man, but you have acted
 better than man. an angel alone could have saved one of us from
 death—that angel came from heaven, if not to make us friends (which,
 alas, fatality renders impossible), at least to make us esteem each
 other.”
 
monte cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips half open,
 extended to albert hand which the latter pressed with sentiment
 resembling respectful fear.
 
“gentlemen,” said he, “m. monte cristo receives my apology. i had
 acted hastily towards him. hasty actions are generally bad ones. now my
 fault is repaired. i hope the world will not call cowardly for
 acting as my conscience dictated. but if anyone should entertain a
 false opinion of me,” added he, drawing himself up as if would
 challenge both friends and enemies, “i shall endeavor to correct his
 mistake.”
 
“what happened during the night?” asked beauchamp of château-renaud;
 “we appear to make very sorry figure here.”
 
“in truth, what albert has just done is either very despicable or very
 noble,” replied the baron.
 
“what can it mean?” said debray to franz.
 
“the count of monte cristo acts dishonorably to m. morcerf, and is
 justified by his son! had i ten yaninas in my family, i should only
 consider myself the more bound to fight ten times.”
 
as for monte cristo, his head was bent down, his arms were powerless.
 bowing under the weight of twenty-four years’ reminiscences, thought
 not of albert, of beauchamp, of château-renaud, or of any of that
 group; but thought of that courageous woman who had come to plead
 for her son’s life, to whom had offered his, and who had now saved
 it by the revelation of dreadful family secret, capable of destroying
 forever in that young man’s heart every feeling of filial piety.
 
“providence still,” murmured he; “now only am i fully convinced of
 being the emissary of god!”
 


chapter 91. mother and son
 
the count of monte cristo bowed to the five young men with melancholy
 and dignified smile, and got into his carriage with maximilian and
 emmanuel. albert, beauchamp, and château-renaud remained alone. albert
 looked at his two friends, not timidly, but in way that appeared to
 ask their opinion of what had just done.
 
“indeed, my dear friend,” said beauchamp first, who had either the most
 feeling or the least dissimulation, “allow to congratulate you; this
 is very unhoped-for conclusion of very disagreeable affair.”
 
albert remained silent and wrapped in thought. château-renaud contented
 himself with tapping his boot with his flexible cane.
 
“are we not going?” said he, after this embarrassing silence.
 
“when you please,” replied beauchamp; “allow only to compliment m.
 morcerf, who has given proof today of rare chivalric generosity.”
 
“oh, yes,” said château-renaud.
 
“it is magnificent,” continued beauchamp, “to be able to exercise so
 much self-control!”
 
“assuredly; as for me, i should have been incapable of it,” said
 château-renaud, with most significant coolness.
 
“gentlemen,” interrupted albert, “i think you did not understand that
 something very serious had passed between m. monte cristo and
 myself.”
 
“possibly, possibly,” said beauchamp immediately; “but every simpleton
 would not be able to understand your heroism, and sooner or later you
 will find yourself compelled to explain it to them more energetically
 than would be convenient to your bodily health and the duration of your
 life. may i give you friendly counsel? set out for naples, the hague,
 or st. petersburg—calm countries, where the point of honor is better
 understood than among our hot-headed parisians. seek quietude and
 oblivion, so that you may return peaceably to france after few years.
 am i not right, m. château-renaud?”
 
40252m
 


“that is quite my opinion,” said the gentleman; “nothing induces
 serious duels so much as duel forsworn.”
 
“thank you, gentlemen,” replied albert, with smile of indifference;
 “i shall follow your advice—not because you give it, but because i had
 before intended to quit france. i thank you equally for the service you
 have rendered in being my seconds. it is deeply engraved on my
 heart, and, after what you have just said, i remember that only.”
 
château-renaud and beauchamp looked at each other; the impression was
 the same on both of them, and the tone in which morcerf had just
 expressed his thanks was so determined that the position would have
 become embarrassing for all if the conversation had continued.
 
“good-bye, albert,” said beauchamp suddenly, carelessly extending his
 hand to the young man. the latter did not appear to arouse from his
 lethargy; in fact, did not notice the offered hand.
 
“good-bye,” said château-renaud in his turn, keeping his little cane in
 his left hand, and saluting with his right.
 
albert’s lips scarcely whispered “good-bye,” but his look was more
 explicit; it expressed whole poem of restrained anger, proud disdain,
 and generous indignation. preserved his melancholy and motionless
 position for some time after his two friends had regained their
 carriage; then suddenly unfastening his horse from the little tree to
 which his servant had tied it, mounted and galloped off in the
 direction of paris.
 
in quarter of an hour was entering the house in the rue du helder.
 as alighted, thought saw his father’s pale face behind the
 curtain of the count’s bedroom. albert turned away his head with a
 sigh, and went to his own apartments. cast one lingering look on all
 the luxuries which had rendered life so easy and so happy since his
 infancy; looked at the pictures, whose faces seemed to smile, and
 the landscapes, which appeared painted in brighter colors. then took
 away his mother’s portrait, with its oaken frame, leaving the gilt
 frame from which took it black and empty. then arranged all his
 beautiful turkish arms, his fine english guns, his japanese china, his
 cups mounted in silver, his artistic bronzes by feuchères or barye;
 examined the cupboards, and placed the key in each; threw into drawer
 of his secretaire, which left open, all the pocket-money had
 about him, and with it the thousand fancy jewels from his vases and his
 jewel-boxes; then made an exact inventory of everything, and placed
 it in the most conspicuous part of the table, after putting aside the
 books and papers which had collected there.
 
at the beginning of this work, his servant, notwithstanding orders to
 the contrary, came to his room.
 
“what do you want?” asked he, with more sorrowful than angry tone.
 
“pardon me, sir,” replied the valet; “you had forbidden to disturb
 you, but the count of morcerf has called me.”
 
“well!” said albert.
 
“i did not like to go to him without first seeing you.”
 
“why?”
 
“because the count is doubtless aware that i accompanied you to the
 meeting this morning.”
 
40254m
 


“it is probable,” said albert.
 
“and since has sent for me, it is doubtless to question on what
 happened there. what must i answer?”
 
“the truth.”
 
“then i shall say the duel did not take place?”
 
“you will say i apologized to the count of monte cristo. go.”
 
the valet bowed and retired, and albert returned to his inventory. as
 was finishing this work, the sound of horses prancing in the yard,
 and the wheels of carriage shaking his window, attracted his
 attention. approached the window, and saw his father get into it,
 and drive away. the door was scarcely closed when albert bent his steps
 to his mother’s room; and, one being there to announce him, he
 advanced to her bedchamber, and distressed by what saw and guessed,
 stopped for one moment at the door.
 
as if the same idea had animated these two beings, mercédès was doing
 the same in her apartments that had just done in his. everything was
 in order,—laces, dresses, jewels, linen, money, all were arranged in
 the drawers, and the countess was carefully collecting the keys. albert
 saw all these preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, “my
 mother!” threw his arms around her neck.
 
the artist who could have depicted the expression of these two
 countenances would certainly have made of them beautiful picture. all
 these proofs of an energetic resolution, which albert did not fear on
 his own account, alarmed him for his mother. “what are you doing?”
 asked he.
 
“what were you doing?” replied she.
 
“oh, my mother!” exclaimed albert, so overcome could scarcely speak;
 “it is not the same with you and me—you cannot have made the same
 resolution i have, for i have come to warn you that i bid adieu to your
 house, and—and to you.”
 
“i also,” replied mercédès, “am going, and i acknowledge i had depended
 on your accompanying me; have i deceived myself?”
 
“mother,” said albert with firmness. “i cannot make you share the fate
 i have planned for myself. i must live henceforth without rank and
 fortune, and to begin this hard apprenticeship i must borrow from a
 friend the loaf i shall eat until i have earned one. so, my dear
 mother, i am going at once to ask franz to lend the small sum i
 shall require to supply my present wants.”
 
“you, my poor child, suffer poverty and hunger? oh, do not say so; it
 will break my resolutions.”
 
“but not mine, mother,” replied albert. “i am young and strong; i
 believe i am courageous, and since yesterday i have learned the power
 of will. alas, my dear mother, some have suffered so much, and yet
 live, and have raised new fortune on the ruin of all the promises of
 happiness which heaven had made them—on the fragments of all the hope
 which god had given them! i have seen that, mother; i know that from
 the gulf in which their enemies have plunged them they have risen with
 so much vigor and glory that in their turn they have ruled their former
 conquerors, and have punished them. no, mother; from this moment i have
 done with the past, and accept nothing from it—not even name, because
 you can understand that your cannot bear the name of man who
 ought to blush for it before another.”
 
“albert, my child,” said mercédès, “if i had stronger heart, that is
 the counsel i would have given you; your conscience has spoken when my
 voice became too weak; listen to its dictates. you had friends, albert;
 break off their acquaintance. but do not despair; you have life before
 you, my dear albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years old; and
 as pure heart like yours wants spotless name, take my father’s—it
 was herrera. i am sure, my dear albert, whatever may be your career,
 you will soon render that name illustrious. then, my son, return to the
 world still more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and if i am
 wrong, still let cherish these hopes, for i have future to look
 forward to. for the grave opens when i pass the threshold of this
 house.”
 
“i will fulfil all your wishes, my dear mother,” said the young man.
 “yes, i share your hopes; the anger of heaven will not pursue us, since
 you are pure and i am innocent. but, since our resolution is formed,
 let us act promptly. m. morcerf went out about half an hour ago; the
 opportunity is favorable to avoid an explanation.”
 
“i am ready, my son,” said mercédès.
 
albert ran to fetch carriage. recollected that there was small
 furnished house to let in the rue des saints-pères, where his mother
 would find humble but decent lodging, and thither intended
 conducting the countess. as the carriage stopped at the door, and
 albert was alighting, man approached and gave him letter.
 
albert recognized the bearer. “from the count,” said bertuccio. albert
 took the letter, opened, and read it, then looked round for bertuccio,
 but was gone.
 
returned to mercédès with tears in his eyes and heaving breast, and
 without uttering word gave her the letter. mercédès read:
 
“albert,—while showing you that i have discovered your plans, i hope
 also to convince you of my delicacy. you are free, you leave the
 count’s house, and you take your mother to your home; but reflect,
 albert, you owe her more than your poor noble heart can pay her. keep
 the struggle for yourself, bear all the suffering, but spare her the
 trial of poverty which must accompany your first efforts; for she
 deserves not even the shadow of the misfortune which has this day
 fallen on her, and providence is not willing that the innocent should
 suffer for the guilty. i know you are going to leave the rue du helder
 without taking anything with you. do not seek to know how i discovered
 it; i know it—that is sufficient.
 
“now, listen, albert. twenty-four years ago i returned, proud and
 joyful, to my country. i had betrothed, albert, lovely girl whom i
 adored, and i was bringing to my betrothed hundred and fifty louis,
 painfully amassed by ceaseless toil. this money was for her; i destined
 it for her, and, knowing the treachery of the i buried our treasure
 in the little garden of the house my father lived in at marseilles, on
 the allées meilhan. your mother, albert, knows that poor house well.
 short time since i passed through marseilles, and went to see the old
 place, which revived so many painful recollections; and in the evening
 i took spade and dug in the corner of the garden where i had
 concealed my treasure. the iron box was there—no one had touched
 it—under beautiful fig-tree my father had planted the day i was born,
 which overshadowed the spot. well, albert, this money, which was
 formerly designed to promote the comfort and tranquillity of the woman
 i adored, may now, through strange and painful circumstances, be
 devoted to the same purpose.
 
“oh, feel for me, who could offer millions to that poor woman, but who
 return her only the piece of black bread forgotten under my poor roof
 since the day i was torn from her i loved. you are generous man,
 albert, but perhaps you may be blinded by pride or resentment; if you
 refuse me, if you ask another for what i have right to offer you, i
 will say it is ungenerous of you to refuse the life of your mother at
 the hands of man whose father was allowed by your father to die in
 all the horrors of poverty and despair.”
 
albert stood pale and motionless to hear what his mother would decide
 after she had finished reading this letter. mercédès turned her eyes
 with an ineffable look towards heaven.
 
“i accept it,” said she; “he has right to pay the dowry, which i
 shall take with to some convent!”
 
putting the letter in her bosom, she took her son’s arm, and with a
 firmer step than she even herself expected she went downstairs.
 


chapter 92. the suicide
 
meanwhile monte cristo had also returned to town with emmanuel and
 maximilian. their return was cheerful. emmanuel did not conceal his joy
 at the peaceful termination of the affair, and was loud in his
 expressions of delight. morrel, in corner of the carriage, allowed
 his brother-in-law’s gayety to expend itself in words, while felt
 equal inward joy, which, however, betrayed itself only in his
 countenance.
 
at the barrière du trône they met bertuccio, who was waiting there,
 motionless as sentinel at his post. monte cristo put his head out of
 the window, exchanged few words with him in low tone, and the
 steward disappeared.
 
“count,” said emmanuel, when they were at the end of the place royale,
 “put down at my door, that my wife may not have single moment of
 needless anxiety on my account or yours.”
 
“if it were not ridiculous to make display of our triumph, said
 morrel, i would invite the count to our house; besides that, he
 doubtless has some trembling heart to comfort. so we will take leave of
 our friend, and let him hasten home.”
 
“stop moment,” said monte cristo; “do not let lose both my
 companions. return, emmanuel, to your charming wife, and present my
 best compliments to her; and do you, morrel, accompany to the
 champs-Élysées.”
 
“willingly,” said maximilian; “particularly as i have business in that
 quarter.”
 
“shall we wait breakfast for you?” asked emmanuel.
 
“no,” replied the young man. the door was closed, and the carriage
 proceeded. “see what good fortune i brought you!” said morrel, when he
 was alone with the count. “have you not thought so?”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo; “for that reason i wished to keep you near
 me.”
 
“it is miraculous!” continued morrel, answering his own thoughts.
 
“what?” said monte cristo.
 
“what has just happened.”
 
“yes,” said the count, “you are right—it is miraculous.”
 
“for albert is brave,” resumed morrel.
 
“very brave,” said monte cristo; “i have seen him sleep with sword
 suspended over his head.”
 
“and i know has fought two duels,” said morrel. “how can you
 reconcile that with his conduct this morning?”
 
“all owing to your influence,” replied monte cristo, smiling.
 
“it is well for albert is not in the army,” said morrel.
 
“why?”
 
“an apology on the ground!” said the young captain, shaking his head.
 
“come,” said the count mildly, “do not entertain the prejudices of
 ordinary men, morrel! acknowledge, that if albert is brave, cannot
 be coward; must then have had some reason for acting as did
 this morning, and confess that his conduct is more heroic than
 otherwise.”
 
“doubtless, doubtless,” said morrel; “but i shall say, like the
 spaniard, ‘he has not been so brave today as was yesterday.’”
 
“you will breakfast with me, will you not, morrel?” said the count, to
 turn the conversation.
 
“no; i must leave you at ten o’clock.”
 
“your engagement was for breakfast, then?” said the count.
 
morrel smiled, and shook his head.
 
“still you must breakfast somewhere.”
 
“but if i am not hungry?” said the young man.
 
“oh,” said the count, “i only know two things which destroy the
 appetite,—grief—and as i am happy to see you very cheerful, it is not
 that—and love. now after what you told this morning of your heart, i
 may believe——”
 
“well, count,” replied morrel gayly, “i will not dispute it.”
 
“but you will not make your confidant, maximilian?” said the count,
 in tone which showed how gladly would have been admitted to the
 secret.
 
“i showed you this morning that i had heart, did i not, count?” monte
 cristo only answered by extending his hand to the young man. “well,”
 continued the latter, “since that heart is longer with you in the
 bois vincennes, it is elsewhere, and i must go and find it.”
 
“go,” said the count deliberately; “go, dear friend, but promise if
 you meet with any obstacle to remember that i have some power in this
 world, that i am happy to use that power in the behalf of those i love,
 and that i love you, morrel.”
 
40260m
 


“i will remember it,” said the young man, “as selfish children
 recollect their parents when they want their aid. when i need your
 assistance, and the moment arrives, i will come to you, count.”
 
“well, i rely upon your promise. good-bye, then.”
 
“good-bye, till we meet again.”
 
they had arrived in the champs-Élysées. monte cristo opened the
 carriage-door, morrel sprang out on the pavement, bertuccio was waiting
 on the steps. morrel disappeared down the avenue marigny, and monte
 cristo hastened to join bertuccio.
 
“well?” asked he.
 
“she is going to leave her house,” said the steward.
 
“and her son?”
 
“florentin, his valet, thinks is going to do the same.”
 
“come this way.” monte cristo took bertuccio into his study, wrote the
 letter we have seen, and gave it to the steward. “go,” said quickly.
 “but first, let haydée be informed that i have returned.”
 
“here i am,” said the young girl, who at the sound of the carriage had
 run downstairs and whose face was radiant with joy at seeing the count
 return safely. bertuccio left. every transport of daughter finding a
 father, all the delight of mistress seeing an adored lover, were felt
 by haydée during the first moments of this meeting, which she had so
 eagerly expected. doubtless, although less evident, monte cristo’s joy
 was not less intense. joy to hearts which have suffered long is like
 the dew on the ground after long drought; both the heart and the
 ground absorb that beneficent moisture falling on them, and nothing is
 outwardly apparent.
 
monte cristo was beginning to think, what had not for long time
 dared to believe, that there were two mercédès in the world, and he
 might yet be happy. his eye, elate with happiness, was reading eagerly
 the tearful gaze of haydée, when suddenly the door opened. the count
 knit his brow.
 
“m. morcerf!” said baptistin, as if that name sufficed for his
 excuse. in fact, the count’s face brightened.
 
“which,” asked he, “the viscount or the count?”
 
“the count.”
 
“oh,” exclaimed haydée, “is it not yet over?”
 
“i know not if it is finished, my beloved child,” said monte cristo,
 taking the young girl’s hands; “but i do know you have nothing more to
 fear.”
 
“but it is the wretched——”
 
“that man cannot injure me, haydée,” said monte cristo; “it was his son
 alone that there was cause to fear.”
 
“and what i have suffered,” said the young girl, “you shall never know,
 my lord.”
 
monte cristo smiled. “by my father’s tomb,” said he, extending his hand
 over the head of the young girl, “i swear to you, haydée, that if any
 misfortune happens, it will not be to me.”
 
“i believe you, my lord, as implicitly as if god had spoken to me,”
 said the young girl, presenting her forehead to him. monte cristo
 pressed on that pure beautiful forehead kiss which made two hearts
 throb at once, the one violently, the other secretly.
 
“oh,” murmured the count, “shall i then be permitted to love again? ask
 m. morcerf into the drawing-room,” said to baptistin, while he
 led the beautiful greek girl to private staircase.
 
we must explain this visit, which although expected by monte cristo, is
 unexpected to our readers. while mercédès, as we have said, was making
 similar inventory of her property to albert’s, while she was
 arranging her jewels, shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to
 leave everything in perfect order, she did not perceive pale and
 sinister face at glass door which threw light into the passage, from
 which everything could be both seen and heard. who was thus looking,
 without being heard or seen, probably heard and saw all that passed in
 madame morcerf’s apartments. from that glass door the pale-faced man
 went to the count’s bedroom and raised with constricted hand the
 curtain of window overlooking the courtyard. remained there ten
 minutes, motionless and dumb, listening to the beating of his own
 heart. for him those ten minutes were very long. it was then albert,
 returning from his meeting with the count, perceived his father
 watching for his arrival behind curtain, and turned aside. the
 count’s eye expanded; knew albert had insulted the count dreadfully,
 and that in every country in the world such an insult would lead to a
 deadly duel. albert returned safely—then the count was revenged.
 
an indescribable ray of joy illumined that wretched countenance like
 the last ray of the sun before it disappears behind the clouds which
 bear the aspect, not of downy couch, but of tomb. but as we have
 said, waited in vain for his to come to his apartment with the
 account of his triumph. easily understood why his did not come
 to see him before went to avenge his father’s honor; but when that
 was done, why did not his come and throw himself into his arms?
 
it was then, when the count could not see albert, that sent for his
 servant, who knew was authorized not to conceal anything from him.
 ten minutes afterwards, general morcerf was seen on the steps in a
 black coat with military collar, black pantaloons, and black gloves.
 had apparently given previous orders, for as reached the bottom
 step his carriage came from the coach-house ready for him. the valet
 threw into the carriage his military cloak, in which two swords were
 wrapped, and, shutting the door, took his seat by the side of the
 coachman. the coachman stooped down for his orders.
 
“to the champs-Élysées,” said the general; “the count of monte
 cristo’s. hurry!”
 
the horses bounded beneath the whip; and in five minutes they stopped
 before the count’s door. m. morcerf opened the door himself, and as
 the carriage rolled away passed up the walk, rang, and entered the
 open door with his servant.
 
moment afterwards, baptistin announced the count of morcerf to monte
 cristo, and the latter, leading haydée aside, ordered that morcerf be
 asked into the drawing-room. the general was pacing the room the third
 time when, in turning, perceived monte cristo at the door.
 
“ah, it is m. morcerf,” said monte cristo quietly; “i thought i had
 not heard aright.”
 
“yes, it is i,” said the count, whom frightful contraction of the
 lips prevented from articulating freely.
 
“may i know the cause which procures the pleasure of seeing m. de
 morcerf so early?”
 
“had you not meeting with my this morning?” asked the general.
 
“i had,” replied the count.
 
“and i know my had good reasons to wish to fight with you, and to
 endeavor to kill you.”
 
“yes, sir, had very good ones; but you see that in spite of them he
 has not killed me, and did not even fight.”
 
“yet considered you the cause of his father’s dishonor, the cause of
 the fearful ruin which has fallen on my house.”
 
“it is true, sir,” said monte cristo with his dreadful calmness; “a
 secondary cause, but not the principal.”
 
“doubtless you made, then, some apology or explanation?”
 
“i explained nothing, and it is who apologized to me.”
 
“but to what do you attribute this conduct?”
 
“to the conviction, probably, that there was one more guilty than i.”
 
“and who was that?”
 
“his father.”
 
“that may be,” said the count, turning pale; “but you know the guilty
 do not like to find themselves convicted.”
 
“i know it, and i expected this result.”
 
“you expected my would be coward?” cried the count.
 
“m. albert morcerf is coward!” said monte cristo.
 
“a man who holds sword in his hand, and sees mortal enemy within
 reach of that sword, and does not fight, is coward! why is not
 here that i may tell him so?”
 
“sir,” replied monte cristo coldly, “i did not expect that you had come
 here to relate to your little family affairs. go and tell m. albert
 that, and may know what to answer you.”
 
“oh, no, no,” said the general, smiling faintly, “i did not come for
 that purpose; you are right. i came to tell you that i also look upon
 you as my enemy. i came to tell you that i hate you instinctively; that
 it seems as if i had always known you, and always hated you; and, in
 short, since the young people of the present day will not fight, it
 remains for us to do so. do you think so, sir?”
 
“certainly. and when i told you i had foreseen the result, it is the
 honor of your visit i alluded to.”
 
“so much the better. are you prepared?”
 
“yes, sir.”
 
“you know that we shall fight till one of us is dead,” said the
 general, whose teeth were clenched with rage.
 
40262m
 


“until one of us dies,” repeated monte cristo, moving his head slightly
 up and down.
 
“let us start, then; we need witnesses.”
 
“very true,” said monte cristo; “it is unnecessary, we know each other
 so well!”
 
“on the contrary,” said the count, “we know so little of each other.”
 
“indeed?” said monte cristo, with the same indomitable coolness; “let
 us see. are you not the soldier fernand who deserted on the eve of the
 battle of waterloo? are you not the lieutenant fernand who served as
 guide and spy to the french army in spain? are you not the captain
 fernand who betrayed, sold, and murdered his benefactor, ali? and have
 not all these fernands, united, made lieutenant-general, the count of
 morcerf, peer of france?”
 
“oh,” cried the general, as if branded with hot iron, “wretch,—to
 reproach with my shame when about, perhaps, to kill me! no, i did
 not say i was stranger to you. i know well, demon, that you have
 penetrated into the darkness of the past, and that you have read, by
 the light of what torch i know not, every page of my life; but perhaps
 i may be more honorable in my shame than you under your pompous
 coverings. no—no, i am aware you know me; but i know you only as an
 adventurer sewn up in gold and jewellery. you call yourself, in paris,
 the count of monte cristo; in italy, sinbad the sailor; in malta, i
 forget what. but it is your real name i want to know, in the midst of
 your hundred names, that i may pronounce it when we meet to fight, at
 the moment when i plunge my sword through your heart.”
 
the count of monte cristo turned dreadfully pale; his eye seemed to
 burn with devouring fire. leaped towards dressing-room near his
 bedroom, and in less than moment, tearing off his cravat, his coat
 and waistcoat, put on sailor’s jacket and hat, from beneath which
 rolled his long black hair. returned thus, formidable and
 implacable, advancing with his arms crossed on his breast, towards the
 general, who could not understand why had disappeared, but who on
 seeing him again, and feeling his teeth chatter and his legs sink under
 him, drew back, and only stopped when found table to support his
 clenched hand.
 
“fernand,” cried he, “of my hundred names i need only tell you one, to
 overwhelm you! but you guess it now, do you not?—or, rather, you
 remember it? for, notwithstanding all my sorrows and my tortures, i
 show you today face which the happiness of revenge makes young
 again—a face you must often have seen in your dreams since your
 marriage with mercédès, my betrothed!”
 
40268m
 


the general, with his head thrown back, hands extended, gaze fixed,
 looked silently at this dreadful apparition; then seeking the wall to
 support him, glided along close to it until reached the door,
 through which went out backwards, uttering this single mournful,
 lamentable, distressing cry:
 
“edmond dantès!”
 
then, with sighs which were unlike any human sound, dragged himself
 to the door, reeled across the courtyard, and falling into the arms of
 his valet, said in voice scarcely intelligible,—“home, home.”
 
the fresh air and the shame felt at having exposed himself before
 his servants, partly recalled his senses, but the ride was short, and
 as drew near his house all his wretchedness revived. stopped at a
 short distance from the house and alighted. the door was wide open, a
 hackney-coach was standing in the middle of the yard—a strange sight
 before so noble mansion; the count looked at it with terror, but
 without daring to inquire its meaning, rushed towards his apartment.
 
two persons were coming down the stairs; had only time to creep into
 an alcove to avoid them. it was mercédès leaning on her son’s arm and
 leaving the house. they passed close by the unhappy being, who,
 concealed behind the damask curtain, almost felt mercédès dress brush
 past him, and his son’s warm breath, pronouncing these words:
 
“courage, mother! come, this is longer our home!”
 
the words died away, the steps were lost in the distance. the general
 drew himself up, clinging to the curtain; uttered the most dreadful
 sob which ever escaped from the bosom of father abandoned at the same
 time by his wife and son. soon heard the clatter of the iron step of
 the hackney-coach, then the coachman’s voice, and then the rolling of
 the heavy vehicle shook the windows. darted to his bedroom to see
 once more all had loved in the world; but the hackney-coach drove on
 and the head of neither mercédès nor her appeared at the window to
 take last look at the house or the deserted father and husband.
 
and at the very moment when the wheels of that coach crossed the
 gateway report was heard, and thick smoke escaped through one of
 the panes of the window, which was broken by the explosion.
 
40270m
 



chapter 93. valentine
 
we may easily conceive where morrel’s appointment was. on leaving monte
 cristo walked slowly towards villefort’s; we say slowly, for morrel
 had more than half an hour to spare to go five hundred steps, but he
 had hastened to take leave of monte cristo because wished to be
 alone with his thoughts. knew his time well—the hour when valentine
 was giving noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to be disturbed in
 the performance of this pious duty. noirtier and valentine had given
 him leave to go twice week, and was now availing himself of that
 permission.
 
arrived; valentine was expecting him. uneasy and almost crazed, she
 seized his hand and led him to her grandfather. this uneasiness,
 amounting almost to frenzy, arose from the report morcerf’s adventure
 had made in the world, for the affair at the opera was generally known.
 one at villefort’s doubted that duel would ensue from it.
 valentine, with her woman’s instinct, guessed that morrel would be
 monte cristo’s second, and from the young man’s well-known courage and
 his great affection for the count, she feared that would not content
 himself with the passive part assigned to him. we may easily understand
 how eagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and received; and
 morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes of his beloved, when
 she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy as it was
 unexpected.
 
“now,” said valentine, motioning to morrel to sit down near her
 grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,—“now let us talk
 about our own affairs. you know, maximilian, grandpapa once thought of
 leaving this house, and taking an apartment away from m. de
 villefort’s.”
 
“yes,” said maximilian, “i recollect the project, of which i highly
 approved.”
 
“well,” said valentine, “you may approve again, for grandpapa is again
 thinking of it.”
 
“bravo,” said maximilian.
 
40272m
 


“and do you know,” said valentine, “what reason grandpapa gives for
 leaving this house.” noirtier looked at valentine to impose silence,
 but she did not notice him; her looks, her eyes, her smile, were all
 for morrel.
 
“oh, whatever may be m. noirtier’s reason,” answered morrel, “i can
 readily believe it to be good one.”
 
“an excellent one,” said valentine. “he pretends the air of the
 faubourg saint-honoré is not good for me.”
 
“indeed?” said morrel; “in that m. noirtier may be right; you have not
 seemed to be well for the last fortnight.”
 
“not very,” said valentine. “and grandpapa has become my physician, and
 i have the greatest confidence in him, because knows everything.”
 
“do you then really suffer?” asked morrel quickly.
 
“oh, it must not be called suffering; i feel general uneasiness, that
 is all. i have lost my appetite, and my stomach feels as if it were
 struggling to get accustomed to something.” noirtier did not lose a
 word of what valentine said.
 
“and what treatment do you adopt for this singular complaint?”
 
“a very simple one,” said valentine. “i swallow every morning a
 spoonful of the mixture prepared for my grandfather. when i say one
 spoonful, i began by one—now i take four. grandpapa says it is a
 panacea.” valentine smiled, but it was evident that she suffered.
 
maximilian, in his devotedness, gazed silently at her. she was very
 beautiful, but her usual pallor had increased; her eyes were more
 brilliant than ever, and her hands, which were generally white like
 mother-of-pearl, now more resembled wax, to which time was adding a
 yellowish hue.
 
from valentine the young man looked towards noirtier. the latter
 watched with strange and deep interest the young girl, absorbed by her
 affection, and also, like morrel, followed those traces of inward
 suffering which was so little perceptible to common observer that
 they escaped the notice of everyone but the grandfather and the lover.
 
“but,” said morrel, “i thought this mixture, of which you now take four
 spoonfuls, was prepared for m. noirtier?”
 
“i know it is very bitter,” said valentine; “so bitter, that all i
 drink afterwards appears to have the same taste.” noirtier looked
 inquiringly at his granddaughter. “yes, grandpapa,” said valentine; “it
 is so. just now, before i came down to you, i drank glass of sugared
 water; i left half, because it seemed so bitter.” noirtier turned pale,
 and made sign that wished to speak.
 
valentine rose to fetch the dictionary. noirtier watched her with
 evident anguish. in fact, the blood was rushing to the young girl’s
 head already, her cheeks were becoming red.
 
“oh,” cried she, without losing any of her cheerfulness, “this is
 singular! i can’t see! did the sun shine in my eyes?” and she leaned
 against the window.
 
“the sun is not shining,” said morrel, more alarmed by noirtier’s
 expression than by valentine’s indisposition. ran towards her. the
 young girl smiled.
 
“cheer up,” said she to noirtier. “do not be alarmed, maximilian; it is
 nothing, and has already passed away. but listen! do i not hear a
 carriage in the courtyard?” she opened noirtier’s door, ran to window
 in the passage, and returned hastily. “yes,” said she, “it is madame
 danglars and her daughter, who have come to call on us. good-bye;—i
 must run away, for they would send here for me, or, rather, farewell
 till i see you again. stay with grandpapa, maximilian; i promise you
 not to persuade them to stay.”
 
40274m
 


morrel watched her as she left the room; heard her ascend the little
 staircase which led both to madame villefort’s apartments and to
 hers. as soon as she was gone, noirtier made sign to morrel to take
 the dictionary. morrel obeyed; guided by valentine, had learned how
 to understand the old man quickly. accustomed, however, as was to
 the work, had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and to
 find every word in the dictionary, so that it was ten minutes before
 the thought of the old man was translated by these words,
 
“fetch the glass of water and the decanter from valentine’s room.”
 
morrel rang immediately for the servant who had taken barrois’s
 situation, and in noirtier’s name gave that order. the servant soon
 returned. the decanter and the glass were completely empty. noirtier
 made sign that wished to speak.
 
“why are the glass and decanter empty?” asked he; “valentine said she
 only drank half the glassful.”
 
the translation of this new question occupied another five minutes.
 
“i do not know,” said the servant, “but the housemaid is in
 mademoiselle valentine’s room: perhaps she has emptied them.”
 
“ask her,” said morrel, translating noirtier’s thought this time by his
 look. the servant went out, but returned almost immediately.
 “mademoiselle valentine passed through the room to go to madame de
 villefort’s,” said he; “and in passing, as she was thirsty, she drank
 what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, master edward had
 emptied that to make pond for his ducks.”
 
noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as gambler does who stakes his
 all on one stroke. from that moment the old man’s eyes were fixed on
 the door, and did not quit it.
 
it was indeed madame danglars and her daughter whom valentine had seen;
 they had been ushered into madame villefort’s room, who had said she
 would receive them there. that is why valentine passed through her
 room, which was on level with valentine’s, and only separated from it
 by edward’s. the two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of
 official stiffness which preludes formal communication. among worldly
 people manner is contagious. madame villefort received them with
 equal solemnity. valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities
 were resumed.
 
“my dear friend,” said the baroness, while the two young people were
 shaking hands, “i and eugénie are come to be the first to announce to
 you the approaching marriage of my daughter with prince cavalcanti.”
 danglars kept up the title of prince. the popular banker found that it
 answered better than count.
 
“allow to present you my sincere congratulations,” replied madame de
 villefort. “prince cavalcanti appears to be young man of rare
 qualities.”
 
40276m
 


“listen,” said the baroness, smiling; “speaking to you as friend i
 can say that the prince does not yet appear all will be. has
 about him little of that foreign manner by which french persons
 recognize, at first sight, the italian or german nobleman. besides, he
 gives evidence of great kindness of disposition, much keenness of wit,
 and as to suitability, m. danglars assures that his fortune is
 majestic—that is his word.”
 
“and then,” said eugénie, while turning over the leaves of madame de
 villefort’s album, “add that you have taken great fancy to the young
 man.”
 
“and,” said madame villefort, “i need not ask you if you share that
 fancy.”
 
“i?” replied eugénie with her usual candor. “oh, not the least in the
 world, madame! my wish was not to confine myself to domestic cares, or
 the caprices of any man, but to be an artist, and consequently free in
 heart, in person, and in thought.”
 
eugénie pronounced these words with so firm tone that the color
 mounted to valentine’s cheeks. the timid girl could not understand that
 vigorous nature which appeared to have none of the timidities of woman.
 
“at any rate,” said she, “since i am to be married whether i will or
 not, i ought to be thankful to providence for having released from
 my engagement with m. albert morcerf, or i should this day have been
 the wife of dishonored man.”
 
“it is true,” said the baroness, with that strange simplicity sometimes
 met with among fashionable ladies, and of which plebeian intercourse
 can never entirely deprive them,—“it is very true that had not the
 morcerfs hesitated, my daughter would have married monsieur albert. the
 general depended much on it; even came to force m. danglars. we have
 had narrow escape.”
 
“but,” said valentine, timidly, “does all the father’s shame revert
 upon the son? monsieur albert appears to quite innocent of the
 treason charged against the general.”
 
“excuse me,” said the implacable young girl, “monsieur albert claims
 and well deserves his share. it appears that after having challenged m.
 monte cristo at the opera yesterday, apologized on the ground
 today.”
 
“impossible,” said madame villefort.
 
“ah, my dear friend,” said madame danglars, with the same simplicity we
 before noticed, “it is fact. i heard it from m. debray, who was
 present at the explanation.”
 
valentine also knew the truth, but she did not answer. single word
 had reminded her that morrel was expecting her in m. noirtier’s room.
 deeply engaged with sort of inward contemplation, valentine had
 ceased for moment to join in the conversation. she would, indeed,
 have found it impossible to repeat what had been said the last few
 minutes, when suddenly madame danglars’ hand, pressed on her arm,
 aroused her from her lethargy.
 
“what is it?” said she, starting at madame danglars’ touch as she would
 have done from an electric shock.
 
“it is, my dear valentine,” said the baroness, “that you are,
 doubtless, suffering.”
 
40280m
 


“i?” said the young girl, passing her hand across her burning forehead.
 
“yes, look at yourself in that glass; you have turned pale and then red
 successively, three or four times in one minute.”
 
“indeed,” cried eugénie, “you are very pale!”
 
“oh, do not be alarmed; i have been so for many days.” artless as she
 was, the young girl knew that this was an opportunity to leave, and
 besides, madame villefort came to her assistance.
 
“retire, valentine,” said she; “you are really suffering, and these
 ladies will excuse you; drink glass of pure water, it will restore
 you.”
 
valentine kissed eugénie, bowed to madame danglars, who had already
 risen to take her leave, and went out.
 
“that poor child,” said madame villefort when valentine was gone,
 “she makes very uneasy, and i should not be astonished if she had
 some serious illness.”
 
meanwhile, valentine, in sort of excitement which she could not quite
 understand, had crossed edward’s room without noticing some trick of
 the child, and through her own had reached the little staircase.
 
she was within three steps of the bottom; she already heard morrel’s
 voice, when suddenly cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot
 missed the step, her hands had power to hold the baluster, and
 falling against the wall she lost her balance wholly and toppled to the
 floor. morrel bounded to the door, opened it, and found valentine
 stretched out at the bottom of the stairs. quick as flash, raised
 her in his arms and placed her in chair. valentine opened her eyes.
 
“oh, what clumsy thing i am,” said she with feverish volubility; “i
 don’t know my way. i forgot there were three more steps before the
 landing.”
 
“you have hurt yourself, perhaps,” said morrel. “what can i do for you,
 valentine?”
 
valentine looked around her; she saw the deepest terror depicted in
 noirtier’s eyes.
 
“don’t worry, dear grandpapa,” said she, endeavoring to smile; “it is
 nothing—it is nothing; i was giddy, that is all.”
 
“another attack of giddiness,” said morrel, clasping his hands. “oh,
 attend to it, valentine, i entreat you.”
 
“but no,” said valentine,—“no, i tell you it is all past, and it was
 nothing. now, let tell you some news; eugénie is to be married in a
 week, and in three days there is to be grand feast, betrothal
 festival. we are all invited, my father, madame villefort, and i—at
 least, i understood it so.”
 
“when will it be our turn to think of these things? oh, valentine, you
 who have so much influence over your grandpapa, try to make him
 answer—soon.”
 
“and do you,” said valentine, “depend on to stimulate the tardiness
 and arouse the memory of grandpapa?”
 
“yes,” cried morrel, “make haste. so long as you are not mine,
 valentine, i shall always think i may lose you.”
 
“oh,” replied valentine with convulsive movement, “oh, indeed,
 maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for soldier who, they
 say, never knows fear. ha, ha, ha!”
 
she burst into forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and
 twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless.
 the cry of terror which was stopped on noirtier’s lips, seemed to start
 from his eyes. morrel understood it; knew must call assistance.
 the young man rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been in
 mademoiselle valentine’s room, and the servant who had replaced
 barrois, ran in at the same moment. valentine was so pale, so cold, so
 inanimate that without listening to what was said to them they were
 seized with the fear which pervaded that house, and they flew into the
 passage crying for help. madame danglars and eugénie were going out at
 that moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.
 
“i told you so!” exclaimed madame villefort. “poor child!”
 
40278m
 



chapter 94. maximilian’s avowal
 
at the same moment m. villefort’s voice was heard calling from his
 study, “what is the matter?”
 
morrel looked at noirtier who had recovered his self-command, and with
 glance indicated the closet where once before under somewhat similar
 circumstances, had taken refuge. had only time to get his hat and
 throw himself breathless into the closet when the procureur’s footstep
 was heard in the passage.
 
villefort sprang into the room, ran to valentine, and took her in his
 arms.
 
“a physician, physician,—m. d’avrigny!” cried villefort; “or rather i
 will go for him myself.”
 
flew from the apartment, and morrel at the same moment darted out at
 the other door. had been struck to the heart by frightful
 recollection—the conversation had heard between the doctor and
 villefort the night of madame saint-méran’s death, recurred to him;
 these symptoms, to less alarming extent, were the same which had
 preceded the death of barrois. at the same time monte cristo’s voice
 seemed to resound in his ear with the words had heard only two hours
 before, “whatever you want, morrel, come to me; i have great power.”
 
more rapidly than thought, darted down the rue matignon, and thence
 to the avenue des champs-Élysées.
 
meanwhile m. villefort arrived in hired cabriolet at m.
 d’avrigny’s door. rang so violently that the porter was alarmed.
 villefort ran upstairs without saying word. the porter knew him, and
 let him pass, only calling to him:
 
“in his study, monsieur procureur—in his study!” villefort pushed, or
 rather forced, the door open.
 
“ah,” said the doctor, “is it you?”
 
“yes,” said villefort, closing the door after him, “it is i, who am
 come in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone. doctor, my house is
 accursed!”
 
“what?” said the latter with apparent coolness, but with deep emotion,
 “have you another invalid?”
 
“yes, doctor,” cried villefort, clutching his hair, “yes!”
 
d’avrigny’s look implied, “i told you it would be so.” then slowly
 uttered these words, “who is now dying in your house? what new victim
 is going to accuse you of weakness before god?”
 
mournful sob burst from villefort’s heart; approached the doctor,
 and seizing his arm,—“valentine,” said he, “it is valentine’s turn!”
 
40284m
 


“your daughter!” cried d’avrigny with grief and surprise.
 
“you see you were deceived,” murmured the magistrate; “come and see
 her, and on her bed of agony entreat her pardon for having suspected
 her.”
 
“each time you have applied to me,” said the doctor, “it has been too
 late; still i will go. but let us make haste, sir; with the enemies you
 have to do with there is time to be lost.”
 
“oh, this time, doctor, you shall not have to reproach with
 weakness. this time i will know the assassin, and will pursue him.”
 
“let us try first to save the victim before we think of revenging her,”
 said d’avrigny. “come.”
 
the same cabriolet which had brought villefort took them back at full
 speed, and at this moment morrel rapped at monte cristo’s door.
 
the count was in his study and was reading with an angry look something
 which bertuccio had brought in haste. hearing the name of morrel, who
 had left him only two hours before, the count raised his head, arose,
 and sprang to meet him.
 
“what is the matter, maximilian?” asked he; “you are pale, and the
 perspiration rolls from your forehead.” morrel fell into chair.
 
“yes,” said he, “i came quickly; i wanted to speak to you.”
 
“are all your family well?” asked the count, with an affectionate
 benevolence, whose sincerity one could for moment doubt.
 
“thank you, count—thank you,” said the young man, evidently embarrassed
 how to begin the conversation; “yes, everyone in my family is well.”
 
“so much the better; yet you have something to tell me?” replied the
 count with increased anxiety.
 
“yes,” said morrel, “it is true; i have but now left house where
 death has just entered, to run to you.”
 
“are you then come from m. morcerf’s?” asked monte cristo.
 
“no,” said morrel; “is someone dead in his house?”
 
“the general has just blown his brains out,” replied monte cristo with
 great coolness.
 
“oh, what dreadful event!” cried maximilian.
 
“not for the countess, or for albert,” said monte cristo; “a dead
 father or husband is better than dishonored one,—blood washes out
 shame.”
 
“poor countess,” said maximilian, “i pity her very much; she is so
 noble woman!”
 
“pity albert also, maximilian; for believe is the worthy of
 the countess. but let us return to yourself. you have hastened to
 me—can i have the happiness of being useful to you?”
 
40286m
 


“yes, i need your help: that is i thought like madman that you could
 lend your assistance in case where god alone can succor me.”
 
“tell what it is,” replied monte cristo.
 
“oh,” said morrel, “i know not, indeed, if i may reveal this secret to
 mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessity constrains me, count——”
 morrel hesitated.
 
“do you think i love you?” said monte cristo, taking the young man’s
 hand affectionately in his.
 
“oh, you encourage me, and something tells there,” placing his hand
 on his heart, “that i ought to have secret from you.”
 
“you are right, morrel; god is speaking to your heart, and your heart
 speaks to you. tell what it says.”
 
“count, will you allow to send baptistin to inquire after someone
 you know?”
 
“i am at your service, and still more my servants.”
 
“oh, i cannot live if she is not better.”
 
“shall i ring for baptistin?”
 
“no, i will go and speak to him myself.” morrel went out, called
 baptistin, and whispered few words to him. the valet ran directly.
 
“well, have you sent?” asked monte cristo, seeing morrel return.
 
“yes, and now i shall be more calm.”
 
“you know i am waiting,” said monte cristo, smiling.
 
“yes, and i will tell you. one evening i was in garden; clump of
 trees concealed me; one suspected i was there. two persons passed
 near me—allow to conceal their names for the present; they were
 speaking in an undertone, and yet i was so interested in what they said
 that i did not lose single word.”
 
“this is gloomy introduction, if i may judge from your pallor and
 shuddering, morrel.”
 
“oh, yes, very gloomy, my friend. someone had just died in the house to
 which that garden belonged. one of the persons whose conversation i
 overheard was the master of the house; the other, the physician. the
 former was confiding to the latter his grief and fear, for it was the
 second time within month that death had suddenly and unexpectedly
 entered that house which was apparently destined to destruction by some
 exterminating angel, as an object of god’s anger.”
 
“ah, indeed?” said monte cristo, looking earnestly at the young man,
 and by an imperceptible movement turning his chair, so that remained
 in the shade while the light fell full on maximilian’s face.
 
“yes,” continued morrel, “death had entered that house twice within one
 month.”
 
“and what did the doctor answer?” asked monte cristo.
 
“he replied—he replied, that the death was not natural one, and must
 be attributed”—
 
“to what?”
 
“to poison.”
 
“indeed!” said monte cristo with slight cough which in moments of
 extreme emotion helped him to disguise blush, or his pallor, or the
 intense interest with which listened; “indeed, maximilian, did you
 hear that?”
 
“yes, my dear count, i heard it; and the doctor added that if another
 death occurred in similar way must appeal to justice.”
 
monte cristo listened, or appeared to do so, with the greatest
 calmness.
 
“well,” said maximilian, “death came third time, and neither the
 master of the house nor the doctor said word. death is now, perhaps,
 striking fourth blow. count, what am i bound to do, being in
 possession of this secret?”
 
“my dear friend,” said monte cristo, “you appear to be relating an
 adventure which we all know by heart. i know the house where you heard
 it, or one very similar to it; house with garden, master, a
 physician, and where there have been three unexpected and sudden
 deaths. well, i have not intercepted your confidence, and yet i know
 all that as well as you, and i have conscientious scruples. no, it
 does not concern me. you say an exterminating angel appears to have
 devoted that house to god’s anger—well, who says your supposition is
 not reality? do not notice things which those whose interest it is to
 see them pass over. if it is god’s justice, instead of his anger, which
 is walking through that house, maximilian, turn away your face and let
 his justice accomplish its purpose.”
 
morrel shuddered. there was something mournful, solemn, and terrible in
 the count’s manner.
 
“besides,” continued he, in so changed tone that one would have
 supposed it was the same person speaking—“besides, who says that it
 will begin again?”
 
“it has returned, count,” exclaimed morrel; “that is why i hastened to
 you.”
 
“well, what do you wish to do? do you wish me, for instance, to give
 information to the procureur?” monte cristo uttered the last words with
 so much meaning that morrel, starting up, cried out:
 
“you know of whom i speak, count, do you not?”
 
“perfectly well, my good friend; and i will prove it to you by putting
 the dots to the _i_, or rather by naming the persons. you were walking
 one evening in m. villefort’s garden; from what you relate, i
 suppose it to have been the evening of madame saint-méran’s death.
 you heard m. villefort talking to m. d’avrigny about the death of m.
 saint-méran, and that less surprising, of the countess. m.
 d’avrigny said believed they both proceeded from poison; and you,
 honest man, have ever since been asking your heart and sounding your
 conscience to know if you ought to expose or conceal this secret. we
 are longer in the middle ages; there is longer vehmgericht, or
 free tribunals; what do you want to ask these people? ‘conscience, what
 hast thou to do with me?’ as sterne said. my dear fellow, let them
 sleep on, if they are asleep; let them grow pale in their drowsiness,
 if they are disposed to do so, and pray do you remain in peace, who
 have remorse to disturb you.”
 
deep grief was depicted on morrel’s features; seized monte cristo’s
 hand. “but it is beginning again, i say!”
 
“well,” said the count, astonished at his perseverance, which could
 not understand, and looking still more earnestly at maximilian, “let it
 begin again,—it is like the house of the atreidae;19 god has condemned
 them, and they must submit to their punishment. they will all
 disappear, like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall,
 one by one, under the breath of their builder, even if there are two
 hundred of them. three months since it was m. saint-méran; madame de
 saint-méran two months since; the other day it was barrois; today, the
 old noirtier, or young valentine.”
 
“you knew it?” cried morrel, in such paroxysm of terror that monte
 cristo started,—he whom the falling heavens would have found unmoved;
 “you knew it, and said nothing?”
 
“and what is it to me?” replied monte cristo, shrugging his shoulders;
 “do i know those people? and must i lose the one to save the other?
 faith, no, for between the culprit and the victim i have choice.”
 
“but i,” cried morrel, groaning with sorrow, “i love her!”
 
“you love?—whom?” cried monte cristo, starting to his feet, and seizing
 the two hands which morrel was raising towards heaven.
 
“i love most fondly—i love madly—i love as man who would give his
 life-blood to spare her tear—i love valentine villefort, who is
 being murdered at this moment! do you understand me? i love her; and i
 ask god and you how i can save her?”
 
monte cristo uttered cry which those only can conceive who have heard
 the roar of wounded lion. “unhappy man,” cried he, wringing his hands
 in his turn; “you love valentine,—that daughter of an accursed race!”
 
never had morrel witnessed such an expression—never had so terrible an
 eye flashed before his face—never had the genius of terror had so
 often seen, either on the battle-field or in the murderous nights of
 algeria, shaken around him more dreadful fire. drew back terrified.
 
as for monte cristo, after this ebullition closed his eyes as if
 dazzled by internal light. in moment restrained himself so
 powerfully that the tempestuous heaving of his breast subsided, as
 turbulent and foaming waves yield to the sun’s genial influence when
 the cloud has passed. this silence, self-control, and struggle lasted
 about twenty seconds, then the count raised his pallid face.
 
“see,” said he, “my dear friend, how god punishes the most thoughtless
 and unfeeling men for their indifference, by presenting dreadful scenes
 to their view. i, who was looking on, an eager and curious
 spectator,—i, who was watching the working of this mournful tragedy,—i,
 who like wicked angel was laughing at the evil men committed
 protected by secrecy (a secret is easily kept by the rich and
 powerful), i am in my turn bitten by the serpent whose tortuous course
 i was watching, and bitten to the heart!”
 
morrel groaned.
 
“come, come,” continued the count, “complaints are unavailing, be a
 man, be strong, be full of hope, for i am here and will watch over
 you.”
 
morrel shook his head sorrowfully.
 
“i tell you to hope. do you understand me?” cried monte cristo.
 “remember that i never uttered falsehood and am never deceived. it is
 twelve o’clock, maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather
 than in the evening, or tomorrow morning. listen, morrel—it is noon; if
 valentine is not now dead, she will not die.”
 
“how so?” cried morrel, “when i left her dying?”
 
monte cristo pressed his hands to his forehead. what was passing in
 that brain, so loaded with dreadful secrets? what does the angel of
 light or the angel of darkness say to that mind, at once implacable and
 generous? god only knows.
 
monte cristo raised his head once more, and this time was calm as a
 child awaking from its sleep.
 
“maximilian,” said he, “return home. i command you not to stir—attempt
 nothing, not to let your countenance betray thought, and i will send
 you tidings. go.”
 
“oh, count, you overwhelm with that coolness. have you, then, power
 against death? are you superhuman? are you an angel?” and the young
 man, who had never shrunk from danger, shrank before monte cristo with
 indescribable terror. but monte cristo looked at him with so melancholy
 and sweet smile, that maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes.
 
“i can do much for you, my friend,” replied the count. “go; i must be
 alone.”
 
morrel, subdued by the extraordinary ascendancy monte cristo exercised
 over everything around him, did not endeavor to resist it. pressed
 the count’s hand and left. stopped one moment at the door for
 baptistin, whom saw in the rue matignon, and who was running.
 
meanwhile, villefort and d’avrigny had made all possible haste,
 valentine had not revived from her fainting fit on their arrival, and
 the doctor examined the invalid with all the care the circumstances
 demanded, and with an interest which the knowledge of the secret
 intensified twofold. villefort, closely watching his countenance and
 his lips, awaited the result of the examination. noirtier, paler than
 even the young girl, more eager than villefort for the decision, was
 watching also intently and affectionately.
 
at last d’avrigny slowly uttered these words: “she is still alive!”
 
“still?” cried villefort; “oh, doctor, what dreadful word is that.”
 
“yes,” said the physician, “i repeat it; she is still alive, and i am
 astonished at it.”
 
“but is she safe?” asked the father.
 
“yes, since she lives.”
 
at that moment d’avrigny’s glance met noirtier’s eye. it glistened with
 such extraordinary joy, so rich and full of thought, that the physician
 was struck. placed the young girl again on the chair,—her lips were
 scarcely discernible, they were so pale and white, as well as her whole
 face,—and remained motionless, looking at noirtier, who appeared to
 anticipate and commend all did.
 
“sir,” said d’avrigny to villefort, “call mademoiselle valentine’s
 maid, if you please.”
 
villefort went himself to find her; and d’avrigny approached noirtier.
 
“have you something to tell me?” asked he. the old man winked his eyes
 expressively, which we may remember was his only way of expressing his
 approval.
 
“privately?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, i will remain with you.” at this moment villefort returned,
 followed by the lady’s maid; and after her came madame villefort.
 
“what is the matter, then, with this dear child? she has just left me,
 and she complained of being indisposed, but i did not think seriously
 of it.”
 
the young woman with tears in her eyes and every mark of affection of a
 true mother, approached valentine and took her hand. d’avrigny
 continued to look at noirtier; saw the eyes of the old man dilate
 and become round, his cheeks turn pale and tremble; the perspiration
 stood in drops upon his forehead.
 
“ah,” said he, involuntarily following noirtier’s eyes, which were
 fixed on madame villefort, who repeated:
 
“this poor child would be better in bed. come, fanny, we will put her
 to bed.”
 
m. d’avrigny, who saw that would be means of his remaining alone with
 noirtier, expressed his opinion that it was the best thing that could
 be done; but forbade that anything should be given to her except
 what ordered.
 
they carried valentine away; she had revived, but could scarcely move
 or speak, so shaken was her frame by the attack. she had, however, just
 power to give one parting look to her grandfather, who in losing her
 seemed to be resigning his very soul. d’avrigny followed the invalid,
 wrote prescription, ordered villefort to take cabriolet, go in
 person to chemist’s to get the prescribed medicine, bring it himself,
 and wait for him in his daughter’s room. then, having renewed his
 injunction not to give valentine anything, went down again to
 noirtier, shut the doors carefully, and after convincing himself that
 one was listening:
 
“do you,” said he, “know anything of this young lady’s illness?”
 
“yes,” said the old man.
 
“we have time to lose; i will question, and do you answer me.”
 noirtier made sign that was ready to answer. “did you anticipate
 the accident which has happened to your granddaughter?”
 
“yes.” d’avrigny reflected moment; then approaching noirtier:
 
“pardon what i am going to say,” added he, “but indication should be
 neglected in this terrible situation. did you see poor barrois die?”
 noirtier raised his eyes to heaven.
 
“do you know of what died!” asked d’avrigny, placing his hand on
 noirtier’s shoulder.
 
“yes,” replied the old man.
 
“do you think died natural death?” sort of smile was discernible
 on the motionless lips of noirtier.
 
“then you have thought that barrois was poisoned?”
 
“yes.”
 
“do you think the poison fell victim to was intended for him?”
 
“no.”
 
“do you think the same hand which unintentionally struck barrois has
 now attacked valentine?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then will she die too?” asked d’avrigny, fixing his penetrating gaze
 on noirtier. watched the effect of this question on the old man.
 
“no,” replied with an air of triumph which would have puzzled the
 most clever diviner.
 
“then you hope?” said d’avrigny, with surprise.
 
“yes.”
 
“what do you hope?” the old man made him understand with his eyes that
 could not answer.
 
“ah, yes, it is true,” murmured d’avrigny. then, turning to
 noirtier,—“do you hope the assassin will be tried?”
 
“no.”
 
“then you hope the poison will take effect on valentine?”
 
“yes.”
 
“it is news to you,” added d’avrigny, “to tell you that an attempt
 has been made to poison her?” the old man made sign that he
 entertained doubt upon the subject. “then how do you hope valentine
 will escape?”
 
noirtier kept his eyes steadfastly fixed on the same spot. d’avrigny
 followed the direction and saw that they were fixed on bottle
 containing the mixture which took every morning. “ah, indeed?” said
 d’avrigny, struck with sudden thought, “has it occurred to
 you”—noirtier did not let him finish.
 
“yes,” said he.
 
“to prepare her system to resist poison?”
 
“yes.”
 
“by accustoming her by degrees——”
 
“yes, yes, yes,” said noirtier, delighted to be understood.
 
“of course. i had told you that there was brucine in the mixture i give
 you.”
 
“yes.”
 
“and by accustoming her to that poison, you have endeavored to
 neutralize the effect of similar poison?” noirtier’s joy continued.
 “and you have succeeded,” exclaimed d’avrigny. “without that precaution
 valentine would have died before assistance could have been procured.
 the dose has been excessive, but she has only been shaken by it; and
 this time, at any rate, valentine will not die.”
 
superhuman joy expanded the old man’s eyes, which were raised towards
 heaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. at this moment
 villefort returned.
 
“here, doctor,” said he, “is what you sent for.”
 
“was this prepared in your presence?”
 
“yes,” replied the procureur.
 
“have you not let it go out of your hands?”
 
“no.”
 
d’avrigny took the bottle, poured some drops of the mixture it
 contained in the hollow of his hand, and swallowed them.
 
“well,” said he, “let us go to valentine; i will give instructions to
 everyone, and you, m. villefort, will yourself see that one
 deviates from them.”
 
40294m
 


at the moment when d’avrigny was returning to valentine’s room,
 accompanied by villefort, an italian priest, of serious demeanor and
 calm and firm tone, hired for his use the house adjoining the hotel of
 m. villefort. one knew how the three former tenants of that house
 left it. about two hours afterwards its foundation was reported to be
 unsafe; but the report did not prevent the new occupant establishing
 himself there with his modest furniture the same day at five o’clock.
 the lease was drawn up for three, six, or nine years by the new tenant,
 who, according to the rule of the proprietor, paid six months in
 advance.
 
this new tenant, who, as we have said, was an italian, was called il
 signor giacomo busoni. workmen were immediately called in, and that
 same night the passengers at the end of the faubourg saw with surprise
 that carpenters and masons were occupied in repairing the lower part of
 the tottering house.
 


chapter 95. father and daughter
 
we saw in preceding chapter how madame danglars went formally to
 announce to madame villefort the approaching marriage of eugénie
 danglars and m. andrea cavalcanti. this formal announcement, which
 implied or appeared to imply, the approval of all the persons concerned
 in this momentous affair, had been preceded by scene to which our
 readers must be admitted. we beg them to take one step backward, and to
 transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes,
 into the showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was
 the pride of its owner, baron danglars.
 
in this room, at about ten o’clock in the morning, the banker himself
 had been walking to and fro for some minutes thoughtfully and in
 evident uneasiness, watching both doors, and listening to every sound.
 when his patience was exhausted, called his valet.
 
“Étienne,” said he, “see why mademoiselle eugénie has asked to meet
 her in the drawing-room, and why she makes wait so long.”
 
having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became more calm;
 mademoiselle danglars had that morning requested an interview with her
 father, and had fixed on the gilded drawing-room as the spot. the
 singularity of this step, and above all its formality, had not little
 surprised the banker, who had immediately obeyed his daughter by
 repairing first to the drawing-room. Étienne soon returned from his
 errand.
 
“mademoiselle’s lady’s maid says, sir, that mademoiselle is finishing
 her toilette, and will be here shortly.”
 
danglars nodded, to signify that was satisfied. to the world and to
 his servants danglars assumed the character of the good-natured man and
 the indulgent father. this was one of his parts in the popular comedy
 was performing,—a make-up had adopted and which suited him about
 as well as the masks worn on the classic stage by paternal actors, who
 seen from one side, were the image of geniality, and from the other
 showed lips drawn down in chronic ill-temper. let us hasten to say that
 in private the genial side descended to the level of the other, so that
 generally the indulgent man disappeared to give place to the brutal
 husband and domineering father.
 
“why the devil does that foolish girl, who pretends to wish to speak to
 me, not come into my study? and why on earth does she want to speak to
 at all?”
 
was turning this thought over in his brain for the twentieth time,
 when the door opened and eugénie appeared, attired in figured black
 satin dress, her hair dressed and gloves on, as if she were going to
 the italian opera.
 
“well, eugénie, what is it you want with me? and why in this solemn
 drawing-room when the study is so comfortable?”
 
“i quite understand why you ask, sir,” said eugénie, making sign that
 her father might be seated, “and in fact your two questions suggest
 fully the theme of our conversation. i will answer them both, and
 contrary to the usual method, the last first, because it is the least
 difficult. i have chosen the drawing-room, sir, as our place of
 meeting, in order to avoid the disagreeable impressions and influences
 of banker’s study. those gilded cashbooks, drawers locked like gates
 of fortresses, heaps of bank-bills, come from i know not where, and the
 quantities of letters from england, holland, spain, india, china, and
 peru, have generally strange influence on father’s mind, and make
 him forget that there is in the world an interest greater and more
 sacred than the good opinion of his correspondents. i have, therefore,
 chosen this drawing-room, where you see, smiling and happy in their
 magnificent frames, your portrait, mine, my mother’s, and all sorts of
 rural landscapes and touching pastorals. i rely much on external
 impressions; perhaps, with regard to you, they are immaterial, but i
 should be artist if i had not some fancies.”
 
“very well,” replied m. danglars, who had listened to all this preamble
 with imperturbable coolness, but without understanding word, since
 like every man burdened with thoughts of the past, was occupied with
 seeking the thread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.
 
“there is, then, the second point cleared up, or nearly so,” said
 eugénie, without the least confusion, and with that masculine
 pointedness which distinguished her gesture and her language; “and you
 appear satisfied with the explanation. now, let us return to the first.
 you ask why i have requested this interview; i will tell you in two
 words, sir; i will not marry count andrea cavalcanti.”
 
danglars leaped from his chair and raised his eyes and arms towards
 heaven.
 
40298m
 


“yes, indeed, sir,” continued eugénie, still quite calm; “you are
 astonished, i see; for since this little affair began, i have not
 manifested the slightest opposition, and yet i am always sure, when the
 opportunity arrives, to oppose determined and absolute will to people
 who have not consulted me, and things which displease me. however, this
 time, my tranquillity, or passiveness as philosophers say, proceeded
 from another source; it proceeded from wish, like submissive and
 devoted daughter” (a slight smile was observable on the purple lips of
 the young girl), “to practice obedience.”
 
“well?” asked danglars.
 
“well, sir,” replied eugénie, “i have tried to the very last and now
 that the moment has come, i feel in spite of all my efforts that it is
 impossible.”
 
“but,” said danglars, whose weak mind was at first quite overwhelmed
 with the weight of this pitiless logic, marking evident premeditation
 and force of will, “what is your reason for this refusal, eugénie? what
 reason do you assign?”
 
“my reason?” replied the young girl. “well, it is not that the man is
 more ugly, more foolish, or more disagreeable than any other; no, m.
 andrea cavalcanti may appear to those who look at men’s faces and
 figures as very good specimen of his kind. it is not, either, that my
 heart is less touched by him than any other; that would be a
 schoolgirl’s reason, which i consider quite beneath me. i actually love
 one, sir; you know it, do you not? i do not then see why, without
 real necessity, i should encumber my life with perpetual companion.
 has not some sage said, ‘nothing too much’? and another, ‘i carry all
 my effects with me’? i have been taught these two aphorisms in latin
 and in greek; one is, i believe, from phædrus, and the other from bias.
 well, my dear father, in the shipwreck of life—for life is an eternal
 shipwreck of our hopes—i cast into the my useless encumbrance, that
 is all, and i remain with my own will, disposed to live perfectly
 alone, and consequently perfectly free.”
 
“unhappy girl, unhappy girl!” murmured danglars, turning pale, for he
 knew from long experience the solidity of the obstacle had so
 suddenly encountered.
 
“unhappy girl,” replied eugénie, “unhappy girl, do you say, sir? no,
 indeed; the exclamation appears quite theatrical and affected. happy,
 on the contrary, for what am i in want of? the world calls me
 beautiful. it is something to be well received. i like favorable
 reception; it expands the countenance, and those around do not then
 appear so ugly. i possess share of wit, and certain relative
 sensibility, which enables to draw from life in general, for the
 support of mine, all i meet with that is good, like the monkey who
 cracks the nut to get at its contents. i am rich, for you have one of
 the first fortunes in france. i am your only daughter, and you are not
 so exacting as the fathers of the porte saint-martin and gaîté, who
 disinherit their daughters for not giving them grandchildren. besides,
 the provident law has deprived you of the power to disinherit me, at
 least entirely, as it has also of the power to compel to marry
 monsieur this or monsieur that. and so—being, beautiful, witty,
 somewhat talented, as the comic operas say, and rich—and that is
 happiness, sir—why do you call unhappy?”
 
danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even to insolence,
 could not entirely repress his brutal feelings, but they betrayed
 themselves only by an exclamation. under the fixed and inquiring gaze
 levelled at him from under those beautiful black eyebrows, prudently
 turned away, and calmed himself immediately, daunted by the power of a
 resolute mind.
 
“truly, my daughter,” replied with smile, “you are all you boast
 of being, excepting one thing; i will not too hastily tell you which,
 but would rather leave you to guess it.”
 
eugénie looked at danglars, much surprised that one flower of her crown
 of pride, with which she had so superbly decked herself, should be
 disputed.
 
“my daughter,” continued the banker, “you have perfectly explained to
 the sentiments which influence girl like you, who is determined
 she will not marry; now it remains for to tell you the motives of a
 father like me, who has decided that his daughter shall marry.”
 
eugénie bowed, not as submissive daughter, but as an adversary
 prepared for discussion.
 
“my daughter,” continued danglars, “when father asks his daughter to
 choose husband, has always some reason for wishing her to marry.
 some are affected with the mania of which you spoke just now, that of
 living again in their grandchildren. this is not my weakness, i tell
 you at once; family joys have charm for me. i may acknowledge this
 to daughter whom i know to be philosophical enough to understand my
 indifference, and not to impute it to as crime.”
 
“this is not to the purpose,” said eugénie; “let us speak candidly,
 sir; i admire candor.”
 
“oh,” said danglars, “i can, when circumstances render it desirable,
 adopt your system, although it may not be my general practice. i will
 therefore proceed. i have proposed to you to marry, not for your sake,
 for indeed i did not think of you in the least at the moment (you
 admire candor, and will now be satisfied, i hope); but because it
 suited to marry you as soon as possible, on account of certain
 commercial speculations i am desirous of entering into.” eugénie became
 uneasy.
 
40302m
 


“it is just as i tell you, i assure you, and you must not be angry with
 me, for you have sought this disclosure. i do not willingly enter into
 arithmetical explanations with an artist like you, who fears to enter
 my study lest she should imbibe disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions
 and sensations. but in that same banker’s study, where you very
 willingly presented yourself yesterday to ask for the thousand francs i
 give you monthly for pocket-money, you must know, my dear young lady,
 that many things may be learned, useful even to girl who will not
 marry. there one may learn, for instance, what, out of regard to your
 nervous susceptibility, i will inform you of in the drawing-room,
 namely, that the credit of banker is his physical and moral life;
 that credit sustains him as breath animates the body; and m. monte
 cristo once gave lecture on that subject, which i have never
 forgotten. there we may learn that as credit sinks, the body becomes a
 corpse, and this is what must happen very soon to the banker who is
 proud to own so good logician as you for his daughter.”
 
but eugénie, instead of stooping, drew herself up under the blow.
 “ruined?” said she.
 
“exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what i mean,” said danglars,
 almost digging his nails into his breast, while preserved on his
 harsh features the smile of the heartless though clever man;
 “ruined—yes, that is it.”
 
“ah!” said eugénie.
 
“yes, ruined! now it is revealed, this secret so full of horror, as the
 tragic poet says. now, my daughter, learn from my lips how you may
 alleviate this misfortune, so far as it will affect you.”
 
“oh,” cried eugénie, “you are bad physiognomist, if you imagine i
 deplore on my own account the catastrophe of which you warn me. i
 ruined? and what will that signify to me? have i not my talent left?
 can i not, like pasta, malibran, grisi, acquire for myself what you
 would never have given me, whatever might have been your fortune, a
 hundred or hundred and fifty thousand livres per annum, for which i
 shall be indebted to one but myself; and which, instead of being
 given as you gave those poor twelve thousand francs, with sour looks
 and reproaches for my prodigality, will be accompanied with
 acclamations, with bravos, and with flowers? and if i do not possess
 that talent, which your smiles prove to you doubt, should i not
 still have that ardent love of independence, which will be substitute
 for wealth, and which in my mind supersedes even the instinct of
 self-preservation? no, i grieve not on my own account, i shall always
 find resource; my books, my pencils, my piano, all the things which
 cost but little, and which i shall be able to procure, will remain my
 own.
 
“do you think that i sorrow for madame danglars? undeceive yourself
 again; either i am greatly mistaken, or she has provided against the
 catastrophe which threatens you, and, which will pass over without
 affecting her. she has taken care for herself,—at least i hope so,—for
 her attention has not been diverted from her projects by watching over
 me. she has fostered my independence by professedly indulging my love
 for liberty. oh, no, sir; from my childhood i have seen too much, and
 understood too much, of what has passed around me, for misfortune to
 have an undue power over me. from my earliest recollections, i have
 been beloved by one—so much the worse; that has naturally led to
 love one—so much the better—now you have my profession of faith.”
 
“then,” said danglars, pale with anger, which was not at all due to
 offended paternal love,—“then, mademoiselle, you persist in your
 determination to accelerate my ruin?”
 
“your ruin? i accelerate your ruin? what do you mean? i do not
 understand you.”
 
“so much the better, i have ray of hope left; listen.”
 
“i am all attention,” said eugénie, looking so earnestly at her father
 that it was an effort for the latter to endure her unrelenting gaze.
 
“m. cavalcanti,” continued danglars, “is about to marry you, and will
 place in my hands his fortune, amounting to three million livres.”
 
“that is admirable!” said eugénie with sovereign contempt, smoothing
 her gloves out one upon the other.
 
“you think i shall deprive you of those three millions,” said danglars;
 “but do not fear it. they are destined to produce at least ten. i and a
 brother banker have obtained grant of railway, the only industrial
 enterprise which in these days promises to make good the fabulous
 prospects that law once held out to the eternally deluded parisians, in
 the fantastic mississippi scheme. as i look at it, millionth part of
 railway is worth fully as much as an acre of waste land on the banks
 of the ohio. we make in our case deposit, on mortgage, which is an
 advance, as you see, since we gain at least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a
 hundred livres’ worth of iron in exchange for our money. well, within a
 week i am to deposit four millions for my share; the four millions, i
 promise you, will produce ten or twelve.”
 
“but during my visit to you the day before yesterday, sir, which you
 appear to recollect so well,” replied eugénie, “i saw you arranging a
 deposit—is not that the term?—of five millions and half; you even
 pointed it out to in two drafts on the treasury, and you were
 astonished that so valuable paper did not dazzle my eyes like
 lightning.”
 
“yes, but those five millions and half are not mine, and are only a
 proof of the great confidence placed in me; my title of popular banker
 has gained the confidence of charitable institutions, and the five
 millions and half belong to them; at any other time i should not have
 hesitated to make use of them, but the great losses i have recently
 sustained are well known, and, as i told you, my credit is rather
 shaken. that deposit may be at any moment withdrawn, and if i had
 employed it for another purpose, i should bring on disgraceful
 bankruptcy. i do not despise bankruptcies, believe me, but they must be
 those which enrich, not those which ruin. now, if you marry m.
 cavalcanti, and i get the three millions, or even if it is thought i am
 going to get them, my credit will be restored, and my fortune, which
 for the last month or two has been swallowed up in gulfs which have
 been opened in my path by an inconceivable fatality, will revive. do
 you understand me?”
 
“perfectly; you pledge for three millions, do you not?”
 
“the greater the amount, the more flattering it is to you; it gives you
 an idea of your value.”
 
“thank you. one word more, sir; do you promise to make what use you
 can of the report of the fortune m. cavalcanti will bring without
 touching the money? this is act of selfishness, but of delicacy. i
 am willing to help rebuild your fortune, but i will not be an
 accomplice in the ruin of others.”
 
“but since i tell you,” cried danglars, “that with these three
 million——”
 
“do you expect to recover your position, sir, without touching those
 three million?”
 
“i hope so, if the marriage should take place and confirm my credit.”
 
“shall you be able to pay m. cavalcanti the five hundred thousand
 francs you promise for my dowry?”
 
“he shall receive them on returning from the mayor’s20.”
 
“very well!”
 
“what next? what more do you want?”
 
“i wish to know if, in demanding my signature, you leave entirely
 free in my person?”
 
“absolutely.”
 
“then, as i said before, sir,—very well; i am ready to marry m.
 cavalcanti.”
 
“but what are you up to?”
 
“ah, that is my affair. what advantage should i have over you, if
 knowing your secret i were to tell you mine?”
 
danglars bit his lips. “then,” said he, “you are ready to pay the
 official visits, which are absolutely indispensable?”
 
“yes,” replied eugénie.
 
“and to sign the contract in three days?”
 
“yes.”
 
“then, in my turn, i also say, very well!”
 
danglars pressed his daughter’s hand in his. but, extraordinary to
 relate, the father did not say, “thank you, my child,” nor did the
 daughter smile at her father.
 
“is the conference ended?” asked eugénie, rising.
 
danglars motioned that had nothing more to say. five minutes
 afterwards the piano resounded to the touch of mademoiselle d’armilly’s
 fingers, and mademoiselle danglars was singing brabantio’s malediction
 on desdemona. at the end of the piece Étienne entered, and announced to
 eugénie that the horses were to the carriage, and that the baroness was
 waiting for her to pay her visits. we have seen them at villefort’s;
 they proceeded then on their course.
 
40306m
 



volume five
 
50009m
 


50011m
 


50019m
 



chapter 96. the contract
 
three days after the scene we have just described, namely towards five
 o’clock in the afternoon of the day fixed for the signature of the
 contract between mademoiselle eugénie danglars and andrea cavalcanti,
 whom the banker persisted in calling prince, fresh breeze was
 stirring the leaves in the little garden in front of the count of monte
 cristo’s house, and the count was preparing to go out. while his horses
 were impatiently pawing the ground, held in by the coachman, who had
 been seated quarter of an hour on his box, the elegant phaeton with
 which we are familiar rapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate,
 and cast out on the doorsteps m. andrea cavalcanti, as decked up and
 gay as if were going to marry princess.
 
inquired after the count with his usual familiarity, and ascending
 lightly to the first story met him at the top of the stairs.
 
the count stopped on seeing the young man. as for andrea, was
 launched, and when was once launched nothing stopped him.
 
“ah, good morning, my dear count,” said he.
 
“ah, m. andrea,” said the latter, with his half-jesting tone; “how do
 you do?”
 
“charmingly, as you see. i am come to talk to you about thousand
 things; but, first tell me, were you going out or just returned?”
 
“i was going out, sir.”
 
“then, in order not to hinder you, i will get up with you if you please
 in your carriage, and tom shall follow with my phaeton in tow.”
 
“no,” said the count, with an imperceptible smile of contempt, for he
 had wish to be seen in the young man’s society,—“no; i prefer
 listening to you here, my dear m. andrea; we can chat better in-doors,
 and there is coachman to overhear our conversation.”
 
the count returned to small drawing-room on the first floor, sat
 down, and crossing his legs motioned to the young man to take seat
 also. andrea assumed his gayest manner.
 
“you know, my dear count,” said he, “the ceremony is to take place this
 evening. at nine o’clock the contract is to be signed at my
 father-in-law’s.”
 
“ah, indeed?” said monte cristo.
 
“what; is it news to you? has not m. danglars informed you of the
 ceremony?”
 
“oh, yes,” said the count; “i received letter from him yesterday, but
 i do not think the hour was mentioned.”
 
“possibly my father-in-law trusted to its general notoriety.”
 
“well,” said monte cristo, “you are fortunate, m. cavalcanti; it is a
 most suitable alliance you are contracting, and mademoiselle danglars
 is handsome girl.”
 
“yes, indeed she is,” replied cavalcanti, in very modest tone.
 
“above all, she is very rich,—at least, i believe so,” said monte
 cristo.
 
“very rich, do you think?” replied the young man.
 
“doubtless; it is said m. danglars conceals at least half of his
 fortune.”
 
“and acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions,” said andrea with a
 look sparkling with joy.
 
“without reckoning,” added monte cristo, “that is on the eve of
 entering into sort of speculation already in vogue in the united
 states and in england, but quite novel in france.”
 
“yes, yes, i know what you mean,—the railway, of which has obtained
 the grant, is it not?”
 
“precisely; it is generally believed will gain ten millions by that
 affair.”
 
“ten millions! do you think so? it is magnificent!” said cavalcanti,
 who was quite confounded at the metallic sound of these golden words.
 
“without reckoning,” replied monte cristo, “that all his fortune will
 come to you, and justly too, since mademoiselle danglars is an only
 daughter. besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is
 almost equal to that of your betrothed. but enough of money matters. do
 you know, m. andrea, i think you have managed this affair rather
 skilfully?”
 
“not badly, by any means,” said the young man; “i was born for a
 diplomatist.”
 
“well, you must become diplomatist; diplomacy, you know, is something
 that is not to be acquired; it is instinctive. have you lost your
 heart?”
 
“indeed, i fear it,” replied andrea, in the tone in which had heard
 dorante or valère reply to alceste21 at the théâtre français.
 
“is your love returned?”
 
“i suppose so,” said andrea with triumphant smile, “since i am
 accepted. but i must not forget one grand point.”
 
“which?”
 
“that i have been singularly assisted.”
 
“nonsense.”
 
“i have, indeed.”
 
“by circumstances?”
 
“no; by you.”
 
“by me? not at all, prince,” said monte cristo laying marked stress
 on the title, “what have i done for you? are not your name, your social
 position, and your merit sufficient?”
 
“no,” said andrea,—“no; it is useless for you to say so, count. i
 maintain that the position of man like you has done more than my
 name, my social position, and my merit.”
 
“you are completely mistaken, sir,” said monte cristo coldly, who felt
 the perfidious manœuvre of the young man, and understood the bearing of
 his words; “you only acquired my protection after the influence and
 fortune of your father had been ascertained; for, after all, who
 procured for me, who had never seen either you or your illustrious
 father, the pleasure of your acquaintance?—two of my good friends, lord
 wilmore and the abbé busoni. what encouraged not to become your
 surety, but to patronize you?—your father’s name, so well known in
 italy and so highly honored. personally, i do not know you.”
 
this calm tone and perfect ease made andrea feel that was, for the
 moment, restrained by more muscular hand than his own, and that the
 restraint could not be easily broken through.
 
“oh, then my father has really very large fortune, count?”
 
“it appears so, sir,” replied monte cristo.
 
“do you know if the marriage settlement promised has come?”
 
“i have been advised of it.”
 
“but the three millions?”
 
“the three millions are probably on the road.”
 
“then i shall really have them?”
 
“oh, well,” said the count, “i do not think you have yet known the want
 of money.”
 
andrea was so surprised that pondered the matter for moment. then,
 arousing from his reverie:
 
“now, sir, i have one request to make to you, which you will
 understand, even if it should be disagreeable to you.”
 
“proceed,” said monte cristo.
 
“i have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune, with many
 noted persons, and have, at least for the moment, crowd of friends.
 but marrying, as i am about to do, before all paris, i ought to be
 supported by an illustrious name, and in the absence of the paternal
 hand some powerful one ought to lead to the altar; now, my father is
 not coming to paris, is he?”
 
“he is old, covered with wounds, and suffers dreadfully, says, in
 travelling.”
 
“i understand; well, i am come to ask favor of you.”
 
“of me?”
 
“yes, of you.”
 
“and pray what may it be?”
 
“well, to take his part.”
 
“ah, my dear sir! what?—after the varied relations i have had the
 happiness to sustain towards you, can it be that you know so little
 as to ask such thing? ask to lend you half million and, although
 such loan is somewhat rare, on my honor, you would annoy less!
 know, then, what i thought i had already told you, that in
 participation in this world’s affairs, more especially in their moral
 aspects, the count of monte cristo has never ceased to entertain the
 scruples and even the superstitions of the east. i, who have seraglio
 at cairo, one at smyrna, and one at constantinople, preside at a
 wedding?—never!”
 
“then you refuse me?”
 
“decidedly; and were you my or my brother i would refuse you in the
 same way.”
 
“but what must be done?” said andrea, disappointed.
 
“you said just now that you had hundred friends.”
 
“very true, but you introduced at m. danglars’.”
 
“not at all! let us recall the exact facts. you met him at dinner
 party at my house, and you introduced yourself at his house; that is a
 totally different affair.”
 
“yes, but, by my marriage, you have forwarded that.”
 
“i?—not in the least, i beg you to believe. recollect what i told you
 when you asked to propose you. ‘oh, i never make matches, my dear
 prince, it is my settled principle.’” andrea bit his lips.
 
50025m
 


“but, at least, you will be there?”
 
“will all paris be there?”
 
“oh, certainly.”
 
“well, like all paris, i shall be there too,” said the count.
 
“and will you sign the contract?”
 
“i see objection to that; my scruples do not go thus far.”
 
“well, since you will grant more, i must be content with what you
 give me. but one word more, count.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“advice.”
 
“be careful; advice is worse than service.”
 
“oh, you can give this without compromising yourself.”
 
“tell what it is.”
 
“is my wife’s fortune five hundred thousand livres?”
 
“that is the sum m. danglars himself announced.”
 
“must i receive it, or leave it in the hands of the notary?”
 
“this is the way such affairs are generally arranged when it is wished
 to do them stylishly: your two solicitors appoint meeting, when the
 contract is signed, for the next or the following day; then they
 exchange the two portions, for which they each give receipt; then,
 when the marriage is celebrated, they place the amount at your disposal
 as the chief member of the alliance.”
 
“because,” said andrea, with certain ill-concealed uneasiness, “i
 thought i heard my father-in-law say that intended embarking our
 property in that famous railway affair of which you spoke just now.”
 
“well,” replied monte cristo, “it will be the way, everybody says, of
 trebling your fortune in twelve months. baron danglars is good
 father, and knows how to calculate.”
 
“in that case,” said andrea, “everything is all right, excepting your
 refusal, which quite grieves me.”
 
“you must attribute it only to natural scruples under similar
 circumstances.”
 
“well,” said andrea, “let it be as you wish. this evening, then, at
 nine o’clock.”
 
“adieu till then.”
 
notwithstanding slight resistance on the part of monte cristo, whose
 lips turned pale, but who preserved his ceremonious smile, andrea
 seized the count’s hand, pressed it, jumped into his phaeton, and
 disappeared.
 
the four or five remaining hours before nine o’clock arrived, andrea
 employed in riding, paying visits,—designed to induce those of whom he
 had spoken to appear at the banker’s in their gayest
 equipages,—dazzling them by promises of shares in schemes which have
 since turned every brain, and in which danglars was just taking the
 initiative.
 
in fact, at half-past eight in the evening the grand salon, the gallery
 adjoining, and the three other drawing-rooms on the same floor, were
 filled with perfumed crowd, who sympathized but little in the event,
 but who all participated in that love of being present wherever there
 is anything fresh to be seen. an academician would say that the
 entertainments of the fashionable world are collections of flowers
 which attract inconstant butterflies, famished bees, and buzzing
 drones.
 
50025m
 


one could deny that the rooms were splendidly illuminated; the light
 streamed forth on the gilt mouldings and the silk hangings; and all the
 bad taste of decorations, which had only their richness to boast of,
 shone in its splendor. mademoiselle eugénie was dressed with elegant
 simplicity in figured white silk dress, and white rose half
 concealed in her jet black hair was her only ornament, unaccompanied by
 single jewel. her eyes, however, betrayed that perfect confidence
 which contradicted the girlish simplicity of this modest attire.
 
madame danglars was chatting at short distance with debray,
 beauchamp, and château-renaud. debray was admitted to the house for
 this grand ceremony, but on the same plane with everyone else, and
 without any particular privilege. m. danglars, surrounded by deputies
 and men connected with the revenue, was explaining new theory of
 taxation which intended to adopt when the course of events had
 compelled the government to call him into the ministry. andrea, on
 whose arm hung one of the most consummate dandies of the opera, was
 explaining to him rather cleverly, since was obliged to be bold to
 appear at ease, his future projects, and the new luxuries meant to
 introduce to parisian fashions with his hundred and seventy-five
 thousand livres per annum.
 
the crowd moved to and fro in the rooms like an ebb and flow of
 turquoises, rubies, emeralds, opals, and diamonds. as usual, the oldest
 women were the most decorated, and the ugliest the most conspicuous. if
 there was beautiful lily, or sweet rose, you had to search for it,
 concealed in some corner behind mother with turban, or an aunt with
 bird-of-paradise.
 
at each moment, in the midst of the crowd, the buzzing, and the
 laughter, the door-keeper’s voice was heard announcing some name well
 known in the financial department, respected in the army, or
 illustrious in the literary world, and which was acknowledged by a
 slight movement in the different groups. but for one whose privilege it
 was to agitate that ocean of human waves, how many were received with a
 look of indifference or sneer of disdain!
 
at the moment when the hand of the massive time-piece, representing
 endymion asleep, pointed to nine on its golden face, and the hammer,
 the faithful type of mechanical thought, struck nine times, the name of
 the count of monte cristo resounded in its turn, and as if by an
 electric shock all the assembly turned towards the door. the count was
 dressed in black and with his habitual simplicity; his white waistcoat
 displayed his expansive noble chest and his black stock was singularly
 noticeable because of its contrast with the deadly paleness of his
 face. his only jewellery was chain, so fine that the slender gold
 thread was scarcely perceptible on his white waistcoat.
 
circle was immediately formed around the door. the count perceived at
 one glance madame danglars at one end of the drawing-room, m. danglars
 at the other, and eugénie in front of him. first advanced towards
 the baroness, who was chatting with madame villefort, who had come
 alone, valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside, so
 clear was the road left for him, passed from the baroness to
 eugénie, whom complimented in such rapid and measured terms, that
 the proud artist was quite struck. near her was mademoiselle louise
 d’armilly, who thanked the count for the letters of introduction had
 so kindly given her for italy, which she intended immediately to make
 use of. on leaving these ladies found himself with danglars, who had
 advanced to meet him.
 
having accomplished these three social duties, monte cristo stopped,
 looking around him with that expression peculiar to certain class,
 which seems to say, “i have done my duty, now let others do theirs.”
 
andrea, who was in an adjoining room, had shared in the sensation
 caused by the arrival of monte cristo, and now came forward to pay his
 respects to the count. found him completely surrounded; all were
 eager to speak to him, as is always the case with those whose words are
 few and weighty. the solicitors arrived at this moment and arranged
 their scrawled papers on the velvet cloth embroidered with gold which
 covered the table prepared for the signature; it was gilt table
 supported on lions’ claws. one of the notaries sat down, the other
 remained standing. they were about to proceed to the reading of the
 contract, which half paris assembled was to sign. all took their
 places, or rather the ladies formed circle, while the gentlemen (more
 indifferent to the restraints of what boileau calls the _style
 énergique_) commented on the feverish agitation of andrea, on m.
 danglars’ riveted attention, eugénie’s composure, and the light and
 sprightly manner in which the baroness treated this important affair.
 
the contract was read during profound silence. but as soon as it was
 finished, the buzz was redoubled through all the drawing-rooms; the
 brilliant sums, the rolling millions which were to be at the command of
 the two young people, and which crowned the display of the wedding
 presents and the young lady’s diamonds, which had been made in room
 entirely appropriated for that purpose, had exercised to the full their
 delusions over the envious assembly.
 
mademoiselle danglars’ charms were heightened in the opinion of the
 young men, and for the moment seemed to outvie the sun in splendor. as
 for the ladies, it is needless to say that while they coveted the
 millions, they thought they did not need them for themselves, as they
 were beautiful enough without them. andrea, surrounded by his friends,
 complimented, flattered, beginning to believe in the reality of his
 dream, was almost bewildered. the notary solemnly took the pen,
 flourished it above his head, and said:
 
“gentlemen, we are about to sign the contract.”
 
the baron was to sign first, then the representative of m. cavalcanti,
 senior, then the baroness, afterwards the “future couple,” as they are
 styled in the abominable phraseology of legal documents.
 
the baron took the pen and signed, then the representative. the
 baroness approached, leaning on madame villefort’s arm.
 
“my dear,” said she, as she took the pen, “is it not vexatious? an
 unexpected incident, in the affair of murder and theft at the count of
 monte cristo’s, in which nearly fell victim, deprives us of the
 pleasure of seeing m. villefort.”
 
“indeed?” said m. danglars, in the same tone in which would have
 said, “oh, well, what do i care?”
 
“as matter of fact,” said monte cristo, approaching, “i am much
 afraid that i am the involuntary cause of his absence.”
 
“what, you, count?” said madame danglars, signing; “if you are, take
 care, for i shall never forgive you.”
 
andrea pricked up his ears.
 
“but it is not my fault, as i shall endeavor to prove.”
 
everyone listened eagerly; monte cristo who so rarely opened his lips,
 was about to speak.
 
“you remember,” said the count, during the most profound silence, “that
 the unhappy wretch who came to rob died at my house; the supposition
 is that was stabbed by his accomplice, on attempting to leave it.”
 
“yes,” said danglars.
 
“in order that his wounds might be examined was undressed, and his
 clothes were thrown into corner, where the police picked them up,
 with the exception of the waistcoat, which they overlooked.”
 
andrea turned pale, and drew towards the door; saw cloud rising in
 the horizon, which appeared to forebode coming storm.
 
“well, this waistcoat was discovered today, covered with blood, and
 with hole over the heart.” the ladies screamed, and two or three
 prepared to faint. “it was brought to me. one could guess what the
 dirty rag could be; i alone suspected that it was the waistcoat of the
 murdered man. my valet, in examining this mournful relic, felt paper
 in the pocket and drew it out; it was letter addressed to you,
 baron.”
 
“to me?” cried danglars.
 
“yes, indeed, to you; i succeeded in deciphering your name under the
 blood with which the letter was stained,” replied monte cristo, amid
 the general outburst of amazement.
 
“but,” asked madame danglars, looking at her husband with uneasiness,
 “how could that prevent m. villefort——”
 
“in this simple way, madame,” replied monte cristo; “the waistcoat and
 the letter were both what is termed circumstantial evidence; i
 therefore sent them to the king’s attorney. you understand, my dear
 baron, that legal methods are the safest in criminal cases; it was,
 perhaps, some plot against you.” andrea looked steadily at monte cristo
 and disappeared in the second drawing-room.
 
“possibly,” said danglars; “was not this murdered man an old
 galley-slave?”
 
50025m
 


“yes,” replied the count; “a felon named caderousse.” danglars turned
 slightly pale; andrea reached the anteroom beyond the little
 drawing-room.
 
“but go on signing,” said monte cristo; “i perceive that my story has
 caused general emotion, and i beg to apologize to you, baroness, and
 to mademoiselle danglars.”
 
the baroness, who had signed, returned the pen to the notary.
 
“prince cavalcanti,” said the latter; “prince cavalcanti, where are
 you?”
 
“andrea, andrea,” repeated several young people, who were already on
 sufficiently intimate terms with him to call him by his christian name.
 
“call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign,” cried
 danglars to one of the floorkeepers.
 
but at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarm into the
 principal salon as if some frightful monster had entered the
 apartments, _quærens quem devoret_. there was, indeed, reason to
 retreat, to be alarmed, and to scream. an officer was placing two
 soldiers at the door of each drawing-room, and was advancing towards
 danglars, preceded by commissary of police, girded with his scarf.
 madame danglars uttered scream and fainted. danglars, who thought
 himself threatened (certain consciences are never calm),—danglars even
 before his guests showed countenance of abject terror.
 
“what is the matter, sir?” asked monte cristo, advancing to meet the
 commissioner.
 
“which of you gentlemen,” asked the magistrate, without replying to the
 count, “answers to the name of andrea cavalcanti?”
 
cry of astonishment was heard from all parts of the room. they
 searched; they questioned.
 
“but who then is andrea cavalcanti?” asked danglars in amazement.
 
“a galley-slave, escaped from confinement at toulon.”
 
“and what crime has committed?”
 
“he is accused,” said the commissary with his inflexible voice, “of
 having assassinated the man named caderousse, his former companion in
 prison, at the moment was making his escape from the house of the
 count of monte cristo.”
 
monte cristo cast rapid glance around him. andrea was gone.
 


chapter 97. the departure for belgium
 
few minutes after the scene of confusion produced in the salons of m.
 danglars by the unexpected appearance of the brigade of soldiers, and
 by the disclosure which had followed, the mansion was deserted with as
 much rapidity as if case of plague or of cholera morbus had broken
 out among the guests.
 
in few minutes, through all the doors, down all the staircases, by
 every exit, everyone hastened to retire, or rather to fly; for it was a
 situation where the ordinary condolences,—which even the best friends
 are so eager to offer in great catastrophes,—were seen to be utterly
 futile. there remained in the banker’s house only danglars, closeted in
 his study, and making his statement to the officer of gendarmes; madame
 danglars, terrified, in the boudoir with which we are acquainted; and
 eugénie, who with haughty air and disdainful lip had retired to her
 room with her inseparable companion, mademoiselle louise d’armilly.
 
as for the numerous servants (more numerous that evening than usual,
 for their number was augmented by cooks and butlers from the café de
 paris), venting on their employers their anger at what they termed the
 insult to which they had been subjected, they collected in groups in
 the hall, in the kitchens, or in their rooms, thinking very little of
 their duty, which was thus naturally interrupted. of all this
 household, only two persons deserve our notice; these are mademoiselle
 eugénie danglars and mademoiselle louise d’armilly.
 
the betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air, disdainful
 lip, and the demeanor of an outraged queen, followed by her companion,
 who was paler and more disturbed than herself. on reaching her room
 eugénie locked her door, while louise fell on chair.
 
“ah, what dreadful thing,” said the young musician; “who would have
 suspected it? m. andrea cavalcanti murderer—a galley-slave escaped—a
 convict!”
 
an ironical smile curled the lip of eugénie. “in truth, i was fated,”
 said she. “i escaped the morcerf only to fall into the cavalcanti.”
 
“oh, do not confound the two, eugénie.”
 
“hold your tongue! the men are all infamous, and i am happy to be able
 now to do more than detest them—i despise them.”
 
“what shall we do?” asked louise.
 
“what shall we do?”
 
“yes.”
 
“why, the same we had intended doing three days since—set off.”
 
“what?—although you are not now going to be married, you intend
 still——”
 
“listen, louise. i hate this life of the fashionable world, always
 ordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper. what i have always
 wished for, desired, and coveted, is the life of an artist, free and
 independent, relying only on my own resources, and accountable only to
 myself. remain here? what for?—that they may try, month hence, to
 marry again; and to whom?—m. debray, perhaps, as it was once
 proposed. no, louise, no! this evening’s adventure will serve for my
 excuse. i did not seek one, i did not ask for one. god sends this,
 and i hail it joyfully!”
 
“how strong and courageous you are!” said the fair, frail girl to her
 brunette companion.
 
“did you not yet know me? come, louise, let us talk of our affairs. the
 post-chaise——”
 
“was happily bought three days since.”
 
“have you had it sent where we are to go for it?”
 
“yes.”
 
“our passport?”
 
“here it is.”
 
and eugénie, with her usual precision, opened printed paper, and
 read:
 
“m. léon d’armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist; hair
 black, eyes black; travelling with his sister.”
 
“capital! how did you get this passport?”
 
“when i went to ask m. monte cristo for letters to the directors of
 the theatres at rome and naples, i expressed my fears of travelling as
 woman; perfectly understood them, and undertook to procure for me
 man’s passport, and two days after i received this, to which i have
 added with my own hand, ‘travelling with his sister.’”
 
50035m
 


“well,” said eugénie cheerfully, “we have then only to pack up our
 trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing of the contract,
 instead of the evening of the wedding—that is all.”
 
“but consider the matter seriously, eugénie!”
 
“oh, i am done with considering! i am tired of hearing only of market
 reports, of the end of the month, of the rise and fall of spanish
 funds, of haitian bonds. instead of that, louise—do you
 understand?—air, liberty, melody of birds, plains of lombardy, venetian
 canals, roman palaces, the bay of naples. how much have we, louise?”
 
the young girl to whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaid
 secretaire small portfolio with lock, in which she counted
 twenty-three bank-notes.
 
“twenty-three thousand francs,” said she.
 
“and as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels,” said eugénie.
 “we are rich. with forty-five thousand francs we can live like
 princesses for two years, and comfortably for four; but before six
 months—you with your music, and i with my voice—we shall double our
 capital. come, you shall take charge of the money, i of the jewel-box;
 so that if one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, the other
 would still have hers left. now, the portmanteau—let us make haste—the
 portmanteau!”
 
“stop!” said louise, going to listen at madame danglars’ door.
 
“what do you fear?”
 
“that we may be discovered.”
 
“the door is locked.”
 
“they may tell us to open it.”
 
“they may if they like, but we will not.”
 
“you are perfect amazon, eugénie!” and the two young girls began to
 heap into trunk all the things they thought they should require.
 
“there now,” said eugénie, “while i change my costume do you lock the
 portmanteau.” louise pressed with all the strength of her little hands
 on the top of the portmanteau.
 
“but i cannot,” said she; “i am not strong enough; do you shut it.”
 
“ah, you do well to ask,” said eugénie, laughing; “i forgot that i was
 hercules, and you only the pale omphale!”
 
and the young girl, kneeling on the top, pressed the two parts of the
 portmanteau together, and mademoiselle d’armilly passed the bolt of the
 padlock through. when this was done, eugénie opened drawer, of which
 she kept the key, and took from it wadded violet silk travelling
 cloak.
 
“here,” said she, “you see i have thought of everything; with this
 cloak you will not be cold.”
 
“but you?”
 
“oh, i am never cold, you know! besides, with these men’s clothes——”
 
“will you dress here?”
 
“certainly.”
 
“shall you have time?”
 
“do not be uneasy, you little coward! all our servants are busy,
 discussing the grand affair. besides, what is there astonishing, when
 you think of the grief i ought to be in, that i shut myself up?—tell
 me!”
 
“no, truly—you comfort me.”
 
“come and help me.”
 
from the same drawer she took man’s complete costume, from the boots
 to the coat, and provision of linen, where there was nothing
 superfluous, but every requisite. then, with promptitude which
 indicated that this was not the first time she had amused herself by
 adopting the garb of the opposite sex, eugénie drew on the boots and
 pantaloons, tied her cravat, buttoned her waistcoat up to the throat,
 and put on coat which admirably fitted her beautiful figure.
 
“oh, that is very good—indeed, it is very good!” said louise, looking
 at her with admiration; “but that beautiful black hair, those
 magnificent braids, which made all the ladies sigh with envy,—will they
 go under man’s hat like the one i see down there?”
 
“you shall see,” said eugénie. and with her left hand seizing the thick
 mass, which her long fingers could scarcely grasp, she took in her
 right hand pair of long scissors, and soon the steel met through the
 rich and splendid hair, which fell in cluster at her feet as she
 leaned back to keep it from her coat. then she grasped the front hair,
 which she also cut off, without expressing the least regret; on the
 contrary, her eyes sparkled with greater pleasure than usual under her
 ebony eyebrows.
 
50039m
 


“oh, the magnificent hair!” said louise, with regret.
 
“and am i not hundred times better thus?” cried eugénie, smoothing
 the scattered curls of her hair, which had now quite masculine
 appearance; “and do you not think handsomer so?”
 
“oh, you are beautiful—always beautiful!” cried louise. “now, where are
 you going?”
 
“to brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier. we can go to
 brussels, liège, aix-la-chapelle; then up the rhine to strasbourg. we
 will cross switzerland, and go down into italy by the saint-gothard.
 will that do?”
 
“yes.”
 
“what are you looking at?”
 
“i am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that! one would say
 you were carrying off.”
 
“and they would be right, _pardieu!_”
 
“oh, i think you swore, eugénie.”
 
and the two young girls, whom everyone might have thought plunged in
 grief, the one on her own account, the other from interest in her
 friend, burst out laughing, as they cleared away every visible trace of
 the disorder which had naturally accompanied the preparations for their
 escape. then, having blown out the lights, the two fugitives, looking
 and listening eagerly, with outstretched necks, opened the door of a
 dressing-room which led by side staircase down to the yard,—eugénie
 going first, and holding with one arm the portmanteau, which by the
 opposite handle mademoiselle d’armilly scarcely raised with both hands.
 the yard was empty; the clock was striking twelve. the porter was not
 yet gone to bed. eugénie approached softly, and saw the old man
 sleeping soundly in an armchair in his lodge. she returned to louise,
 took up the portmanteau, which she had placed for moment on the
 ground, and they reached the archway under the shadow of the wall.
 
eugénie concealed louise in an angle of the gateway, so that if the
 porter chanced to awake might see but one person. then placing
 herself in the full light of the lamp which lit the yard:
 
“gate!” cried she, with her finest contralto voice, and rapping at the
 window.
 
the porter got up as eugénie expected, and even advanced some steps to
 recognize the person who was going out, but seeing young man striking
 his boot impatiently with his riding-whip, opened it immediately.
 louise slid through the half-open gate like snake, and bounded
 lightly forward. eugénie, apparently calm, although in all probability
 her heart beat somewhat faster than usual, went out in her turn.
 
porter was passing and they gave him the portmanteau; then the two
 young girls, having told him to take it to no. 36, rue victoire,
 walked behind this man, whose presence comforted louise. as for
 eugénie, she was as strong as judith or delilah. they arrived at
 the appointed spot. eugénie ordered the porter to put down the
 portmanteau, gave him some pieces of money, and having rapped at the
 shutter sent him away. the shutter where eugénie had rapped was that of
 little laundress, who had been previously warned, and was not yet
 gone to bed. she opened the door.
 
“mademoiselle,” said eugénie, “let the porter get the post-chaise from
 the coach-house, and fetch some post-horses from the hotel. here are
 five francs for his trouble.”
 
“indeed,” said louise, “i admire you, and i could almost say respect
 you.” the laundress looked on in astonishment, but as she had been
 promised twenty louis, she made remark.
 
in quarter of an hour the porter returned with post-boy and horses,
 which were harnessed, and put in the post-chaise in minute, while the
 porter fastened the portmanteau on with the assistance of cord and
 strap.
 
“here is the passport,” said the postilion, “which way are we going,
 young gentleman?”
 
“to fontainebleau,” replied eugénie with an almost masculine voice.
 
“what do you say?” said louise.
 
“i am giving them the slip,” said eugénie; “this woman to whom we have
 given twenty louis may betray us for forty; we will soon alter our
 direction.”
 
and the young girl jumped into the britzka, which was admirably
 arranged for sleeping in, without scarcely touching the step.
 
“you are always right,” said the music teacher, seating herself by the
 side of her friend.
 
quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been put in the
 right road, passed with crack of his whip through the gateway of the
 barrière saint-martin.
 
“ah,” said louise, breathing freely, “here we are out of paris.”
 
“yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,” replied eugénie.
 
“yes, and without violence,” said louise.
 
“i shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,” replied
 eugénie.
 
these words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in rolling
 over the pavement of villette. m. danglars longer had daughter.
 


chapter 98. the bell and bottle tavern
 
and now let us leave mademoiselle danglars and her friend pursuing
 their way to brussels, and return to poor andrea cavalcanti, so
 inopportunely interrupted in his rise to fortune. notwithstanding his
 youth, master andrea was very skilful and intelligent boy. we have
 seen that on the first rumor which reached the salon had gradually
 approached the door, and crossing two or three rooms at last
 disappeared. but we have forgotten to mention one circumstance, which
 nevertheless ought not to be omitted; in one of the rooms crossed,
 the _trousseau_ of the bride-elect was on exhibition. there were
 caskets of diamonds, cashmere shawls, valenciennes lace, english veils,
 and in fact all the tempting things, the bare mention of which makes
 the hearts of young girls bound with joy, and which is called the
 _corbeille_.22 now, in passing through this room, andrea proved himself
 not only to be clever and intelligent, but also provident, for he
 helped himself to the most valuable of the ornaments before him.
 
furnished with this plunder, andrea leaped with lighter heart from
 the window, intending to slip through the hands of the gendarmes. tall
 and well proportioned as an ancient gladiator, and muscular as a
 spartan, walked for quarter of an hour without knowing where to
 direct his steps, actuated by the sole idea of getting away from the
 spot where if lingered knew that would surely be taken. having
 passed through the rue du mont-blanc, guided by the instinct which
 leads thieves always to take the safest path, found himself at the
 end of the rue fayette. there stopped, breathless and panting. he
 was quite alone; on one side was the vast wilderness of the
 saint-lazare, on the other, paris enshrouded in darkness.
 
“am i to be captured?” cried; “no, not if i can use more activity
 than my enemies. my safety is now mere question of speed.”
 
at this moment saw cab at the top of the faubourg poissonnière.
 the dull driver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along toward the limits
 of the faubourg saint-denis, where doubt ordinarily had his
 station.
 
“ho, friend!” said benedetto.
 
“what do you want, sir?” asked the driver.
 
“is your horse tired?”
 
“tired? oh, yes, tired enough—he has done nothing the whole of this
 blessed day! four wretched fares, and twenty sous over, making in all
 seven francs, are all that i have earned, and i ought to take ten to
 the owner.”
 
“will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?”
 
“with pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised. tell what
 i am to do for this.”
 
“a very easy thing, if your horse isn’t tired.”
 
“i tell you he’ll go like the wind,—only tell which way to drive.”
 
“towards the louvres.”
 
“ah, i know the way—you get good sweetened rum over there.”
 
“exactly so; i merely wish to overtake one of my friends, with whom i
 am going to hunt tomorrow at chapelle-en-serval. should have waited
 for here with cabriolet till half-past eleven; it is twelve, and,
 tired of waiting, must have gone on.”
 
“it is likely.”
 
“well, will you try and overtake him?”
 
“nothing i should like better.”
 
“if you do not overtake him before we reach bourget you shall have
 twenty francs; if not before louvres, thirty.”
 
“and if we do overtake him?”
 
“forty,” said andrea, after moment’s hesitation, at the end of which
 remembered that might safely promise.
 
“that’s all right,” said the man; “hop in, and we’re off! who-o-o-pla!”
 
andrea got into the cab, which passed rapidly through the faubourg
 saint-denis, along the faubourg saint-martin, crossed the barrier, and
 threaded its way through the interminable villette. they never overtook
 the chimerical friend, yet andrea frequently inquired of people on foot
 whom passed and at the inns which were not yet closed, for green
 cabriolet and bay horse; and as there are great many cabriolets to be
 seen on the road to the low countries, and as nine-tenths of them are
 green, the inquiries increased at every step. everyone had just seen it
 pass; it was only five hundred, two hundred, one hundred steps in
 advance; at length they reached it, but it was not the friend. once the
 cab was also passed by calash rapidly whirled along by two
 post-horses.
 
“ah,” said cavalcanti to himself, “if i only had that britzka, those
 two good post-horses, and above all the passport that carries them on!”
 and sighed deeply.
 
the calash contained mademoiselle danglars and mademoiselle d’armilly.
 
“hurry, hurry!” said andrea, “we must overtake him soon.”
 
and the poor horse resumed the desperate gallop it had kept up since
 leaving the barrier, and arrived steaming at louvres.
 
“certainly,” said andrea, “i shall not overtake my friend, but i shall
 kill your horse, therefore i had better stop. here are thirty francs; i
 will sleep at the _cheval rouge_, and will secure place in the first
 coach. good-night, friend.”
 
and andrea, after placing six pieces of five francs each in the man’s
 hand, leaped lightly on to the pathway. the cabman joyfully pocketed
 the sum, and turned back on his road to paris. andrea pretended to go
 towards the hotel of the _cheval rouge_, but after leaning an instant
 against the door, and hearing the last sound of the cab, which was
 disappearing from view, went on his road, and with lusty stride
 soon traversed the space of two leagues. then rested; must be
 near chapelle-en-serval, where pretended to be going.
 
it was not fatigue that stayed andrea here; it was that might form
 some resolution, adopt some plan. it would be impossible to make use of
 diligence, equally so to engage post-horses; to travel either way a
 passport was necessary. it was still more impossible to remain in the
 department of the oise, one of the most open and strictly guarded in
 france; this was quite out of the question, especially to man like
 andrea, perfectly conversant with criminal matters.
 
sat down by the side of the moat, buried his face in his hands and
 reflected. ten minutes after raised his head; his resolution was
 made. threw some dust over the topcoat, which had found time to
 unhook from the antechamber and button over his ball costume, and going
 to chapelle-en-serval knocked loudly at the door of the only inn in
 the place.
 
the host opened.
 
“my friend,” said andrea, “i was coming from mortefontaine to senlis,
 when my horse, which is troublesome creature, stumbled and threw me.
 i must reach compiègne tonight, or i shall cause deep anxiety to my
 family. could you let hire horse of you?”
 
an innkeeper has always horse to let, whether it be good or bad. the
 host called the stable-boy, and ordered him to saddle _le blanc_ then
 awoke his son, child of seven years, whom ordered to ride
 before the gentleman and bring back the horse. andrea gave the
 innkeeper twenty francs, and in taking them from his pocket dropped a
 visiting card. this belonged to one of his friends at the café de
 paris, so that the innkeeper, picking it up after andrea had left, was
 convinced that had let his horse to the count of mauléon, 25 rue
 saint-dominique, that being the name and address on the card.
 
_le blanc_ was not fast animal, but kept up an easy, steady pace;
 in three hours and half andrea had traversed the nine leagues which
 separated him from compiègne, and four o’clock struck as reached the
 place where the coaches stop. there is an excellent tavern at
 compiègne, well remembered by those who have ever been there. andrea,
 who had often stayed there in his rides about paris, recollected the
 bell and bottle inn; turned around, saw the sign by the light of a
 reflected lamp, and having dismissed the child, giving him all the
 small coin had about him, began knocking at the door, very
 reasonably concluding that having now three or four hours before him he
 had best fortify himself against the fatigues of the morrow by sound
 sleep and good supper. waiter opened the door.
 
“my friend,” said andrea, “i have been dining at saint-jean-aux-bois,
 and expected to catch the coach which passes by at midnight, but like a
 fool i have lost my way, and have been walking for the last four hours
 in the forest. show into one of those pretty little rooms which
 overlook the court, and bring cold fowl and bottle of bordeaux.”
 
the waiter had suspicions; andrea spoke with perfect composure, he
 had cigar in his mouth, and his hands in the pocket of his top coat;
 his clothes were fashionably made, his chin smooth, his boots
 irreproachable; looked merely as if had stayed out very late,
 that was all. while the waiter was preparing his room, the hostess
 arose; andrea assumed his most charming smile, and asked if could
 have no. 3, which had occupied on his last stay at compiègne.
 unfortunately, no. 3 was engaged by young man who was travelling with
 his sister. andrea appeared in despair, but consoled himself when the
 hostess assured him that no. 7, prepared for him, was situated
 precisely the same as no. 3, and while warming his feet and chatting
 about the last races at chantilly, waited until they announced his
 room to be ready.
 
andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty rooms looking out
 upon the court of the bell hotel, which with its triple galleries like
 those of theatre, with the jessamine and clematis twining round the
 light columns, forms one of the prettiest entrances to an inn that you
 can imagine. the fowl was tender, the wine old, the fire clear and
 sparkling, and andrea was surprised to find himself eating with as good
 an appetite as though nothing had happened. then went to bed and
 almost immediately fell into that deep sleep which is sure to visit men
 of twenty years of age, even when they are torn with remorse. now, here
 we are obliged to own that andrea ought to have felt remorse, but that
 did not.
 
this was the plan which had appealed to him to afford the best chance
 of his security. before daybreak would awake, leave the inn after
 rigorously paying his bill, and reaching the forest, would, under
 pretence of making studies in painting, test the hospitality of some
 peasants, procure himself the dress of woodcutter and hatchet,
 casting off the lion’s skin to assume that of the woodman; then, with
 his hands covered with dirt, his hair darkened by means of leaden
 comb, his complexion embrowned with preparation for which one of his
 old comrades had given him the recipe, intended, by following the
 wooded districts, to reach the nearest frontier, walking by night and
 sleeping in the day in the forests and quarries, and only entering
 inhabited regions to buy loaf from time to time.
 
once past the frontier, andrea proposed making money of his diamonds;
 and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes always carried about
 with him in case of accident, would then find himself possessor of
 about 50,000 livres, which philosophically considered as very
 deplorable condition after all. moreover, reckoned much on the
 interest of the danglars to hush up the rumor of their own
 misadventures. these were the reasons which, added to the fatigue,
 caused andrea to sleep so soundly. in order that might wake early he
 did not close the shutters, but contented himself with bolting the door
 and placing on the table an unclasped and long-pointed knife, whose
 temper well knew, and which was never absent from him.
 
about seven in the morning andrea was awakened by ray of sunlight,
 which played, warm and brilliant, upon his face. in all well-organized
 brains, the predominating idea—and there always is one—is sure to be
 the last thought before sleeping, and the first upon waking in the
 morning. andrea had scarcely opened his eyes when his predominating
 idea presented itself, and whispered in his ear that had slept too
 long. jumped out of bed and ran to the window. gendarme was
 crossing the court. gendarme is one of the most striking objects in
 the world, even to man void of uneasiness; but for one who has a
 timid conscience, and with good cause too, the yellow, blue, and white
 uniform is really very alarming.
 
“why is that gendarme there?” asked andrea of himself.
 
then, all at once, replied, with that logic which the reader has,
 doubtless, remarked in him, “there is nothing astonishing in seeing a
 gendarme at an inn; instead of being astonished, let dress myself.”
 and the youth dressed himself with facility his valet chambre had
 failed to rob him of during the two months of fashionable life had
 led in paris.
 
“now then,” said andrea, while dressing himself, “i’ll wait till he
 leaves, and then i’ll slip away.”
 
50047m
 


and, saying this, andrea, who had now put on his boots and cravat,
 stole gently to the window, and second time lifted up the muslin
 curtain. not only was the first gendarme still there, but the young man
 now perceived second yellow, blue, and white uniform at the foot of
 the staircase, the only one by which could descend, while third,
 on horseback, holding musket in his fist, was posted as sentinel at
 the great street-door which alone afforded the means of egress. the
 appearance of the third gendarme settled the matter, for crowd of
 curious loungers was extended before him, effectually blocking the
 entrance to the hotel.
 
“they’re after me!” was andrea’s first thought. “_diable!_”
 
pallor overspread the young man’s forehead, and looked around him
 with anxiety. his room, like all those on the same floor, had but one
 outlet to the gallery in the sight of everybody. “i am lost!” was his
 second thought; and, indeed, for man in andrea’s situation, an arrest
 meant the assizes, trial, and death,—death without mercy or delay.
 
for moment convulsively pressed his head within his hands, and
 during that brief period became nearly mad with terror; but soon a
 ray of hope glimmered in the multitude of thoughts which bewildered his
 mind, and faint smile played upon his white lips and pallid cheeks.
 looked around and saw the objects of his search upon the
 chimney-piece; they were pen, ink, and paper. with forced composure
 dipped the pen in the ink, and wrote the following lines upon a
 sheet of paper:
 
“i have money to pay my bill, but i am not dishonest man; i leave
 behind as pledge this pin, worth ten times the amount. i shall be
 excused for leaving at daybreak, for i was ashamed.”
 
then drew the pin from his cravat and placed it on the paper. this
 done, instead of leaving the door fastened, drew back the bolts and
 even placed the door ajar, as though had left the room, forgetting
 to close it, and slipping into the chimney like man accustomed to
 that kind of gymnastic exercise, after replacing the chimney-board,
 which represented achilles with deidamia, and effacing the very marks
 of his feet upon the ashes, commenced climbing the hollow tunnel,
 which afforded him the only means of escape left.
 
at this precise time, the first gendarme andrea had noticed walked
 upstairs, preceded by the commissary of police, and supported by the
 second gendarme who guarded the staircase and was himself reinforced by
 the one stationed at the door.
 
andrea was indebted for this visit to the following circumstances. at
 daybreak, the telegraphs were set at work in all directions, and almost
 immediately the authorities in every district had exerted their utmost
 endeavors to arrest the murderer of caderousse. compiègne, that royal
 residence and fortified town, is well furnished with authorities,
 gendarmes, and commissaries of police; they therefore began operations
 as soon as the telegraphic despatch arrived, and the bell and bottle
 being the best-known hotel in the town, they had naturally directed
 their first inquiries there.
 
now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the hôtel ville,
 which is next door to the bell and bottle, it had been stated by others
 that number of travellers had arrived during the night. the sentinel
 who was relieved at six o’clock in the morning, remembered perfectly
 that, just as was taking his post few minutes past four, young
 man arrived on horseback, with little boy before him. the young man,
 having dismissed the boy and horse, knocked at the door of the hotel,
 which was opened, and again closed after his entrance. this late
 arrival had attracted much suspicion, and the young man being other
 than andrea, the commissary and gendarme, who was brigadier, directed
 their steps towards his room. they found the door ajar.
 
“oh, oh,” said the brigadier, who thoroughly understood the trick; “a
 bad sign to find the door open! i would rather find it triply bolted.”
 
and, indeed, the little note and pin upon the table confirmed, or
 rather corroborated, the sad truth. andrea had fled. we say
 corroborated, because the brigadier was too experienced to be convinced
 by single proof. glanced around, looked in the bed, shook the
 curtains, opened the closets, and finally stopped at the chimney.
 andrea had taken the precaution to leave traces of his feet in the
 ashes, but still it was an outlet, and in this light was not to be
 passed over without serious investigation.
 
the brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and having filled the
 chimney with them, set light to it. the fire crackled, and the smoke
 ascended like the dull vapor from volcano; but still prisoner fell
 down, as they expected. the fact was, that andrea, at war with society
 ever since his youth, was quite as deep as gendarme, even though he
 were advanced to the rank of brigadier, and quite prepared for the
 fire, had climbed out on the roof and was crouching down against the
 chimney-pots.
 
50049m
 


at one time thought was saved, for heard the brigadier exclaim
 in loud voice, to the two gendarmes, “he is not here!” but venturing
 to peep, perceived that the latter, instead of retiring, as might
 have been reasonably expected upon this announcement, were watching
 with increased attention.
 
it was now his turn to look about him; the hôtel ville, massive
 sixteenth century building, was on his right; anyone could descend from
 the openings in the tower, and examine every corner of the roof below,
 and andrea expected momentarily to see the head of gendarme appear at
 one of these openings. if once discovered, knew would be lost,
 for the roof afforded chance of escape; therefore resolved to
 descend, not through the same chimney by which had come up, but by a
 similar one conducting to another room.
 
looked around for chimney from which smoke issued, and having
 reached it, disappeared through the orifice without being seen by
 anyone. at the same minute, one of the little windows of the hôtel de
 ville was thrown open, and the head of gendarme appeared. for an
 instant it remained motionless as one of the stone decorations of the
 building, then after long sigh of disappointment the head
 disappeared. the brigadier, calm and dignified as the law he
 represented, passed through the crowd, without answering the thousand
 questions addressed to him, and re-entered the hotel.
 
“well?” asked the two gendarmes.
 
“well, my boys,” said the brigadier, “the brigand must really have
 escaped early this morning; but we will send to the villers-coterets
 and noyon roads, and search the forest, when we shall catch him, no
 doubt.”
 
the honorable functionary had scarcely expressed himself thus, in that
 intonation which is peculiar to brigadiers of the gendarmerie, when a
 loud scream, accompanied by the violent ringing of bell, resounded
 through the court of the hotel.
 
“ah, what is that?” cried the brigadier.
 
“some traveller seems impatient,” said the host. “what number was it
 that rang?”
 
“number 3.”
 
“run, waiter!”
 
at this moment the screams and ringing were redoubled.
 
“aha!” said the brigadier, stopping the servant, “the person who is
 ringing appears to want something more than waiter; we will attend
 upon him with gendarme. who occupies number 3?”
 
“the little fellow who arrived last night in post-chaise with his
 sister, and who asked for an apartment with two beds.”
 
the bell here rang for the third time, with another shriek of anguish.
 
“follow me, mr. commissary!” said the brigadier; “tread in my steps.”
 
“wait an instant,” said the host; “number 3 has two staircases,—inside
 and outside.”
 
“good,” said the brigadier. “i will take charge of the inside one. are
 the carbines loaded?”
 
“yes, brigadier.”
 
“well, you guard the exterior, and if attempts to fly, fire upon
 him; must be great criminal, from what the telegraph says.”
 
the brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared by the inside
 staircase, accompanied by the noise which his assertions respecting
 andrea had excited in the crowd.
 
this is what had happened: andrea had very cleverly managed to descend
 two-thirds of the chimney, but then his foot slipped, and
 notwithstanding his endeavors, came into the room with more speed
 and noise than intended. it would have signified little had the room
 been empty, but unfortunately it was occupied. two ladies, sleeping in
 one bed, were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes upon the
 spot whence the sound proceeded, they saw man. one of these ladies,
 the fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks which resounded through
 the house, while the other, rushing to the bell-rope, rang with all her
 strength. andrea, as we can see, was surrounded by misfortune.
 
“for pity’s sake,” cried, pale and bewildered, without seeing whom
 was addressing,—“for pity’s sake do not call assistance! save me!—i
 will not harm you.”
 
“andrea, the murderer!” cried one of the ladies.
 
“eugénie! mademoiselle danglars!” exclaimed andrea, stupefied.
 
“help, help!” cried mademoiselle d’armilly, taking the bell from her
 companion’s hand, and ringing it yet more violently.
 
“save me, i am pursued!” said andrea, clasping his hands. “for pity,
 for mercy’s sake do not deliver up!”
 
“it is too late, they are coming,” said eugénie.
 
“well, conceal somewhere; you can say you were needlessly alarmed;
 you can turn their suspicions and save my life!”
 
50053m
 


the two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing the
 bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to this supplicating
 voice, repugnance and fear taking possession of their minds.
 
“well, be it so,” at length said eugénie; “return by the same road you
 came, and we will say nothing about you, unhappy wretch.”
 
“here is, here is!” cried voice from the landing; “here is!
 i see him!”
 
the brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole, and had discovered andrea
 in posture of entreaty. violent blow from the butt end of the
 musket burst open the lock, two more forced out the bolts, and the
 broken door fell in. andrea ran to the other door, leading to the
 gallery, ready to rush out; but was stopped short, and stood with
 his body little thrown back, pale, and with the useless knife in his
 clenched hand.
 
“fly, then!” cried mademoiselle d’armilly, whose pity returned as her
 fears diminished; “fly!”
 
“or kill yourself!” said eugénie (in tone which vestal in the
 amphitheatre would have used, when urging the victorious gladiator to
 finish his vanquished adversary). andrea shuddered, and looked on the
 young girl with an expression which proved how little understood
 such ferocious honor.
 
“kill myself?” cried, throwing down his knife; “why should i do so?”
 
“why, you said,” answered mademoiselle danglars, “that you would be
 condemned to die like the worst criminals.”
 
50055m
 


“bah,” said cavalcanti, crossing his arms, “one has friends.”
 
the brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand.
 
“come, come,” said andrea, “sheathe your sword, my fine fellow; there
 is occasion to make such fuss, since i give myself up;” and he
 held out his hands to be manacled.
 
the two girls looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the
 man of the world shaking off his covering and appearing as a
 galley-slave. andrea turned towards them, and with an impertinent smile
 asked, “have you any message for your father, mademoiselle danglars,
 for in all probability i shall return to paris?”
 
eugénie covered her face with her hands.
 
“oh, oh!” said andrea, “you need not be ashamed, even though you did
 post after me. was i not nearly your husband?”
 
50056m
 


and with this raillery andrea went out, leaving the two girls prey to
 their own feelings of shame, and to the comments of the crowd. an hour
 after they stepped into their calash, both dressed in feminine attire.
 the gate of the hotel had been closed to screen them from sight, but
 they were forced, when the door was open, to pass through throng of
 curious glances and whispering voices.
 
eugénie closed her eyes; but though she could not see, she could hear,
 and the sneers of the crowd reached her in the carriage.
 
“oh, why is not the world wilderness?” she exclaimed, throwing
 herself into the arms of mademoiselle d’armilly, her eyes sparkling
 with the same kind of rage which made nero wish that the roman world
 had but one neck, that might sever it at single blow.
 
the next day they stopped at the hôtel flandre, at brussels. the
 same evening andrea was incarcerated in the conciergerie.
 


chapter 99. the law
 
we have seen how quietly mademoiselle danglars and mademoiselle
 d’armilly accomplished their transformation and flight; the fact being
 that everyone was too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think
 of theirs.
 
we will leave the banker contemplating the enormous magnitude of his
 debt before the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness, who
 after being momentarily crushed under the weight of the blow which had
 struck her, had gone to seek her usual adviser, lucien debray. the
 baroness had looked forward to this marriage as means of ridding her
 of guardianship which, over girl of eugénie’s character, could not
 fail to be rather troublesome undertaking; for in the tacit relations
 which maintain the bond of family union, the mother, to maintain her
 ascendancy over her daughter, must never fail to be model of wisdom
 and type of perfection.
 
now, madame danglars feared eugénie’s sagacity and the influence of
 mademoiselle d’armilly; she had frequently observed the contemptuous
 expression with which her daughter looked upon debray,—an expression
 which seemed to imply that she understood all her mother’s amorous and
 pecuniary relationships with the intimate secretary; moreover, she saw
 that eugénie detested debray, not only because was source of
 dissension and scandal under the paternal roof, but because she had at
 once classed him in that catalogue of bipeds whom plato endeavors to
 withdraw from the appellation of men, and whom diogenes designated as
 animals upon two legs without feathers.
 
unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views things through
 certain medium, and so is prevented from seeing in the same light as
 others, and madame danglars, therefore, very much regretted that the
 marriage of eugénie had not taken place, not only because the match was
 good, and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but because it
 would also set her at liberty. she ran therefore to debray, who, after
 having, like the rest of paris, witnessed the contract scene and the
 scandal attending it, had retired in haste to his club, where was
 chatting with some friends upon the events which served as subject of
 conversation for three-fourths of that city known as the capital of the
 world.
 
at the precise time when madame danglars, dressed in black and
 concealed in long veil, was ascending the stairs leading to debray’s
 apartments, notwithstanding the assurances of the concierge that the
 young man was not at home, debray was occupied in repelling the
 insinuations of friend, who tried to persuade him that after the
 terrible scene which had just taken place ought, as friend of the
 family, to marry mademoiselle danglars and her two millions. debray did
 not defend himself very warmly, for the idea had sometimes crossed his
 mind; still, when recollected the independent, proud spirit of
 eugénie, positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the
 same thought again continually recurred and found resting-place in
 his heart. tea, play, and the conversation, which had become
 interesting during the discussion of such serious affairs, lasted till
 one o’clock in the morning.
 
meanwhile madame danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited the return of
 debray in the little green room, seated between two baskets of flowers,
 which she had that morning sent, and which, it must be confessed,
 debray had himself arranged and watered with so much care that his
 absence was half excused in the eyes of the poor woman.
 
at twenty minutes to twelve, madame danglars, tired of waiting,
 returned home. women of certain grade are like prosperous grisettes
 in one respect, they seldom return home after twelve o’clock. the
 baroness returned to the hotel with as much caution as eugénie used in
 leaving it; she ran lightly upstairs, and with an aching heart entered
 her apartment, contiguous, as we know, to that of eugénie. she was
 fearful of exciting any remark, and believed firmly in her daughter’s
 innocence and fidelity to the paternal roof. she listened at eugénie’s
 door, and hearing sound tried to enter, but the bolts were in place.
 madame danglars then concluded that the young girl had been overcome
 with the terrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed and to
 sleep. she called the maid and questioned her.
 
“mademoiselle eugénie,” said the maid, “retired to her apartment with
 mademoiselle d’armilly; they then took tea together, after which they
 desired to leave, saying that they needed longer.”
 
since then the maid had been below, and like everyone else she thought
 the young ladies were in their own room; madame danglars, therefore,
 went to bed without shadow of suspicion, and began to muse over the
 recent events. in proportion as her memory became clearer, the
 occurrences of the evening were revealed in their true light; what she
 had taken for confusion was tumult; what she had regarded as
 something distressing, was in reality disgrace. and then the baroness
 remembered that she had felt pity for poor mercédès, who had been
 afflicted with as severe blow through her husband and son.
 
“eugénie,” she said to herself, “is lost, and so are we. the affair, as
 it will be reported, will cover us with shame; for in society such as
 ours satire inflicts painful and incurable wound. how fortunate that
 eugénie is possessed of that strange character which has so often made
 tremble!”
 
and her glance was turned towards heaven, where mysterious providence
 disposes all things, and out of fault, nay, even vice, sometimes
 produces blessing. and then her thoughts, cleaving through space like
 bird in the air, rested on cavalcanti. this andrea was wretch, a
 robber, an assassin, and yet his manners showed the effects of sort
 of education, if not complete one; had been presented to the world
 with the appearance of an immense fortune, supported by an honorable
 name. how could she extricate herself from this labyrinth? to whom
 would she apply to help her out of this painful situation? debray, to
 whom she had run, with the first instinct of woman towards the man
 she loves, and who yet betrays her,—debray could but give her advice,
 she must apply to someone more powerful than he.
 
the baroness then thought of m. villefort. it was m. villefort
 who had remorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though
 they had been strangers. but, no; on reflection, the procureur was not
 merciless man; and it was not the magistrate, slave to his duties,
 but the friend, the loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the
 very core of the corruption; it was not the executioner, but the
 surgeon, who wished to withdraw the honor of danglars from ignominious
 association with the disgraced young man they had presented to the
 world as their son-in-law. and since villefort, the friend of danglars,
 had acted in this way, one could suppose that had been previously
 acquainted with, or had lent himself to, any of andrea’s intrigues.
 villefort’s conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to the
 baroness as if shaped for their mutual advantage. but the inflexibility
 of the procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and
 if she could not make him fail in his duties as magistrate, she
 would, at least, obtain all the indulgence could allow. she would
 invoke the past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate him by
 the remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. m. villefort would stifle
 the affair; had only to turn his eyes on one side, and allow andrea
 to fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow of guilt called
 contempt of court. and after this reasoning she slept easily.
 
at nine o’clock next morning she arose, and without ringing for her
 maid or giving the least sign of her activity, she dressed herself in
 the same simple style as on the previous night; then running
 downstairs, she left the hotel, walked to the rue provence, called a
 cab, and drove to m. villefort’s house.
 
for the last month this wretched house had presented the gloomy
 appearance of lazaretto infected with the plague. some of the
 apartments were closed within and without; the shutters were only
 opened to admit minute’s air, showing the scared face of footman,
 and immediately afterwards the window would be closed, like a
 gravestone falling on sepulchre, and the neighbors would say to each
 other in low voice, “will there be another funeral today at the
 procureur’s house?”
 
madame danglars involuntarily shuddered at the desolate aspect of the
 mansion; descending from the cab, she approached the door with
 trembling knees, and rang the bell. three times did the bell ring with
 dull, heavy sound, seeming to participate, in the general sadness,
 before the concierge appeared and peeped through the door, which he
 opened just wide enough to allow his words to be heard. saw lady,
 fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, and yet the door remained almost
 closed.
 
“do you intend opening the door?” said the baroness.
 
“first, madame, who are you?”
 
“who am i? you know well enough.”
 
“we longer know anyone, madame.”
 
“you must be mad, my friend,” said the baroness.
 
“where do you come from?”
 
“oh, this is too much!”
 
“madame, these are my orders; excuse me. your name?”
 
“the baroness danglars; you have seen twenty times.”
 
“possibly, madame. and now, what do you want?”
 
“oh, how extraordinary! i shall complain to m. villefort of the
 impertinence of his servants.”
 
“madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; one enters here
 without an order from m. d’avrigny, or without speaking to the
 procureur.”
 
“well, i have business with the procureur.”
 
“is it pressing business?”
 
“you can imagine so, since i have not even brought my carriage out yet.
 but enough of this—here is my card, take it to your master.”
 
“madame will await my return?”
 
“yes; go.”
 
the concierge closed the door, leaving madame danglars in the street.
 she had not long to wait; directly afterwards the door was opened wide
 enough to admit her, and when she had passed through, it was again
 shut. without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took a
 whistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, and blew it.
 the valet chambre appeared on the door-steps.
 
“you will excuse this poor fellow, madame,” said, as preceded the
 baroness, “but his orders are precise, and m. villefort begged to
 tell you that could not act otherwise.”
 
in the court showing his merchandise, was tradesman who had been
 admitted with the same precautions. the baroness ascended the steps;
 she felt herself strongly infected with the sadness which seemed to
 magnify her own, and still guided by the valet chambre, who never
 lost sight of her for an instant, she was introduced to the
 magistrate’s study.
 
preoccupied as madame danglars had been with the object of her visit,
 the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so
 insulting, that she began by complaining of it. but villefort, raising
 his head, bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad smile
 that her complaints died upon her lips.
 
“forgive my servants,” said, “for terror i cannot blame them for;
 from being suspected they have become suspicious.”
 
madame danglars had often heard of the terror to which the magistrate
 alluded, but without the evidence of her own eyesight she could never
 have believed that the sentiment had been carried so far.
 
“you too, then, are unhappy?” she said.
 
“yes, madame,” replied the magistrate.
 
“then you pity me!”
 
“sincerely, madame.”
 
“and you understand what brings here?”
 
“you wish to speak to about the circumstance which has just
 happened?”
 
“yes, sir,—a fearful misfortune.”
 
“you mean mischance.”
 
“a mischance?” repeated the baroness.
 
“alas, madame,” said the procureur with his imperturbable calmness of
 manner, “i consider those alone misfortunes which are irreparable.”
 
“and do you suppose this will be forgotten?”
 
“everything will be forgotten, madame,” said villefort. “your daughter
 will be married tomorrow, if not today—in week, if not tomorrow; and
 i do not think you can regret the intended husband of your daughter.”
 
madame danglars gazed on villefort, stupefied to find him so almost
 insultingly calm. “am i come to friend?” she asked in tone full of
 mournful dignity.
 
“you know that you are, madame,” said villefort, whose pale cheeks
 became slightly flushed as gave her the assurance. and truly this
 assurance carried him back to different events from those now occupying
 the baroness and him.
 
“well, then, be more affectionate, my dear villefort,” said the
 baroness. “speak to not as magistrate, but as friend; and when i
 am in bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell that i ought to be gay.”
 villefort bowed.
 
“when i hear misfortunes named, madame,” said, “i have within the
 last few months contracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, and
 then i cannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind. that
 is the reason that by the side of my misfortunes yours appear to me
 mere mischances; that is why my dreadful position makes yours appear
 enviable. but this annoys you; let us change the subject. you were
 saying, madame——”
 
“i came to ask you, my friend,” said the baroness, “what will be done
 with this impostor?”
 
“impostor,” repeated villefort; “certainly, madame, you appear to
 extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others. impostor, indeed!—m.
 andrea cavalcanti, or rather m. benedetto, is nothing more nor less
 than an assassin!”
 
“sir, i do not deny the justice of your correction, but the more
 severely you arm yourself against that unfortunate man, the more deeply
 will you strike our family. come, forget him for moment, and instead
 of pursuing him, let him go.”
 
“you are too late, madame; the orders are issued.”
 
“well, should be arrested—do they think they will arrest him?”
 
“i hope so.”
 
“if they should arrest him (i know that sometimes prisons afford means
 of escape), will you leave him in prison?”
 
the procureur shook his head.
 
“at least keep him there till my daughter be married.”
 
“impossible, madame; justice has its formalities.”
 
“what, even for me?” said the baroness, half jesting, half in earnest.
 
“for all, even for myself among the rest,” replied villefort.
 
50063m
 


“ah!” exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideas which the
 exclamation betrayed. villefort looked at her with that piercing glance
 which reads the secrets of the heart.
 
“yes, i know what you mean,” said; “you refer to the terrible rumors
 spread abroad in the world, that the deaths which have kept in
 mourning for the last three months, and from which valentine has only
 escaped by miracle, have not happened by natural means.”
 
“i was not thinking of that,” replied madame danglars quickly.
 
“yes, you were thinking of it, and with justice. you could not help
 thinking of it, and saying to yourself, ‘you, who pursue crime so
 vindictively, answer now, why are there unpunished crimes in your
 dwelling?’” the baroness became pale. “you were saying this, were you
 not?”
 
“well, i own it.”
 
“i will answer you.”
 
villefort drew his armchair nearer to madame danglars; then resting
 both hands upon his desk said in voice more hollow than usual:
 
“there are crimes which remain unpunished because the criminals are
 unknown, and we might strike the innocent instead of the guilty; but
 when the culprits are discovered” (villefort here extended his hand
 toward large crucifix placed opposite to his desk)—“when they are
 discovered, i swear to you, by all i hold most sacred, that whoever
 they may be they shall die. now, after the oath i have just taken, and
 which i will keep, madame, dare you ask for mercy for that wretch!”
 
“but, sir, are you sure is as guilty as they say?”
 
“listen; this is his description: ‘benedetto, condemned, at the age of
 sixteen, for five years to the galleys for forgery.’ promised well,
 as you see—first runaway, then an assassin.”
 
“and who is this wretch?”
 
“who can tell?—a vagabond, corsican.”
 
“has one owned him?”
 
“no one; his parents are unknown.”
 
“but who was the man who brought him from lucca?”
 
“another rascal like himself, perhaps his accomplice.” the baroness
 clasped her hands.
 
“villefort,” she exclaimed in her softest and most captivating manner.
 
“for heaven’s sake, madame,” said villefort, with firmness of
 expression not altogether free from harshness—“for heaven’s sake, do
 not ask pardon of for guilty wretch! what am i?—the law. has the
 law any eyes to witness your grief? has the law ears to be melted by
 your sweet voice? has the law memory for all those soft recollections
 you endeavor to recall? no, madame; the law has commanded, and when it
 commands it strikes. you will tell that i am living being, and not
 code—a man, and not volume. look at me, madame—look around me. has
 mankind treated as brother? have men loved me? have they spared
 me? has anyone shown the mercy towards that you now ask at my hands?
 no, madame, they struck me, always struck me!
 
50065m
 


“woman, siren that you are, do you persist in fixing on that
 fascinating eye, which reminds that i ought to blush? well, be it
 so; let blush for the faults you know, and perhaps—perhaps for even
 more than those! but having sinned myself,—it may be more deeply than
 others,—i never rest till i have torn the disguises from my
 fellow-creatures, and found out their weaknesses. i have always found
 them; and more,—i repeat it with joy, with triumph,—i have always found
 some proof of human perversity or error. every criminal i condemn seems
 to living evidence that i am not hideous exception to the rest.
 alas, alas, alas; all the world is wicked; let us therefore strike at
 wickedness!”
 
villefort pronounced these last words with feverish rage, which gave
 ferocious eloquence to his words.
 
“but”’ said madame danglars, resolving to make last effort, “this
 young man, though murderer, is an orphan, abandoned by everybody.”
 
“so much the worse, or rather, so much the better; it has been so
 ordained that may have none to weep his fate.”
 
“but this is trampling on the weak, sir.”
 
“the weakness of murderer!”
 
“his dishonor reflects upon us.”
 
“is not death in my house?”
 
“oh, sir,” exclaimed the baroness, “you are without pity for others,
 well, then, i tell you they will have mercy on you!”
 
“be it so!” said villefort, raising his arms to heaven with a
 threatening gesture.
 
“at least, delay the trial till the next assizes; we shall then have
 six months before us.”
 
“no, madame,” said villefort; “instructions have been given. there are
 yet five days left; five days are more than i require. do you not think
 that i also long for forgetfulness? while working night and day, i
 sometimes lose all recollection of the past, and then i experience the
 same sort of happiness i can imagine the dead feel; still, it is better
 than suffering.”
 
“but, sir, has fled; let him escape—inaction is pardonable
 offence.”
 
“i tell you it is too late; early this morning the telegraph was
 employed, and at this very minute——”
 
“sir,” said the valet chambre, entering the room, “a dragoon has
 brought this despatch from the minister of the interior.”
 
villefort seized the letter, and hastily broke the seal. madame
 danglars trembled with fear; villefort started with joy.
 
“arrested!” exclaimed; “he was taken at compiègne, and all is over.”
 
madame danglars rose from her seat, pale and cold.
 
“adieu, sir,” she said.
 
“adieu, madame,” replied the king’s attorney, as in an almost joyful
 manner conducted her to the door. then, turning to his desk, he
 said, striking the letter with the back of his right hand:
 
“come, i had forgery, three robberies, and two cases of arson, i only
 wanted murder, and here it is. it will be splendid session!”
 


chapter 100. the apparition
 
as the procureur had told madame danglars, valentine was not yet
 recovered. bowed down with fatigue, she was indeed confined to her bed;
 and it was in her own room, and from the lips of madame villefort,
 that she heard all the strange events we have related; we mean the
 flight of eugénie and the arrest of andrea cavalcanti, or rather
 benedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronounced against
 him. but valentine was so weak that this recital scarcely produced the
 same effect it would have done had she been in her usual state of
 health. indeed, her brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and
 confused forms, mingled with strange fancies, alone presented
 themselves before her eyes.
 
during the daytime valentine’s perceptions remained tolerably clear,
 owing to the constant presence of m. noirtier, who caused himself to be
 carried to his granddaughter’s room, and watched her with his paternal
 tenderness; villefort also, on his return from the law courts,
 frequently passed an hour or two with his father and child.
 
at six o’clock villefort retired to his study, at eight m. d’avrigny
 himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared for the young
 girl, and then m. noirtier was carried away. nurse of the doctor’s
 choice succeeded them, and never left till about ten or eleven o’clock,
 when valentine was asleep. as she went downstairs she gave the keys of
 valentine’s room to m. villefort, so that one could reach the
 sick-room excepting through that of madame villefort and little
 edward.
 
every morning morrel called on noirtier to receive news of valentine,
 and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less uneasy.
 certainly, though valentine still labored under dreadful nervous
 excitement, she was better; and moreover, monte cristo had told him
 when, half distracted, had rushed to the count’s house, that if she
 were not dead in two hours she would be saved. now four days had
 elapsed, and valentine still lived.
 
the nervous excitement of which we speak pursued valentine even in her
 sleep, or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded her waking
 hours; it was then, in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from
 the alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass
 and repass which hover over the bed of sickness, and fan the fever with
 their trembling wings. first she fancied she saw her stepmother
 threatening her, then morrel stretched his arms towards her; sometimes
 mere strangers, like the count of monte cristo came to visit her; even
 the very furniture, in these moments of delirium, seemed to move, and
 this state lasted till about three o’clock in the morning, when deep,
 heavy slumber overcame the young girl, from which she did not awake
 till daylight.
 
on the evening of the day on which valentine had learned of the flight
 of eugénie and the arrest of benedetto,—villefort having retired as
 well as noirtier and d’avrigny,—her thoughts wandered in confused
 maze, alternately reviewing her own situation and the events she had
 just heard.
 
eleven o’clock had struck. the nurse, having placed the beverage
 prepared by the doctor within reach of the patient, and locked the
 door, was listening with terror to the comments of the servants in the
 kitchen, and storing her memory with all the horrible stories which had
 for some months past amused the occupants of the antechambers in the
 house of the king’s attorney. meanwhile an unexpected scene was passing
 in the room which had been so carefully locked.
 
ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left; valentine, who for
 the last hour had been suffering from the fever which returned nightly,
 incapable of controlling her ideas, was forced to yield to the
 excitement which exhausted itself in producing and reproducing a
 succession and recurrence of the same fancies and images. the
 night-lamp threw out countless rays, each resolving itself into some
 strange form to her disordered imagination, when suddenly by its
 flickering light valentine thought she saw the door of her library,
 which was in the recess by the chimney-piece, open slowly, though she
 in vain listened for the sound of the hinges on which it turned.
 
at any other time valentine would have seized the silken bell-pull and
 summoned assistance, but nothing astonished her in her present
 situation. her reason told her that all the visions she beheld were but
 the children of her imagination, and the conviction was strengthened by
 the fact that in the morning traces remained of the nocturnal
 phantoms, who disappeared with the coming of daylight.
 
from behind the door human figure appeared, but the girl was too
 familiar with such apparitions to be alarmed, and therefore only
 stared, hoping to recognize morrel. the figure advanced towards the bed
 and appeared to listen with profound attention. at this moment ray of
 light glanced across the face of the midnight visitor.
 
“it is not he,” she murmured, and waited, in the assurance that this
 was but dream, for the man to disappear or assume some other form.
 still, she felt her pulse, and finding it throb violently she
 remembered that the best method of dispelling such illusions was to
 drink, for draught of the beverage prepared by the doctor to allay
 her fever seemed to cause reaction of the brain, and for short time
 she suffered less. valentine therefore reached her hand towards the
 glass, but as soon as her trembling arm left the bed the apparition
 advanced more quickly towards her, and approached the young girl so
 closely that she fancied she heard his breath, and felt the pressure of
 his hand.
 
this time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassed anything
 valentine had before experienced; she began to believe herself really
 alive and awake, and the belief that her reason was this time not
 deceived made her shudder. the pressure she felt was evidently intended
 to arrest her arm, and she slowly withdrew it. then the figure, from
 whom she could not detach her eyes, and who appeared more protecting
 than menacing, took the glass, and walking towards the night-light held
 it up, as if to test its transparency. this did not seem sufficient;
 the man, or rather the ghost—for trod so softly that sound was
 heard—then poured out about spoonful into the glass, and drank it.
 
valentine witnessed this scene with sentiment of stupefaction. every
 minute she had expected that it would vanish and give place to another
 vision; but the man, instead of dissolving like shadow, again
 approached her, and said in an agitated voice, “now you may drink.”
 
valentine shuddered. it was the first time one of these visions had
 ever addressed her in living voice, and she was about to utter an
 exclamation. the man placed his finger on her lips.
 
“the count of monte cristo!” she murmured.
 
it was easy to see that doubt now remained in the young girl’s mind
 as to the reality of the scene; her eyes started with terror, her hands
 trembled, and she rapidly drew the bedclothes closer to her. still, the
 presence of monte cristo at such an hour, his mysterious, fanciful, and
 extraordinary entrance into her room through the wall, might well seem
 impossibilities to her shattered reason.
 
“do not call anyone—do not be alarmed,” said the count; “do not let a
 shade of suspicion or uneasiness remain in your breast; the man
 standing before you, valentine (for this time it is ghost), is
 nothing more than the tenderest father and the most respectful friend
 you could dream of.”
 
valentine could not reply; the voice which indicated the real presence
 of being in the room, alarmed her so much that she feared to utter a
 syllable; still the expression of her eyes seemed to inquire, “if your
 intentions are pure, why are you here?” the count’s marvellous sagacity
 understood all that was passing in the young girl’s mind.
 
“listen to me,” said, “or, rather, look upon me; look at my face,
 paler even than usual, and my eyes, red with weariness—for four days i
 have not closed them, for i have been constantly watching you, to
 protect and preserve you for maximilian.”
 
the blood mounted rapidly to the cheeks of valentine, for the name just
 announced by the count dispelled all the fear with which his presence
 had inspired her.
 
“maximilian!” she exclaimed, and so sweet did the sound appear to her,
 that she repeated it—“maximilian!—has then owned all to you?”
 
“everything. told your life was his, and i have promised him that
 you shall live.”
 
“you have promised him that i shall live?”
 
“yes.”
 
“but, sir, you spoke of vigilance and protection. are you doctor?”
 
“yes; the best you could have at the present time, believe me.”
 
“but you say you have watched?” said valentine uneasily; “where have
 you been?—i have not seen you.”
 
the count extended his hand towards the library.
 
“i was hidden behind that door,” said, “which leads into the next
 house, which i have rented.”
 
valentine turned her eyes away, and, with an indignant expression of
 pride and modest fear, exclaimed:
 
“sir, i think you have been guilty of an unparalleled intrusion, and
 that what you call protection is more like an insult.”
 
“valentine,” answered, “during my long watch over you, all i have
 observed has been what people visited you, what nourishment was
 prepared, and what beverage was served; then, when the latter appeared
 dangerous to me, i entered, as i have now done, and substituted, in the
 place of the poison, healthful draught; which, instead of producing
 the death intended, caused life to circulate in your veins.”
 
“poison—death!” exclaimed valentine, half believing herself under the
 influence of some feverish hallucination; “what are you saying, sir?”
 
50071m
 


“hush, my child,” said monte cristo, again placing his finger upon her
 lips, “i did say poison and death. but drink some of this;” and the
 count took bottle from his pocket, containing red liquid, of which
 poured few drops into the glass. “drink this, and then take
 nothing more tonight.”
 
valentine stretched out her hand, but scarcely had she touched the
 glass when she drew back in fear. monte cristo took the glass, drank
 half its contents, and then presented it to valentine, who smiled and
 swallowed the rest.
 
“oh, yes,” she exclaimed, “i recognize the flavor of my nocturnal
 beverage which refreshed so much, and seemed to ease my aching
 brain. thank you, sir, thank you!”
 
“this is how you have lived during the last four nights, valentine,”
 said the count. “but, oh, how i passed that time! oh, the wretched
 hours i have endured—the torture to which i have submitted when i saw
 the deadly poison poured into your glass, and how i trembled lest you
 should drink it before i could find time to throw it away!”
 
“sir,” said valentine, at the height of her terror, “you say you
 endured tortures when you saw the deadly poison poured into my glass;
 but if you saw this, you must also have seen the person who poured it?”
 
“yes.”
 
valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over her chest, which
 appeared whiter than snow, the embroidered cambric, still moist with
 the cold dews of delirium, to which were now added those of terror.
 “you saw the person?” repeated the young girl.
 
“yes,” repeated the count.
 
“what you tell is horrible, sir. you wish to make believe
 something too dreadful. what?—attempt to murder in my father’s
 house, in my room, on my bed of sickness? oh, leave me, sir; you are
 tempting me—you make doubt the goodness of providence—it is
 impossible, it cannot be!”
 
“are you the first that this hand has stricken? have you not seen m. de
 saint-méran, madame saint-méran, barrois, all fall? would not m.
 noirtier also have fallen victim, had not the treatment has been
 pursuing for the last three years neutralized the effects of the
 poison?”
 
“oh, heaven,” said valentine; “is this the reason why grandpapa has
 made share all his beverages during the last month?”
 
“and have they all tasted of slightly bitter flavor, like that of
 dried orange-peel?”
 
“oh, yes, yes!”
 
“then that explains all,” said monte cristo. “your grandfather knows,
 then, that poisoner lives here; perhaps even suspects the person.
 has been fortifying you, his beloved child, against the fatal
 effects of the poison, which has failed because your system was already
 impregnated with it. but even this would have availed little against a
 more deadly medium of death employed four days ago, which is generally
 but too fatal.”
 
“but who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?”
 
“let also ask you question. have you never seen anyone enter your
 room at night?”
 
“oh, yes; i have frequently seen shadows pass close to me, approach,
 and disappear; but i took them for visions raised by my feverish
 imagination, and indeed when you entered i thought i was under the
 influence of delirium.”
 
“then you do not know who it is that attempts your life?”
 
50073m
 


“no,” said valentine; “who could desire my death?”
 
“you shall know it now, then,” said monte cristo, listening.
 
“how do you mean?” said valentine, looking anxiously around.
 
“because you are not feverish or delirious tonight, but thoroughly
 awake; midnight is striking, which is the hour murderers choose.”
 
“oh, heavens,” exclaimed valentine, wiping off the drops which ran down
 her forehead. midnight struck slowly and sadly; every hour seemed to
 strike with leaden weight upon the heart of the poor girl.
 
“valentine,” said the count, “summon up all your courage; still the
 beatings of your heart; do not let sound escape you, and feign to be
 asleep; then you will see.”
 
valentine seized the count’s hand. “i think i hear noise,” she said;
 “leave me.”
 
“good-bye, for the present,” replied the count, walking upon tiptoe
 towards the library door, and smiling with an expression so sad and
 paternal that the young girl’s heart was filled with gratitude.
 
before closing the door turned around once more, and said, “not a
 movement—not word; let them think you asleep, or perhaps you may be
 killed before i have the power of helping you.”
 
and with this fearful injunction the count disappeared through the
 door, which noiselessly closed after him.
 


chapter 101. locusta
 
valentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that of
 saint-philippe-du-roule, struck the hour of midnight from different
 directions, and excepting the rumbling of few carriages all was
 silent. then valentine’s attention was engrossed by the clock in her
 room, which marked the seconds. she began counting them, remarking that
 they were much slower than the beatings of her heart; and still she
 doubted,—the inoffensive valentine could not imagine that anyone should
 desire her death. why should they? to what end? what had she done to
 excite the malice of an enemy?
 
there was fear of her falling asleep. one terrible idea pressed upon
 her mind,—that someone existed in the world who had attempted to
 assassinate her, and who was about to endeavor to do so again.
 supposing this person, wearied at the inefficacy of the poison, should,
 as monte cristo intimated, have recourse to steel!—what if the count
 should have time to run to her rescue!—what if her last moments were
 approaching, and she should never again see morrel!
 
when this terrible chain of ideas presented itself, valentine was
 nearly persuaded to ring the bell, and call for help. but through the
 door she fancied she saw the luminous eye of the count—that eye which
 lived in her memory, and the recollection overwhelmed her with so much
 shame that she asked herself whether any amount of gratitude could ever
 repay his adventurous and devoted friendship.
 
twenty minutes, twenty tedious minutes, passed thus, then ten more, and
 at last the clock struck the half-hour.
 
just then the sound of finger-nails slightly grating against the door
 of the library informed valentine that the count was still watching,
 and recommended her to do the same; at the same time, on the opposite
 side, that is towards edward’s room, valentine fancied that she heard
 the creaking of the floor; she listened attentively, holding her breath
 till she was nearly suffocated; the lock turned, and the door slowly
 opened. valentine had raised herself upon her elbow, and had scarcely
 time to throw herself down on the bed and shade her eyes with her arm;
 then, trembling, agitated, and her heart beating with indescribable
 terror, she awaited the event.
 
someone approached the bed and drew back the curtains. valentine
 summoned every effort, and breathed with that regular respiration which
 announces tranquil sleep.
 
“valentine!” said low voice.
 
the girl shuddered to the heart but did not reply.
 
“valentine,” repeated the same voice.
 
still silent: valentine had promised not to wake. then everything was
 still, excepting that valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of
 some liquid being poured into the glass she had just emptied. then she
 ventured to open her eyelids, and glance over her extended arm. she saw
 woman in white dressing-gown pouring liquor from phial into her
 glass. during this short time valentine must have held her breath, or
 moved in some slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and
 leaned over the bed, in order the better to ascertain whether valentine
 slept: it was madame villefort.
 
on recognizing her step-mother, valentine could not repress shudder,
 which caused vibration in the bed. madame villefort instantly
 stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains,
 she silently and attentively watched the slightest movement of
 valentine. the latter recollected the terrible caution of monte cristo;
 she fancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped long sharp
 knife. then collecting all her remaining strength, she forced herself
 to close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the most delicate
 organs of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almost
 impossible at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the
 eyelid open and learn the truth. madame villefort, however,
 reassured by the silence, which was alone disturbed by the regular
 breathing of valentine, again extended her hand, and half hidden by the
 curtains succeeded in emptying the contents of the phial into the
 glass. then she retired so gently that valentine did not know she had
 left the room. she only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm—the fair
 round arm of woman but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread
 death around her.
 
50077m
 


it is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by valentine
 during the minute and half madame villefort remained in the room.
 
the grating against the library-door aroused the young girl from the
 stupor in which she was plunged, and which almost amounted to
 insensibility. she raised her head with an effort. the noiseless door
 again turned on its hinges, and the count of monte cristo reappeared.
 
“well,” said he, “do you still doubt?”
 
“oh,” murmured the young girl.
 
“have you seen?”
 
“alas!”
 
“did you recognize?” valentine groaned.
 
“oh, yes;” she said, “i saw, but i cannot believe!”
 
“would you rather die, then, and cause maximilian’s death?”
 
“oh,” repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, “can i not leave the
 house?—can i not escape?”
 
“valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue you
 everywhere; your servants will be seduced with gold, and death will be
 offered to you disguised in every shape. you will find it in the water
 you drink from the spring, in the fruit you pluck from the tree.”
 
“but did you not say that my kind grandfather’s precaution had
 neutralized the poison?”
 
“yes, but not against strong dose; the poison will be changed, and
 the quantity increased.” took the glass and raised it to his lips.
 “it is already done,” said; “brucine is longer employed, but a
 simple narcotic! i can recognize the flavor of the alcohol in which it
 has been dissolved. if you had taken what madame villefort has
 poured into your glass, valentine—valentine—you would have been
 doomed!”
 
“but,” exclaimed the young girl, “why am i thus pursued?”
 
“why?—are you so kind—so good—so unsuspicious of ill, that you cannot
 understand, valentine?”
 
“no, i have never injured her.”
 
“but you are rich, valentine; you have 200,000 livres year, and you
 prevent her from enjoying these 200,000 livres.”
 
“how so? the fortune is not her gift, but is inherited from my
 relations.”
 
“certainly; and that is why m. and madame saint-méran have died;
 that is why m. noirtier was sentenced the day made you his heir;
 that is why you, in your turn, are to die—it is because your father
 would inherit your property, and your brother, his only son, succeed to
 his.”
 
“edward? poor child! are all these crimes committed on his account?”
 
“ah, then you at length understand?”
 
“heaven grant that this may not be visited upon him!”
 
“valentine, you are an angel!”
 
“but why is my grandfather allowed to live?”
 
“it was considered, that you dead, the fortune would naturally revert
 to your brother, unless were disinherited; and besides, the crime
 appearing useless, it would be folly to commit it.”
 
“and is it possible that this frightful combination of crimes has been
 invented by woman?”
 
“do you recollect in the arbor of the hôtel des postes, at perugia,
 seeing man in brown cloak, whom your stepmother was questioning
 upon _aqua tofana_? well, ever since then, the infernal project has
 been ripening in her brain.”
 
“ah, then, indeed, sir,” said the sweet girl, bathed in tears, “i see
 that i am condemned to die!”
 
“no, valentine, for i have foreseen all their plots; no, your enemy is
 conquered since we know her, and you will live, valentine—live to be
 happy yourself, and to confer happiness upon noble heart; but to
 insure this you must rely on me.”
 
“command me, sir—what am i to do?”
 
“you must blindly take what i give you.”
 
“alas, were it only for my own sake, i should prefer to die!”
 
“you must not confide in anyone—not even in your father.”
 
“my father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?” asked
 valentine, clasping her hands.
 
“no; and yet your father, man accustomed to judicial accusations,
 ought to have known that all these deaths have not happened naturally;
 it is who should have watched over you—he should have occupied my
 place—he should have emptied that glass—he should have risen against
 the assassin. spectre against spectre!” murmured in low voice, as
 concluded his sentence.
 
“sir,” said valentine, “i will do all i can to live, for there are two
 beings who love and will die if i die—my grandfather and
 maximilian.”
 
“i will watch over them as i have over you.”
 
“well, sir, do as you will with me;” and then she added, in low
 voice, “oh, heavens, what will befall me?”
 
“whatever may happen, valentine, do not be alarmed; though you suffer;
 though you lose sight, hearing, consciousness, fear nothing; though you
 should awake and be ignorant where you are, still do not fear; even
 though you should find yourself in sepulchral vault or coffin.
 reassure yourself, then, and say to yourself: ‘at this moment, a
 friend, father, who lives for my happiness and that of maximilian,
 watches over me!’”
 
“alas, alas, what fearful extremity!”
 
“valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?”
 
“i would rather die hundred times—oh, yes, die!”
 
“no, you will not die; but will you promise me, whatever happens, that
 you will not complain, but hope?”
 
“i will think of maximilian!”
 
“you are my own darling child, valentine! i alone can save you, and i
 will.”
 
valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her hands,—for she felt
 that the moment had arrived to ask for courage,—and began to pray, and
 while uttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot that her
 white shoulders had other covering than her long hair, and that the
 pulsations of her heart could be seen through the lace of her
 nightdress. monte cristo gently laid his hand on the young girl’s arm,
 drew the velvet coverlet close to her throat, and said with paternal
 smile:
 
“my child, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in the goodness
 of providence and the love of maximilian.” valentine gave him look
 full of gratitude, and remained as docile as child.
 
then drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emerald box, raised
 the golden lid, and took from it pastille about the size of pea,
 which placed in her hand. she took it, and looked attentively on the
 count; there was an expression on the face of her intrepid protector
 which commanded her veneration. she evidently interrogated him by her
 look.
 
“yes,” said he.
 
valentine carried the pastille to her mouth, and swallowed it.
 
“and now, my dear child, adieu for the present. i will try and gain a
 little sleep, for you are saved.”
 
“go,” said valentine, “whatever happens, i promise you not to fear.”
 
monte cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young girl, who
 gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the narcotic the
 count had given her. then took the glass, emptied three parts of the
 contents in the fireplace, that it might be supposed valentine had
 taken it, and replaced it on the table; then disappeared, after
 throwing farewell glance on valentine, who slept with the confidence
 and innocence of an angel at the feet of the lord.
 


chapter 102. valentine
 
the night-light continued to burn on the chimney-piece, exhausting the
 last drops of oil which floated on the surface of the water. the globe
 of the lamp appeared of reddish hue, and the flame, brightening
 before it expired, threw out the last flickerings which in an inanimate
 object have been so often compared with the convulsions of human
 creature in its final agonies. dull and dismal light was shed over
 the bedclothes and curtains surrounding the young girl. all noise in
 the streets had ceased, and the silence was frightful.
 
it was then that the door of edward’s room opened, and head we have
 before noticed appeared in the glass opposite; it was madame de
 villefort, who came to witness the effects of the drink she had
 prepared. she stopped in the doorway, listened for moment to the
 flickering of the lamp, the only sound in that deserted room, and then
 advanced to the table to see if valentine’s glass were empty. it was
 still about quarter full, as we before stated. madame villefort
 emptied the contents into the ashes, which she disturbed that they
 might the more readily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed the
 glass, and wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.
 
if anyone could have looked into the room just then would have
 noticed the hesitation with which madame villefort approached the
 bed and looked fixedly on valentine. the dim light, the profound
 silence, and the gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more
 by her own conscience, all combined to produce sensation of fear; the
 poisoner was terrified at the contemplation of her own work.
 
at length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and leaning over the
 pillow gazed intently on valentine. the young girl longer breathed,
 breath issued through the half-closed teeth; the white lips no
 longer quivered—the eyes were suffused with bluish vapor, and the
 long black lashes rested on cheek white as wax. madame villefort
 gazed upon the face so expressive even in its stillness; then she
 ventured to raise the coverlet and press her hand upon the young girl’s
 heart. it was cold and motionless. she only felt the pulsation in her
 own fingers, and withdrew her hand with shudder. one arm was hanging
 out of the bed; from shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of
 germain pillon’s “graces,”23 but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly
 distorted by convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed, was
 resting with stiff outstretched fingers on the framework of the bed.
 the nails, too, were turning blue.
 
madame villefort had longer any doubt; all was over—she had
 consummated the last terrible work she had to accomplish. there was no
 more to do in the room, so the poisoner retired stealthily, as though
 fearing to hear the sound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she
 still held aside the curtain, absorbed in the irresistible attraction
 always exerted by the picture of death, so long as it is merely
 mysterious and does not excite disgust.
 
the minutes passed; madame villefort could not drop the curtain
 which she held like funeral pall over the head of valentine. she was
 lost in reverie, and the reverie of crime is remorse.
 
just then the lamp again flickered; the noise startled madame de
 villefort, who shuddered and dropped the curtain. immediately
 afterwards the light expired, and the room was plunged in frightful
 obscurity, while the clock at that minute struck half-past four.
 
overpowered with agitation, the poisoner succeeded in groping her way
 to the door, and reached her room in an agony of fear. the darkness
 lasted two hours longer; then by degrees cold light crept through the
 venetian blinds, until at length it revealed the objects in the room.
 
about this time the nurse’s cough was heard on the stairs and the woman
 entered the room with cup in her hand. to the tender eye of father
 or lover, the first glance would have sufficed to reveal valentine’s
 condition; but to this hireling, valentine only appeared to sleep.
 
“good,” she exclaimed, approaching the table, “she has taken part of
 her draught; the glass is three-quarters empty.”
 
then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although she had
 just left her bed, she could not resist the temptation offered by
 valentine’s sleep, so she threw herself into an armchair to snatch a
 little more rest. the clock striking eight awoke her. astonished at the
 prolonged slumber of the patient, and frightened to see that the arm
 was still hanging out of the bed, she advanced towards valentine, and
 for the first time noticed the white lips. she tried to replace the
 arm, but it moved with frightful rigidity which could not deceive a
 sick-nurse. she screamed aloud; then running to the door exclaimed:
 
“help, help!”
 
50083m
 


“what is the matter?” asked m. d’avrigny, at the foot of the stairs, it
 being the hour usually visited her.
 
“what is it?” asked villefort, rushing from his room. “doctor, do you
 hear them call for help?”
 
“yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in valentine’s room.”
 
but before the doctor and the father could reach the room, the servants
 who were on the same floor had entered, and seeing valentine pale and
 motionless on her bed, they lifted up their hands towards heaven and
 stood transfixed, as though struck by lightening.
 
“call madame villefort!—wake madame villefort!” cried the
 procureur from the door of his chamber, which apparently scarcely
 dared to leave. but instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching
 m. d’avrigny, who ran to valentine, and raised her in his arms.
 
“what?—this one, too?” exclaimed. “oh, where will be the end?”
 
villefort rushed into the room.
 
“what are you saying, doctor?” exclaimed, raising his hands to
 heaven.
 
“i say that valentine is dead!” replied d’avrigny, in voice terrible
 in its solemn calmness.
 
50085m
 


m. villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed. on the
 exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, the servants all
 fled with muttered imprecations; they were heard running down the
 stairs and through the long passages, then there was rush in the
 court, afterwards all was still; they had, one and all, deserted the
 accursed house.
 
just then, madame villefort, in the act of slipping on her
 dressing-gown, threw aside the drapery and for moment stood
 motionless, as though interrogating the occupants of the room, while
 she endeavored to call up some rebellious tears. on sudden she
 stepped, or rather bounded, with outstretched arms, towards the table.
 she saw d’avrigny curiously examining the glass, which she felt certain
 of having emptied during the night. it was now third full, just as it
 was when she threw the contents into the ashes. the spectre of
 valentine rising before the poisoner would have alarmed her less. it
 was, indeed, the same color as the draught she had poured into the
 glass, and which valentine had drunk; it was indeed the poison, which
 could not deceive m. d’avrigny, which now examined so closely; it
 was doubtless miracle from heaven, that, notwithstanding her
 precautions, there should be some trace, some proof remaining to reveal
 the crime.
 
while madame villefort remained rooted to the spot like statue of
 terror, and villefort, with his head hidden in the bedclothes, saw
 nothing around him, d’avrigny approached the window, that might the
 better examine the contents of the glass, and dipping the tip of his
 finger in, tasted it.
 
“ah,” exclaimed, “it is longer brucine that is used; let see
 what it is!”
 
then ran to one of the cupboards in valentine’s room, which had been
 transformed into medicine closet, and taking from its silver case a
 small bottle of nitric acid, dropped little of it into the liquor,
 which immediately changed to blood-red color.
 
“ah,” exclaimed d’avrigny, in voice in which the horror of judge
 unveiling the truth was mingled with the delight of student making a
 discovery.
 
madame villefort was overpowered; her eyes first flashed and then
 swam, she staggered towards the door and disappeared. directly
 afterwards the distant sound of heavy weight falling on the ground
 was heard, but one paid any attention to it; the nurse was engaged
 in watching the chemical analysis, and villefort was still absorbed in
 grief. m. d’avrigny alone had followed madame villefort with his
 eyes, and watched her hurried retreat. lifted up the drapery over
 the entrance to edward’s room, and his eye reaching as far as madame de
 villefort’s apartment, beheld her extended lifeless on the floor.
 
“go to the assistance of madame villefort,” said to the nurse.
 “madame villefort is ill.”
 
50087m
 


“but mademoiselle villefort——” stammered the nurse.
 
“mademoiselle villefort longer requires help,” said d’avrigny,
 “since she is dead.”
 
“dead,—dead!” groaned forth villefort, in paroxysm of grief, which
 was the more terrible from the novelty of the sensation in the iron
 heart of that man.
 
“dead!” repeated third voice. “who said valentine was dead?”
 
the two men turned round, and saw morrel standing at the door, pale and
 terror-stricken. this is what had happened. at the usual time, morrel
 had presented himself at the little door leading to noirtier’s room.
 contrary to custom, the door was open, and having occasion to ring
 entered. waited for moment in the hall and called for servant
 to conduct him to m. noirtier; but one answered, the servants
 having, as we know, deserted the house. morrel had particular reason
 for uneasiness; monte cristo had promised him that valentine should
 live, and so far had always fulfilled his word. every night the
 count had given him news, which was the next morning confirmed by
 noirtier. still this extraordinary silence appeared strange to him, and
 called second and third time; still answer. then determined
 to go up. noirtier’s room was opened, like all the rest. the first
 thing saw was the old man sitting in his armchair in his usual
 place, but his eyes expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor
 which overspread his features.
 
“how are you, sir?” asked morrel, with sickness of heart.
 
“well,” answered the old man, by closing his eyes; but his appearance
 manifested increasing uneasiness.
 
“you are thoughtful, sir,” continued morrel; “you want something; shall
 i call one of the servants?”
 
“yes,” replied noirtier.
 
morrel pulled the bell, but though nearly broke the cord one
 answered. turned towards noirtier; the pallor and anguish expressed
 on his countenance momentarily increased.
 
“oh,” exclaimed morrel, “why do they not come? is anyone ill in the
 house?” the eyes of noirtier seemed as though they would start from
 their sockets. “what is the matter? you alarm me. valentine?
 valentine?”
 
“yes, yes,” signed noirtier.
 
maximilian tried to speak, but could articulate nothing; he
 staggered, and supported himself against the wainscot. then pointed
 to the door.
 
“yes, yes, yes!” continued the old man.
 
50089m
 


maximilian rushed up the little staircase, while noirtier’s eyes seemed
 to say,—“quicker, quicker!”
 
in minute the young man darted through several rooms, till at length
 reached valentine’s.
 
there was occasion to push the door, it was wide open. sob was the
 only sound heard. saw as though in mist, black figure
 kneeling and buried in confused mass of white drapery. terrible
 fear transfixed him. it was then heard voice exclaim “valentine is
 dead!” and another voice which, like an echo repeated:
 
“dead,—dead!”
 
50090m
 



chapter 103. maximilian
 
villefort rose, half-ashamed of being surprised in such paroxysm of
 grief. the terrible office had held for twenty-five years had
 succeeded in making him more or less than man. his glance, at first
 wandering, fixed itself upon morrel. “who are you, sir,” asked,
 “that forget that this is not the manner to enter house stricken with
 death? go, sir, go!”
 
but morrel remained motionless; could not detach his eyes from that
 disordered bed, and the pale corpse of the young girl who was lying on
 it.
 
“go!—do you hear?” said villefort, while d’avrigny advanced to lead
 morrel out. maximilian stared for moment at the corpse, gazed all
 around the room, then upon the two men; opened his mouth to speak,
 but finding it impossible to give utterance to the innumerable ideas
 that occupied his brain, went out, thrusting his hands through his
 hair in such manner that villefort and d’avrigny, for moment
 diverted from the engrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemed to
 say,—“he is mad!”
 
but in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an
 extraordinary weight. morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman
 strength, the armchair containing noirtier upstairs. when reached
 the landing placed the armchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it
 into valentine’s room. this could only have been accomplished by means
 of unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement. but the most
 fearful spectacle was noirtier being pushed towards the bed, his face
 expressing all his meaning, and his eyes supplying the want of every
 other faculty. that pale face and flaming glance appeared to villefort
 like frightful apparition. each time had been brought into contact
 with his father, something terrible had happened.
 
“see what they have done!” cried morrel, with one hand leaning on the
 back of the chair, and the other extended towards valentine. “see, my
 father, see!”
 
villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the young man, who,
 almost stranger to him, called noirtier his father. at this moment
 the whole soul of the old man seemed centred in his eyes which became
 bloodshot; the veins of the throat swelled; his cheeks and temples
 became purple, as though was struck with epilepsy; nothing was
 wanting to complete this but the utterance of cry. and the cry issued
 from his pores, if we may thus speak—a cry frightful in its silence.
 d’avrigny rushed towards the old man and made him inhale powerful
 restorative.
 
“sir,” cried morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic, “they ask
 who i am, and what right i have to be here. oh, you know it, tell
 them, tell them!” and the young man’s voice was choked by sobs.
 
as for the old man, his chest heaved with his panting respiration. one
 could have thought that was undergoing the agonies preceding death.
 at length, happier than the young man, who sobbed without weeping,
 tears glistened in the eyes of noirtier.
 
“tell them,” said morrel in hoarse voice, “tell them that i am her
 betrothed. tell them she was my beloved, my noble girl, my only
 blessing in the world. tell them—oh, tell them, that corpse belongs to
 me!”
 
the young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, fell heavily on
 his knees before the bed, which his fingers grasped with convulsive
 energy. d’avrigny, unable to bear the sight of this touching emotion,
 turned away; and villefort, without seeking any further explanation,
 and attracted towards him by the irresistible magnetism which draws us
 towards those who have loved the people for whom we mourn, extended his
 hand towards the young man.
 
but morrel saw nothing; had grasped the hand of valentine, and
 unable to weep vented his agony in groans as bit the sheets. for
 some time nothing was heard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations, and
 prayers. at length villefort, the most composed of all, spoke:
 
“sir,” said to maximilian, “you say you loved valentine, that you
 were betrothed to her. i knew nothing of this engagement, of this love,
 yet i, her father, forgive you, for i see that your grief is real and
 deep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for anger to find place
 in my heart. but you see that the angel whom you hoped for has left
 this earth—she has nothing more to do with the adoration of men. take a
 last farewell, sir, of her sad remains; take the hand you expected to
 possess once more within your own, and then separate yourself from her
 forever. valentine now requires only the ministrations of the priest.”
 
50093m
 


“you are mistaken, sir,” exclaimed morrel, raising himself on one knee,
 his heart pierced by more acute pang than any had yet felt—“you
 are mistaken; valentine, dying as she has, not only requires priest,
 but an avenger. _you_, m. villefort, send for the priest; _i_ will
 be the avenger.”
 
“what do you mean, sir?” asked villefort, trembling at the new idea
 inspired by the delirium of morrel.
 
“i tell you, sir, that two persons exist in you; the father has mourned
 sufficiently, now let the procureur fulfil his office.”
 
the eyes of noirtier glistened, and d’avrigny approached.
 
“gentlemen,” said morrel, reading all that passed through the minds of
 the witnesses to the scene, “i know what i am saying, and you know as
 well as i do what i am about to say—valentine has been assassinated!”
 
villefort hung his head, d’avrigny approached nearer, and noirtier said
 “yes” with his eyes.
 
“now, sir,” continued morrel, “in these days one can disappear by
 violent means without some inquiries being made as to the cause of her
 disappearance, even were she not young, beautiful, and adorable
 creature like valentine. now, m. procureur du roi,” said morrel with
 increasing vehemence, “no mercy is allowed; i denounce the crime; it is
 your place to seek the assassin.”
 
the young man’s implacable eyes interrogated villefort, who, on his
 side, glanced from noirtier to d’avrigny. but instead of finding
 sympathy in the eyes of the doctor and his father, only saw an
 expression as inflexible as that of maximilian.
 
“yes,” indicated the old man.
 
“assuredly,” said d’avrigny.
 
“sir,” said villefort, striving to struggle against this triple force
 and his own emotion,—“sir, you are deceived; one commits crimes
 here. i am stricken by fate. it is horrible, indeed, but one
 assassinates.”
 
the eyes of noirtier lighted up with rage, and d’avrigny prepared to
 speak. morrel, however, extended his arm, and commanded silence.
 
“and i say that murders _are_ committed here,” said morrel, whose
 voice, though lower in tone, lost none of its terrible distinctness: “i
 tell you that this is the fourth victim within the last four months. i
 tell you, valentine’s life was attempted by poison four days ago,
 though she escaped, owing to the precautions of m. noirtier. i tell you
 that the dose has been double, the poison changed, and that this time
 it has succeeded. i tell you that you know these things as well as i
 do, since this gentleman has forewarned you, both as doctor and as a
 friend.”
 
“oh, you rave, sir,” exclaimed villefort, in vain endeavoring to escape
 the net in which was taken.
 
50095m
 


“i rave?” said morrel; “well, then, i appeal to m. d’avrigny himself.
 ask him, sir, if recollects the words uttered in the garden of
 this house on the night of madame saint-méran’s death. you thought
 yourselves alone, and talked about that tragical death, and the
 fatality you mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder of
 valentine.” villefort and d’avrigny exchanged looks.
 
“yes, yes,” continued morrel; “recall the scene, for the words you
 thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my ears.
 certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence manifested by m. de
 villefort towards his own relations, i ought to have denounced him to
 the authorities; then i should not have been an accomplice to thy
 death, as i now am, sweet, beloved valentine; but the accomplice shall
 become the avenger. this fourth murder is apparent to all, and if thy
 father abandon thee, valentine, it is i, and i swear it, that shall
 pursue the assassin.”
 
and this time, as though nature had at least taken compassion on the
 vigorous frame, nearly bursting with its own strength, the words of
 morrel were stifled in his throat; his breast heaved; the tears, so
 long rebellious, gushed from his eyes; and threw himself weeping on
 his knees by the side of the bed.
 
then d’avrigny spoke. “and i, too,” exclaimed in low voice, “i
 unite with m. morrel in demanding justice for crime; my blood boils at
 the idea of having encouraged murderer by my cowardly concession.”
 
“oh, merciful heavens!” murmured villefort. morrel raised his head, and
 reading the eyes of the old man, which gleamed with unnatural lustre,—
 
“stay,” said, “m. noirtier wishes to speak.”
 
“yes,” indicated noirtier, with an expression the more terrible, from
 all his faculties being centred in his glance.
 
“do you know the assassin?” asked morrel.
 
“yes,” replied noirtier.
 
“and will you direct us?” exclaimed the young man. “listen, m.
 d’avrigny, listen!”
 
noirtier looked upon morrel with one of those melancholy smiles which
 had so often made valentine happy, and thus fixed his attention. then,
 having riveted the eyes of his interlocutor on his own, glanced
 towards the door.
 
“do you wish to leave?” said morrel, sadly.
 
“yes,” replied noirtier.
 
“alas, alas, sir, have pity on me!”
 
the old man’s eyes remained fixed on the door.
 
“may i, at least, return?” asked morrel.
 
“yes.”
 
“must i leave alone?”
 
“no.”
 
“whom am i to take with me? the procureur?”
 
“no.”
 
“the doctor?”
 
“yes.”
 
“you wish to remain alone with m. villefort?”
 
“yes.”
 
“but can understand you?”
 
“yes.”
 
“oh,” said villefort, inexpressibly delighted to think that the
 inquiries were to be made by him alone,—“oh, be satisfied, i can
 understand my father.” while uttering these words with this expression
 of joy, his teeth clashed together violently.
 
d’avrigny took the young man’s arm, and led him out of the room. more
 than deathlike silence then reigned in the house. at the end of a
 quarter of an hour faltering footstep was heard, and villefort
 appeared at the door of the apartment where d’avrigny and morrel had
 been staying, one absorbed in meditation, the other in grief.
 
“you can come,” said, and led them back to noirtier.
 
morrel looked attentively on villefort. his face was livid, large drops
 rolled down his face, and in his fingers held the fragments of a
 quill pen which had torn to atoms.
 
“gentlemen,” said in hoarse voice, “give your word of honor
 that this horrible secret shall forever remain buried amongst
 ourselves!” the two men drew back.
 
“i entreat you——” continued villefort.
 
“but,” said morrel, “the culprit—the murderer—the assassin.”
 
“do not alarm yourself, sir; justice will be done,” said villefort. “my
 father has revealed the culprit’s name; my father thirsts for revenge
 as much as you do, yet even conjures you as i do to keep this
 secret. do you not, father?”
 
“yes,” resolutely replied noirtier. morrel suffered an exclamation of
 horror and surprise to escape him.
 
“oh, sir,” said villefort, arresting maximilian by the arm, “if my
 father, the inflexible man, makes this request, it is because knows,
 be assured, that valentine will be terribly revenged. is it not so,
 father?”
 
the old man made sign in the affirmative. villefort continued:
 
“he knows me, and i have pledged my word to him. rest assured,
 gentlemen, that within three days, in less time than justice would
 demand, the revenge i shall have taken for the murder of my child will
 be such as to make the boldest heart tremble;” and as spoke these
 words ground his teeth, and grasped the old man’s senseless hand.
 
“will this promise be fulfilled, m. noirtier?” asked morrel, while
 d’avrigny looked inquiringly.
 
“yes,” replied noirtier with an expression of sinister joy.
 
“swear, then,” said villefort, joining the hands of morrel and
 d’avrigny, “swear that you will spare the honor of my house, and leave
 to avenge my child.”
 
d’avrigny turned round and uttered very feeble “yes,” but morrel,
 disengaging his hand, rushed to the bed, and after having pressed the
 cold lips of valentine with his own, hurriedly left, uttering long,
 deep groan of despair and anguish.
 
we have before stated that all the servants had fled. m. villefort
 was therefore obliged to request m. d’avrigny to superintend all the
 arrangements consequent upon death in large city, more especially a
 death under such suspicious circumstances.
 
it was something terrible to witness the silent agony, the mute despair
 of noirtier, whose tears silently rolled down his cheeks. villefort
 retired to his study, and d’avrigny left to summon the doctor of the
 mayoralty, whose office it is to examine bodies after decease, and who
 is expressly named “the doctor of the dead.” m. noirtier could not be
 persuaded to quit his grandchild. at the end of quarter of an hour m.
 d’avrigny returned with his associate; they found the outer gate
 closed, and not servant remaining in the house; villefort himself was
 obliged to open to them. but stopped on the landing; had not the
 courage to again visit the death chamber. the two doctors, therefore,
 entered the room alone. noirtier was near the bed, pale, motionless,
 and silent as the corpse. the district doctor approached with the
 indifference of man accustomed to spend half his time amongst the
 dead; then lifted the sheet which was placed over the face, and just
 unclosed the lips.
 
“alas,” said d’avrigny, “she is indeed dead, poor child!”
 
50099m
 


“yes,” answered the doctor laconically, dropping the sheet had
 raised. noirtier uttered kind of hoarse, rattling sound; the old
 man’s eyes sparkled, and the good doctor understood that wished to
 behold his child. therefore approached the bed, and while his
 companion was dipping the fingers with which had touched the lips of
 the corpse in chloride of lime, uncovered the calm and pale face,
 which looked like that of sleeping angel.
 
tear, which appeared in the old man’s eye, expressed his thanks to
 the doctor. the doctor of the dead then laid his permit on the corner
 of the table, and having fulfilled his duty, was conducted out by
 d’avrigny. villefort met them at the door of his study; having in few
 words thanked the district doctor, turned to d’avrigny, and said:
 
“and now the priest.”
 
“is there any particular priest you wish to pray with valentine?” asked
 d’avrigny.
 
“no.” said villefort; “fetch the nearest.”
 
“the nearest,” said the district doctor, “is good italian abbé, who
 lives next door to you. shall i call on him as i pass?”
 
“d’avrigny,” said villefort, “be so kind, i beseech you, as to
 accompany this gentleman. here is the key of the door, so that you can
 go in and out as you please; you will bring the priest with you, and
 will oblige by introducing him into my child’s room.”
 
50101m
 


“do you wish to see him?”
 
“i only wish to be alone. you will excuse me, will you not? priest
 can understand father’s grief.”
 
and m. villefort, giving the key to d’avrigny, again bade farewell
 to the strange doctor, and retired to his study, where began to
 work. for some temperaments work is remedy for all afflictions.
 
as the doctors entered the street, they saw man in cassock standing
 on the threshold of the next door.
 
“this is the abbé of whom i spoke,” said the doctor to d’avrigny.
 d’avrigny accosted the priest.
 
“sir,” said, “are you disposed to confer great obligation on an
 unhappy father who has just lost his daughter? i mean m. villefort,
 the king’s attorney.”
 
“ah,” said the priest, in marked italian accent; “yes, i have heard
 that death is in that house.”
 
“then i need not tell you what kind of service requires of you.”
 
“i was about to offer myself, sir,” said the priest; “it is our mission
 to forestall our duties.”
 
“it is young girl.”
 
“i know it, sir; the servants who fled from the house informed me. i
 also know that her name is valentine, and i have already prayed for
 her.”
 
“thank you, sir,” said d’avrigny; “since you have commenced your sacred
 office, deign to continue it. come and watch by the dead, and all the
 wretched family will be grateful to you.”
 
“i am going, sir; and i do not hesitate to say that prayers will be
 more fervent than mine.”
 
d’avrigny took the priest’s hand, and without meeting villefort, who
 was engaged in his study, they reached valentine’s room, which on the
 following night was to be occupied by the undertakers. on entering the
 room, noirtier’s eyes met those of the abbé, and doubt read some
 particular expression in them, for remained in the room. d’avrigny
 recommended the attention of the priest to the living as well as to the
 dead, and the abbé promised to devote his prayers to valentine and his
 attentions to noirtier.
 
in order, doubtless, that might not be disturbed while fulfilling
 his sacred mission, the priest rose as soon as d’avrigny departed, and
 not only bolted the door through which the doctor had just left, but
 also that leading to madame villefort’s room.
 


chapter 104. danglars’ signature
 
the next morning dawned dull and cloudy. during the night the
 undertakers had executed their melancholy office, and wrapped the
 corpse in the winding-sheet, which, whatever may be said about the
 equality of death, is at least last proof of the luxury so pleasing
 in life. this winding-sheet was nothing more than beautiful piece of
 cambric, which the young girl had bought fortnight before.
 
during the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carried
 noirtier from valentine’s room into his own, and contrary to all
 expectation there was difficulty in withdrawing him from his child.
 the abbé busoni had watched till daylight, and then left without
 calling anyone. d’avrigny returned about eight o’clock in the morning;
 met villefort on his way to noirtier’s room, and accompanied him to
 see how the old man had slept. they found him in the large armchair,
 which served him for bed, enjoying calm, nay, almost smiling
 sleep. they both stood in amazement at the door.
 
“see,” said d’avrigny to villefort, “nature knows how to alleviate the
 deepest sorrow. one can say that m. noirtier did not love his child,
 and yet sleeps.”
 
“yes, you are right,” replied villefort, surprised; “he sleeps, indeed!
 and this is the more strange, since the least contradiction keeps him
 awake all night.”
 
“grief has stunned him,” replied d’avrigny; and they both returned
 thoughtfully to the procureur’s study.
 
“see, i have not slept,” said villefort, showing his undisturbed bed;
 “grief does not stun me. i have not been in bed for two nights; but
 then look at my desk; see what i have written during these two days and
 nights. i have filled those papers, and have made out the accusation
 against the assassin benedetto. oh, work, work,—my passion, my joy, my
 delight,—it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!” and convulsively
 grasped the hand of d’avrigny.
 
“do you require my services now?” asked d’avrigny.
 
“no,” said villefort; “only return again at eleven o’clock; at twelve
 the—the—oh, heavens, my poor, poor child!” and the procureur again
 becoming man, lifted up his eyes and groaned.
 
“shall you be present in the reception-room?”
 
“no; i have cousin who has undertaken this sad office. i shall work,
 doctor—when i work i forget everything.”
 
and, indeed, sooner had the doctor left the room, than was again
 absorbed in work. on the doorsteps d’avrigny met the cousin whom
 villefort had mentioned, personage as insignificant in our story as
 in the world occupied—one of those beings designed from their birth
 to make themselves useful to others. was punctual, dressed in black,
 with crape around his hat, and presented himself at his cousin’s with a
 face made up for the occasion, and which could alter as might be
 required.
 
at eleven o’clock the mourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, and
 the rue du faubourg saint-honoré was filled with crowd of idlers,
 equally pleased to witness the festivities or the mourning of the rich,
 and who rush with the same avidity to funeral procession as to the
 marriage of duchess.
 
gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old friends made
 their appearance—we mean debray, château-renaud, and beauchamp,
 accompanied by all the leading men of the day at the bar, in
 literature, or the army, for m. villefort moved in the first
 parisian circles, less owing to his social position than to his
 personal merit.
 
the cousin standing at the door ushered in the guests, and it was
 rather relief to the indifferent to see person as unmoved as
 themselves, and who did not exact mournful face or force tears, as
 would have been the case with father, brother, or lover. those
 who were acquainted soon formed into little groups. one of them was
 made of debray, château-renaud, and beauchamp.
 
“poor girl,” said debray, like the rest, paying an involuntary tribute
 to the sad event,—“poor girl, so young, so rich, so beautiful! could
 you have imagined this scene, château-renaud, when we saw her, at the
 most three weeks ago, about to sign that contract?”
 
“indeed, no,” said château-renaud.”
 
“did you know her?”
 
“i spoke to her once or twice at madame morcerf’s, among the rest;
 she appeared to charming, though rather melancholy. where is her
 stepmother? do you know?”
 
“she is spending the day with the wife of the worthy gentleman who is
 receiving us.”
 
50105m
 


“who is he?”
 
“whom do you mean?”
 
“the gentleman who receives us? is deputy?”
 
“oh, no. i am condemned to witness those gentlemen every day,” said
 beauchamp; “but is perfectly unknown to me.”
 
“have you mentioned this death in your paper?”
 
“it has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, i doubt if
 it will please m. villefort, for it says that if four successive deaths
 had happened anywhere else than in the house of the king’s attorney, he
 would have interested himself somewhat more about it.”
 
“still,” said château-renaud, “dr. d’avrigny, who attends my mother,
 declares is in despair about it. but whom are you seeking, debray?”
 
“i am seeking the count of monte cristo” said the young man.
 
“i met him on the boulevard, on my way here,” said beauchamp. “i think
 is about to leave paris; was going to his banker.”
 
“his banker? danglars is his banker, is not?” asked château-renaud
 of debray.
 
“i believe so,” replied the secretary with slight uneasiness. “but
 monte cristo is not the only one i miss here; i do not see morrel.”
 
“morrel? do they know him?” asked château-renaud. “i think has only
 been introduced to madame villefort.”
 
“still, ought to have been here,” said debray; “i wonder what will
 be talked about tonight; this funeral is the news of the day. but hush,
 here comes our minister of justice; will feel obliged to make some
 little speech to the cousin,” and the three young men drew near to
 listen.
 
beauchamp told the truth when said that on his way to the funeral he
 had met monte cristo, who was directing his steps towards the rue la
 chaussée d’antin, to m. danglars’. the banker saw the carriage of the
 count enter the courtyard, and advanced to meet him with sad, though
 affable smile.
 
“well,” said he, extending his hand to monte cristo, “i suppose you
 have come to sympathize with me, for indeed misfortune has taken
 possession of my house. when i perceived you, i was just asking myself
 whether i had not wished harm towards those poor morcerfs, which would
 have justified the proverb of ‘he who wishes misfortunes to happen to
 others experiences them himself.’ well, on my word of honor, i
 answered, ‘no!’ i wished ill to morcerf; was little proud,
 perhaps, for man who like myself has risen from nothing; but we all
 have our faults. do you know, count, that persons of our time of
 life—not that you belong to the class, you are still young man,—but
 as i was saying, persons of our time of life have been very unfortunate
 this year. for example, look at the puritanical procureur, who has just
 lost his daughter, and in fact nearly all his family, in so singular a
 manner; morcerf dishonored and dead; and then myself covered with
 ridicule through the villany of benedetto; besides——”
 
“besides what?” asked the count.
 
“alas, do you not know?”
 
“what new calamity?”
 
“my daughter——”
 
“mademoiselle danglars?”
 
“eugénie has left us!”
 
“good heavens, what are you telling me?”
 
“the truth, my dear count. oh, how happy you must be in not having
 either wife or children!”
 
“do you think so?”
 
“indeed i do.”
 
“and so mademoiselle danglars——”
 
“she could not endure the insult offered to us by that wretch, so she
 asked permission to travel.”
 
“and is she gone?”
 
“the other night she left.”
 
“with madame danglars?”
 
“no, with relation. but still, we have quite lost our dear eugénie;
 for i doubt whether her pride will ever allow her to return to france.”
 
“still, baron,” said monte cristo, “family griefs, or indeed any other
 affliction which would crush man whose child was his only treasure,
 are endurable to millionaire. philosophers may well say, and
 practical men will always support the opinion, that money mitigates
 many trials; and if you admit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you
 ought to be very easily consoled—you, the king of finance, the focus of
 immeasurable power.”
 
danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertain whether spoke
 seriously.
 
“yes,” answered, “if fortune brings consolation, i ought to be
 consoled; i am rich.”
 
“so rich, dear sir, that your fortune resembles the pyramids; if you
 wished to demolish them you could not, and if it were possible, you
 would not dare!”
 
danglars smiled at the good-natured pleasantry of the count. “that
 reminds me,” said, “that when you entered i was on the point of
 signing five little bonds; i have already signed two: will you allow me
 to do the same to the others?”
 
“pray do so.”
 
there was moment’s silence, during which the noise of the banker’s
 pen was alone heard, while monte cristo examined the gilt mouldings on
 the ceiling.
 
“are they spanish, haitian, or neapolitan bonds?” said monte cristo.
 
“no,” said danglars, smiling, “they are bonds on the bank of france,
 payable to bearer. stay, count,” added, “you, who may be called the
 emperor, if i claim the title of king of finance, have you many pieces
 of paper of this size, each worth million?”
 
the count took into his hands the papers, which danglars had so proudly
 presented to him, and read:—
 
“‘to the governor of the bank. please pay to my order, from the fund
 deposited by me, the sum of million, and charge the same to my
 account.
 
“baron danglars.’”
 
“one, two, three, four, five,” said monte cristo; “five millions—why
 what crœsus you are!”
 
“this is how i transact business,” said danglars.
 
“it is really wonderful,” said the count; “above all, if, as i suppose,
 it is payable at sight.”
 
“it is, indeed,” said danglars.
 
“it is fine thing to have such credit; really, it is only in france
 these things are done. five millions on five little scraps of paper!—it
 must be seen to be believed.”
 
“you do not doubt it?”
 
“no!”
 
“you say so with an accent—stay, you shall be convinced; take my clerk
 to the bank, and you will see him leave it with an order on the
 treasury for the same sum.”
 
“no,” said monte cristo folding the five notes, “most decidedly not;
 the thing is so curious, i will make the experiment myself. i am
 credited on you for six millions. i have drawn nine hundred thousand
 francs, you therefore still owe five millions and hundred thousand
 francs. i will take the five scraps of paper that i now hold as bonds,
 with your signature alone, and here is receipt in full for the six
 millions between us. i had prepared it beforehand, for i am much in
 want of money today.”
 
and monte cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while
 with the other held out the receipt to danglars. if thunderbolt
 had fallen at the banker’s feet, could not have experienced greater
 terror.
 
“what,” stammered, “do you mean to keep that money? excuse me,
 excuse me, but i owe this money to the charity fund,—a deposit which i
 promised to pay this morning.”
 
“oh, well, then,” said monte cristo, “i am not particular about these
 five notes, pay in different form; i wished, from curiosity, to
 take these, that i might be able to say that without any advice or
 preparation the house of danglars had paid five millions without a
 minute’s delay; it would have been remarkable. but here are your bonds;
 pay differently;” and held the bonds towards danglars, who seized
 them like vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is
 being wrested from its grasp.
 
suddenly rallied, made violent effort to restrain himself, and
 then smile gradually widened the features of his disturbed
 countenance.
 
50109m
 


“certainly,” said, “your receipt is money.”
 
“oh dear, yes; and if you were at rome, the house of thomson & french
 would make more difficulty about paying the money on my receipt than
 you have just done.”
 
“pardon me, count, pardon me.”
 
“then i may keep this money?”
 
“yes,” said danglars, while the perspiration started from the roots of
 his hair. “yes, keep it—keep it.”
 
monte cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that indescribable
 expression which seemed to say, “come, reflect; if you repent there is
 still time.”
 
“no,” said danglars, “no, decidedly no; keep my signatures. but you
 know none are so formal as bankers in transacting business; i intended
 this money for the charity fund, and i seemed to be robbing them if i
 did not pay them with these precise bonds. how absurd—as if one crown
 were not as good as another. excuse me;” and began to laugh loudly,
 but nervously.
 
“certainly, i excuse you,” said monte cristo graciously, “and pocket
 them.” and placed the bonds in his pocket-book.
 
“but,” said danglars, “there is still sum of one hundred thousand
 francs?”
 
“oh, mere nothing,” said monte cristo. “the balance would come to
 about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits.”
 
“count,” said danglars, “are you speaking seriously?”
 
“i never joke with bankers,” said monte cristo in freezing manner,
 which repelled impertinence; and turned to the door, just as the
 valet chambre announced:
 
“m. boville, receiver-general of the charities.”
 
“_ma foi_,” said monte cristo; “i think i arrived just in time to
 obtain your signatures, or they would have been disputed with me.”
 
danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct the count out.
 monte cristo exchanged ceremonious bow with m. boville, who was
 standing in the waiting-room, and who was introduced into danglars’
 room as soon as the count had left.
 
the count’s serious face was illumined by faint smile, as noticed
 the portfolio which the receiver-general held in his hand. at the door
 found his carriage, and was immediately driven to the bank.
 meanwhile danglars, repressing all emotion, advanced to meet the
 receiver-general. we need not say that smile of condescension was
 stamped upon his lips.
 
“good-morning, creditor,” said he; “for i wager anything it is the
 creditor who visits me.”
 
“you are right, baron,” answered m. boville; “the charities present
 themselves to you through me; the widows and orphans depute to
 receive alms to the amount of five millions from you.”
 
“and yet they say orphans are to be pitied,” said danglars, wishing to
 prolong the jest. “poor things!”
 
“here i am in their name,” said m. boville; “but did you receive my
 letter yesterday?”
 
“yes.”
 
“i have brought my receipt.”
 
50111m
 


“my dear m. boville, your widows and orphans must oblige by
 waiting twenty-four hours, since m. monte cristo whom you just saw
 leaving here—you did see him, i think?”
 
“yes; well?”
 
“well, m. monte cristo has just carried off their five millions.”
 
“how so?”
 
“the count has an unlimited credit upon me; credit opened by thomson
 & french, of rome; came to demand five millions at once, which i
 paid him with checks on the bank. my funds are deposited there, and you
 can understand that if i draw out ten millions on the same day it will
 appear rather strange to the governor. two days will be different
 thing,” said danglars, smiling.
 
“come,” said boville, with tone of entire incredulity, “five millions
 to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to as though knew
 me?”
 
“perhaps knows you, though you do not know him; m. monte cristo
 knows everybody.”
 
“five millions!”
 
“here is his receipt. believe your own eyes.” m. boville took the
 paper danglars presented him, and read:
 
“received of baron danglars the sum of five million one hundred
 thousand francs, to be repaid on demand by the house of thomson &
 french of rome.”
 
“it is really true,” said m. boville.
 
“do you know the house of thomson & french?”
 
“yes, i once had business to transact with it to the amount of 200,000
 francs; but since then i have not heard it mentioned.”
 
“it is one of the best houses in europe,” said danglars, carelessly
 throwing down the receipt on his desk.
 
“and had five millions in your hands alone! why, this count of monte
 cristo must be nabob?”
 
“indeed i do not know what is; has three unlimited credits—one on
 me, one on rothschild, one on lafitte; and, you see,” added
 carelessly, “he has given the preference, by leaving balance of
 100,000 francs.”
 
m. boville manifested signs of extraordinary admiration.
 
“i must visit him,” said, “and obtain some pious grant from him.”
 
“oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount to 20,000
 francs month.”
 
“it is magnificent! i will set before him the example of madame de
 morcerf and her son.”
 
“what example?”
 
“they gave all their fortune to the hospitals.”
 
“what fortune?”
 
“their own—m. morcerf’s, who is deceased.”
 
“for what reason?”
 
“because they would not spend money so guiltily acquired.”
 
“and what are they to live upon?”
 
“the mother retires into the country, and the enters the army.”
 
50113m
 


“well, i must confess, these are scruples.”
 
“i registered their deed of gift yesterday.”
 
“and how much did they possess?”
 
“oh, not much—from twelve to thirteen hundred thousand francs. but to
 return to our millions.”
 
“certainly,” said danglars, in the most natural tone in the world. “are
 you then pressed for this money?”
 
“yes; for the examination of our cash takes place tomorrow.”
 
“tomorrow? why did you not tell so before? why, it is as good as a
 century! at what hour does the examination take place?”
 
“at two o’clock.”
 
“send at twelve,” said danglars, smiling.
 
m. boville said nothing, but nodded his head, and took up the
 portfolio.
 
“now i think of it, you can do better,” said danglars.
 
“how do you mean?”
 
“the receipt of m. monte cristo is as good as money; take it to
 rothschild’s or lafitte’s, and they will take it off your hands at
 once.”
 
“what, though payable at rome?”
 
“certainly; it will only cost you discount of 5,000 or 6,000 francs.”
 
the receiver started back.
 
“_ma foi!_” said, “i prefer waiting till tomorrow. what a
 proposition!”
 
“i thought, perhaps,” said danglars with supreme impertinence, “that
 you had deficiency to make up?”
 
“indeed,” said the receiver.
 
“and if that were the case it would be worth while to make some
 sacrifice.”
 
“thank you, no, sir.”
 
“then it will be tomorrow.”
 
“yes; but without fail.”
 
“ah, you are laughing at me; send tomorrow at twelve, and the bank
 shall be notified.”
 
“i will come myself.”
 
“better still, since it will afford the pleasure of seeing you.”
 they shook hands.
 
“by the way,” said m. boville, “are you not going to the funeral of
 poor mademoiselle villefort, which i met on my road here?”
 
“no,” said the banker; “i have appeared rather ridiculous since that
 affair of benedetto, so i remain in the background.”
 
“bah, you are wrong. how were you to blame in that affair?”
 
“listen—when one bears an irreproachable name, as i do, one is rather
 sensitive.”
 
“everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, mademoiselle danglars!”
 
“poor eugénie!” said danglars; “do you know she is going to embrace a
 religious life?”
 
“no.”
 
“alas, it is unhappily but too true. the day after the event, she
 decided on leaving paris with nun of her acquaintance; they are gone
 to seek very strict convent in italy or spain.”
 
“oh, it is terrible!” and m. boville retired with this exclamation,
 after expressing acute sympathy with the father. but had scarcely
 left before danglars, with an energy of action those can alone
 understand who have seen robert macaire represented by frédérick,24
 exclaimed:
 
“fool!”
 
then enclosing monte cristo’s receipt in little pocket-book, he
 added:—“yes, come at twelve o’clock; i shall then be far away.”
 
then double-locked his door, emptied all his drawers, collected
 about fifty thousand francs in bank-notes, burned several papers, left
 others exposed to view, and then commenced writing letter which he
 addressed:
 
“to madame baronne danglars.”
 
“i will place it on her table myself tonight,” murmured. then taking
 passport from his drawer said,—“good, it is available for two
 months longer.”
 


chapter 105. the cemetery of père-lachaise
 
m. boville had indeed met the funeral procession which was taking
 valentine to her last home on earth. the weather was dull and stormy, a
 cold wind shook the few remaining yellow leaves from the boughs of the
 trees, and scattered them among the crowd which filled the boulevards.
 m. villefort, true parisian, considered the cemetery of
 père-lachaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains of a
 parisian family; there alone the corpses belonging to him would be
 surrounded by worthy associates. had therefore purchased vault,
 which was quickly occupied by members of his family. on the front of
 the monument was inscribed: “the families of saint-méran and
 villefort,” for such had been the last wish expressed by poor renée,
 valentine’s mother. the pompous procession therefore wended its way
 towards père-lachaise from the faubourg saint-honoré. having crossed
 paris, it passed through the faubourg du temple, then leaving the
 exterior boulevards, it reached the cemetery. more than fifty private
 carriages followed the twenty mourning-coaches, and behind them more
 than five hundred persons joined in the procession on foot.
 
50117m
 


these last consisted of all the young people whom valentine’s death had
 struck like thunderbolt, and who, notwithstanding the raw chilliness
 of the season, could not refrain from paying last tribute to the
 memory of the beautiful, chaste, and adorable girl, thus cut off in the
 flower of her youth.
 
as they left paris, an equipage with four horses, at full speed, was
 seen to draw up suddenly; it contained monte cristo. the count left the
 carriage and mingled in the crowd who followed on foot. château-renaud
 perceived him and immediately alighting from his _coupé_, joined him;
 beauchamp did the same.
 
the count looked attentively through every opening in the crowd; was
 evidently watching for someone, but his search ended in disappointment.
 
50119m
 


“where is morrel?” asked; “do either of these gentlemen know where
 is?”
 
“we have already asked that question,” said château-renaud, “for none
 of us has seen him.”
 
the count was silent, but continued to gaze around him. at length they
 arrived at the cemetery. the piercing eye of monte cristo glanced
 through clusters of bushes and trees, and was soon relieved from all
 anxiety, for seeing shadow glide between the yew-trees, monte cristo
 recognized him whom sought.
 
one funeral is generally very much like another in this magnificent
 metropolis. black figures are seen scattered over the long white
 avenues; the silence of earth and heaven is alone broken by the noise
 made by the crackling branches of hedges planted around the monuments;
 then follows the melancholy chant of the priests, mingled now and then
 with sob of anguish, escaping from some woman concealed behind mass
 of flowers.
 
the shadow monte cristo had noticed passed rapidly behind the tomb of
 abélard and héloïse, placed itself close to the heads of the horses
 belonging to the hearse, and following the undertaker’s men, arrived
 with them at the spot appointed for the burial. each person’s attention
 was occupied. monte cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which one
 else observed. twice the count left the ranks to see whether the object
 of his interest had any concealed weapon beneath his clothes. when the
 procession stopped, this shadow was recognized as morrel, who, with his
 coat buttoned up to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively
 crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against tree, situated
 on an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none of the funeral
 details could escape his observation.
 
everything was conducted in the usual manner. few men, the least
 impressed of all by the scene, pronounced discourse, some deploring
 this premature death, others expatiating on the grief of the father,
 and one very ingenious person quoting the fact that valentine had
 solicited pardon of her father for criminals on whom the arm of justice
 was ready to fall—until at length they exhausted their stores of
 metaphor and mournful speeches, elaborate variations on the stanzas of
 malherbe to du périer.
 
monte cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather only saw morrel, whose
 calmness had frightful effect on those who knew what was passing in
 his heart.
 
“see,” said beauchamp, pointing out morrel to debray. “what is doing
 up there?” and they called château-renaud’s attention to him.
 
“how pale is!” said château-renaud, shuddering.
 
“he is cold,” said debray.
 
“not at all,” said château-renaud, slowly; “i think is violently
 agitated. is very susceptible.”
 
“bah,” said debray; “he scarcely knew mademoiselle villefort; you
 said so yourself.”
 
“true. still i remember danced three times with her at madame de
 morcerf’s. do you recollect that ball, count, where you produced such
 an effect?”
 
50121m
 


“no, i do not,” replied monte cristo, without even knowing of what or
 to whom was speaking, so much was occupied in watching morrel,
 who was holding his breath with emotion.
 
“the discourse is over; farewell, gentlemen,” said the count,
 unceremoniously.
 
and disappeared without anyone seeing whither went.
 
the funeral being over, the guests returned to paris. château-renaud
 looked for moment for morrel; but while they were watching the
 departure of the count, morrel had quitted his post, and
 château-renaud, failing in his search, joined debray and beauchamp.
 
monte cristo concealed himself behind large tomb and awaited the
 arrival of morrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by
 spectators and workmen. morrel threw glance around, but before it
 reached the spot occupied by monte cristo the latter had advanced yet
 nearer, still unperceived. the young man knelt down. the count, with
 outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitude ready to
 pounce upon morrel upon the first occasion. morrel bent his head till
 it touched the stone, then clutching the grating with both hands, he
 murmured:
 
“oh, valentine!”
 
the count’s heart was pierced by the utterance of these two words; he
 stepped forward, and touching the young man’s shoulder, said:
 
“i was looking for you, my friend.” monte cristo expected burst of
 passion, but was deceived, for morrel turning round, said calmly,—
 
“you see i was praying.” the scrutinizing glance of the count searched
 the young man from head to foot. then seemed more easy.
 
“shall i drive you back to paris?” asked.
 
“no, thank you.”
 
“do you wish anything?”
 
“leave to pray.”
 
the count withdrew without opposition, but it was only to place himself
 in situation where could watch every movement of morrel, who at
 length arose, brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards
 paris, without once looking back. walked slowly down the rue la
 roquette. the count, dismissing his carriage, followed him about a
 hundred paces behind. maximilian crossed the canal and entered the rue
 meslay by the boulevards.
 
five minutes after the door had been closed on morrel’s entrance, it
 was again opened for the count. julie was at the entrance of the
 garden, where she was attentively watching penelon, who, entering with
 zeal into his profession of gardener, was very busy grafting some
 bengal roses. “ah, count,” she exclaimed, with the delight manifested
 by every member of the family whenever visited the rue meslay.
 
“maximilian has just returned, has not, madame?” asked the count.
 
50123m
 


“yes, i think i saw him pass; but pray, call emmanuel.”
 
“excuse me, madame, but i must go up to maximilian’s room this
 instant,” replied monte cristo, “i have something of the greatest
 importance to tell him.”
 
“go, then,” she said with charming smile, which accompanied him until
 had disappeared.
 
monte cristo soon ran up the staircase conducting from the ground floor
 to maximilian’s room; when reached the landing listened
 attentively, but all was still. like many old houses occupied by a
 single family, the room door was panelled with glass; but it was
 locked, maximilian was shut in, and it was impossible to see what was
 passing in the room, because red curtain was drawn before the glass.
 the count’s anxiety was manifested by bright color which seldom
 appeared on the face of that imperturbable man.
 
“what shall i do!” uttered, and reflected for moment; “shall i
 ring? no, the sound of bell, announcing visitor, will but
 accelerate the resolution of one in maximilian’s situation, and then
 the bell would be followed by louder noise.”
 
monte cristo trembled from head to foot and as if his determination had
 been taken with the rapidity of lightning, struck one of the panes
 of glass with his elbow; the glass was shivered to atoms, then
 withdrawing the curtain saw morrel, who had been writing at his
 desk, bound from his seat at the noise of the broken window.
 
“i beg thousand pardons,” said the count, “there is nothing the
 matter, but i slipped down and broke one of your panes of glass with my
 elbow. since it is opened, i will take advantage of it to enter your
 room; do not disturb yourself—do not disturb yourself!”
 
and passing his hand through the broken glass, the count opened the
 door. morrel, evidently discomposed, came to meet monte cristo less
 with the intention of receiving him than to exclude his entry.
 
“_ma foi_,” said monte cristo, rubbing his elbow, “it’s all your
 servant’s fault; your stairs are so polished, it is like walking on
 glass.”
 
“are you hurt, sir?” coldly asked morrel.
 
“i believe not. but what are you about there? you were writing.”
 
“i?”
 
“your fingers are stained with ink.”
 
“ah, true, i was writing. i do sometimes, soldier though i am.”
 
monte cristo advanced into the room; maximilian was obliged to let him
 pass, but followed him.
 
“you were writing?” said monte cristo with searching look.
 
“i have already had the honor of telling you i was,” said morrel.
 
the count looked around him.
 
“your pistols are beside your desk,” said monte cristo, pointing with
 his finger to the pistols on the table.
 
“i am on the point of starting on journey,” replied morrel
 disdainfully.
 
“my friend,” exclaimed monte cristo in tone of exquisite sweetness.
 
“sir?”
 
“my friend, my dear maximilian, do not make hasty resolution, i
 entreat you.”
 
“i make hasty resolution?” said morrel, shrugging his shoulders; “is
 there anything extraordinary in journey?”
 
50125m
 


“maximilian,” said the count, “let us both lay aside the mask we have
 assumed. you more deceive with that false calmness than i impose
 upon you with my frivolous solicitude. you can understand, can you not,
 that to have acted as i have done, to have broken that glass, to have
 intruded on the solitude of friend—you can understand that, to have
 done all this, i must have been actuated by real uneasiness, or rather
 by terrible conviction. morrel, you are going to destroy yourself!”
 
“indeed, count,” said morrel, shuddering; “what has put this into your
 head?”
 
“i tell you that you are about to destroy yourself,” continued the
 count, “and here is proof of what i say;” and, approaching the desk, he
 removed the sheet of paper which morrel had placed over the letter he
 had begun, and took the latter in his hands.
 
morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but monte cristo perceiving
 his intention, seized his wrist with his iron grasp.
 
“you wish to destroy yourself,” said the count; “you have written it.”
 
“well,” said morrel, changing his expression of calmness for one of
 violence—“well, and if i do intend to turn this pistol against myself,
 who shall prevent me—who will dare prevent me? all my hopes are
 blighted, my heart is broken, my life burden, everything around is
 sad and mournful; earth has become distasteful to me, and human voices
 distract me. it is mercy to let die, for if i live i shall lose my
 reason and become mad. when, sir, i tell you all this with tears of
 heartfelt anguish, can you reply that i am wrong, can you prevent my
 putting an end to my miserable existence? tell me, sir, could you have
 the courage to do so?”
 
“yes, morrel,” said monte cristo, with calmness which contrasted
 strangely with the young man’s excitement; “yes, i would do so.”
 
“you?” exclaimed morrel, with increasing anger and reproach—“you, who
 have deceived with false hopes, who have cheered and soothed with
 vain promises, when i might, if not have saved her, at least have seen
 her die in my arms! you, who pretend to understand everything, even the
 hidden sources of knowledge,—and who enact the part of guardian angel
 upon earth, and could not even find an antidote to poison
 administered to young girl! ah, sir, indeed you would inspire with
 pity, were you not hateful in my eyes.”
 
“morrel——”
 
“yes; you tell to lay aside the mask, and i will do so, be
 satisfied! when you spoke to at the cemetery, i answered you—my
 heart was softened; when you arrived here, i allowed you to enter. but
 since you abuse my confidence, since you have devised new torture
 after i thought i had exhausted them all, then, count of monte cristo
 my pretended benefactor—then, count of monte cristo, the universal
 guardian, be satisfied, you shall witness the death of your friend;”
 and morrel, with maniacal laugh, again rushed towards the pistols.
 
“and i again repeat, you shall not commit suicide.”
 
“prevent me, then!” replied morrel, with another struggle, which, like
 the first, failed in releasing him from the count’s iron grasp.
 
“i will prevent you.”
 
50127m
 


“and who are you, then, that arrogate to yourself this tyrannical right
 over free and rational beings?”
 
“who am i?” repeated monte cristo. “listen; i am the only man in the
 world having the right to say to you, ‘morrel, your father’s shall
 not die today;’” and monte cristo, with an expression of majesty and
 sublimity, advanced with arms folded toward the young man, who,
 involuntarily overcome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled a
 step.
 
“why do you mention my father?” stammered he; “why do you mingle a
 recollection of him with the affairs of today?”
 
“because i am who saved your father’s life when wished to destroy
 himself, as you do today—because i am the man who sent the purse to
 your young sister, and the _pharaon_ to old morrel—because i am the
 edmond dantès who nursed you, child, on my knees.”
 
morrel made another step back, staggering, breathless, crushed; then
 all his strength give way, and fell prostrate at the feet of monte
 cristo. then his admirable nature underwent complete and sudden
 revulsion; arose, rushed out of the room and to the stairs,
 exclaiming energetically, “julie, julie—emmanuel, emmanuel!”
 
monte cristo endeavored also to leave, but maximilian would have died
 rather than relax his hold of the handle of the door, which closed
 upon the count. julie, emmanuel, and some of the servants, ran up in
 alarm on hearing the cries of maximilian. morrel seized their hands,
 and opening the door exclaimed in voice choked with sobs:
 
“on your knees—on your knees—he is our benefactor—the saviour of our
 father! is——”
 
would have added “edmond dantès,” but the count seized his arm and
 prevented him.
 
julie threw herself into the arms of the count; emmanuel embraced him
 as guardian angel; morrel again fell on his knees, and struck the
 ground with his forehead. then the iron-hearted man felt his heart
 swell in his breast; flame seemed to rush from his throat to his
 eyes, bent his head and wept. for while nothing was heard in the
 room but succession of sobs, while the incense from their grateful
 hearts mounted to heaven. julie had scarcely recovered from her deep
 emotion when she rushed out of the room, descended to the next floor,
 ran into the drawing-room with childlike joy and raised the crystal
 globe which covered the purse given by the unknown of the allées de
 meilhan. meanwhile, emmanuel in broken voice said to the count:
 
“oh, count, how could you, hearing us so often speak of our unknown
 benefactor, seeing us pay such homage of gratitude and adoration to his
 memory,—how could you continue so long without discovering yourself to
 us? oh, it was cruel to us, and—dare i say it?—to you also.”
 
“listen, my friends,” said the count—“i may call you so since we have
 really been friends for the last eleven years—the discovery of this
 secret has been occasioned by great event which you must never know.
 i wished to bury it during my whole life in my own bosom, but your
 brother maximilian wrested it from by violence repents of now,
 i am sure.”
 
then turning around, and seeing that morrel, still on his knees, had
 thrown himself into an armchair, added in low voice, pressing
 emmanuel’s hand significantly, “watch over him.”
 
“why so?” asked the young man, surprised.
 
“i cannot explain myself; but watch over him.” emmanuel looked around
 the room and caught sight of the pistols; his eyes rested on the
 weapons, and pointed to them. monte cristo bent his head. emmanuel
 went towards the pistols.
 
“leave them,” said monte cristo. then walking towards morrel, took
 his hand; the tumultuous agitation of the young man was succeeded by a
 profound stupor. julie returned, holding the silken purse in her hands,
 while tears of joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.
 
“here is the relic,” she said; “do not think it will be less dear to us
 now we are acquainted with our benefactor!”
 
“my child,” said monte cristo, coloring, “allow to take back that
 purse? since you now know my face, i wish to be remembered alone
 through the affection i hope you will grant me.
 
“oh,” said julie, pressing the purse to her heart, “no, no, i beseech
 you do not take it, for some unhappy day you will leave us, will you
 not?”
 
“you have guessed rightly, madame,” replied monte cristo, smiling; “in
 week i shall have left this country, where so many persons who merit
 the vengeance of heaven lived happily, while my father perished of
 hunger and grief.”
 
while announcing his departure, the count fixed his eyes on morrel, and
 remarked that the words, “i shall have left this country,” had failed
 to rouse him from his lethargy. then saw that must make another
 struggle against the grief of his friend, and taking the hands of
 emmanuel and julie, which pressed within his own, said with the
 mild authority of father:
 
“my kind friends, leave alone with maximilian.”
 
julie saw the means offered of carrying off her precious relic, which
 monte cristo had forgotten. she drew her husband to the door. “let us
 leave them,” she said.
 
the count was alone with morrel, who remained motionless as statue.
 
“come,” said monte-cristo, touching his shoulder with his finger, “are
 you man again, maximilian?”
 
“yes; for i begin to suffer again.”
 
the count frowned, apparently in gloomy hesitation.
 
“maximilian, maximilian,” said, “the ideas you yield to are unworthy
 of christian.”
 
“oh, do not fear, my friend,” said morrel, raising his head, and
 smiling with sweet expression on the count; “i shall longer
 attempt my life.”
 
“then we are to have more pistols—no more despair?”
 
“no; i have found better remedy for my grief than either bullet or
 knife.”
 
“poor fellow, what is it?”
 
“my grief will kill of itself.”
 
“my friend,” said monte cristo, with an expression of melancholy equal
 to his own, “listen to me. one day, in moment of despair like yours,
 since it led to similar resolution, i also wished to kill myself; one
 day your father, equally desperate, wished to kill himself too. if
 anyone had said to your father, at the moment raised the pistol to
 his head—if anyone had told me, when in my prison i pushed back the
 food i had not tasted for three days—if anyone had said to either of us
 then, ‘live—the day will come when you will be happy, and will bless
 life!’—no matter whose voice had spoken, we should have heard him with
 the smile of doubt, or the anguish of incredulity,—and yet how many
 times has your father blessed life while embracing you—how often have i
 myself——”
 
“ah,” exclaimed morrel, interrupting the count, “you had only lost your
 liberty, my father had only lost his fortune, but i have lost
 valentine.”
 
“look at me,” said monte cristo, with that expression which sometimes
 made him so eloquent and persuasive—“look at me. there are tears in
 my eyes, nor is there fever in my veins, yet i see you suffer—you,
 maximilian, whom i love as my own son. well, does not this tell you
 that in grief, as in life, there is always something to look forward to
 beyond? now, if i entreat, if i order you to live, morrel, it is in the
 conviction that one day you will thank for having preserved your
 life.”
 
“oh, heavens,” said the young man, “oh, heavens—what are you saying,
 count? take care. but perhaps you have never loved!”
 
“child!” replied the count.
 
“i mean, as i love. you see, i have been soldier ever since i
 attained manhood. i reached the age of twenty-nine without loving, for
 none of the feelings i before then experienced merit the appellation of
 love. well, at twenty-nine i saw valentine; for two years i have loved
 her, for two years i have seen written in her heart, as in book, all
 the virtues of daughter and wife. count, to possess valentine would
 have been happiness too infinite, too ecstatic, too complete, too
 divine for this world, since it has been denied me; but without
 valentine the earth is desolate.”
 
“i have told you to hope,” said the count.
 
“then have care, i repeat, for you seek to persuade me, and if you
 succeed i should lose my reason, for i should hope that i could again
 behold valentine.”
 
the count smiled.
 
“my friend, my father,” said morrel with excitement, “have care, i
 again repeat, for the power you wield over alarms me. weigh your
 words before you speak, for my eyes have already become brighter, and
 my heart beats strongly; be cautious, or you will make believe in
 supernatural agencies. i must obey you, though you bade call forth
 the dead or walk upon the water.”
 
“hope, my friend,” repeated the count.
 
“ah,” said morrel, falling from the height of excitement to the abyss
 of despair—“ah, you are playing with me, like those good, or rather
 selfish mothers who soothe their children with honeyed words, because
 their screams annoy them. no, my friend, i was wrong to caution you; do
 not fear, i will bury my grief so deep in my heart, i will disguise it
 so, that you shall not even care to sympathize with me. adieu, my
 friend, adieu!”
 
“on the contrary,” said the count, “after this time you must live with
 me—you must not leave me, and in week we shall have left france
 behind us.”
 
“and you still bid hope?”
 
“i tell you to hope, because i have method of curing you.”
 
“count, you render sadder than before, if it be possible. you think
 the result of this blow has been to produce an ordinary grief, and you
 would cure it by an ordinary remedy—change of scene.” and morrel
 dropped his head with disdainful incredulity.
 
“what can i say more?” asked monte cristo. “i have confidence in the
 remedy i propose, and only ask you to permit to assure you of its
 efficacy.”
 
“count, you prolong my agony.”
 
“then,” said the count, “your feeble spirit will not even grant the
 trial i request? come—do you know of what the count of monte cristo is
 capable? do you know that holds terrestrial beings under his
 control? nay, that can almost work miracle? well, wait for the
 miracle i hope to accomplish, or——”
 
“or?” repeated morrel.
 
“or, take care, morrel, lest i call you ungrateful.”
 
“have pity on me, count!”
 
“i feel so much pity towards you, maximilian, that—listen to me
 attentively—if i do not cure you in month, to the day, to the very
 hour, mark my words, morrel, i will place loaded pistols before you,
 and cup of the deadliest italian poison—a poison more sure and prompt
 than that which has killed valentine.”
 
“will you promise me?”
 
“yes; for i am man, and have suffered like yourself, and also
 contemplated suicide; indeed, often since misfortune has left i have
 longed for the delights of an eternal sleep.”
 
“but you are sure you will promise this?” said morrel, intoxicated.
 
“i not only promise, but swear it!” said monte cristo extending his
 hand.
 
“in month, then, on your honor, if i am not consoled, you will let me
 take my life into my own hands, and whatever may happen you will not
 call ungrateful?”
 
“in month, to the day, the very hour and the date is sacred one,
 maximilian. i do not know whether you remember that this is the 5th of
 september; it is ten years today since i saved your father’s life, who
 wished to die.”
 
morrel seized the count’s hand and kissed it; the count allowed him to
 pay the homage felt due to him.
 
“in month you will find on the table, at which we shall be then
 sitting, good pistols and delicious draught; but, on the other hand,
 you must promise not to attempt your life before that time.”
 
“oh, i also swear it!”
 
monte cristo drew the young man towards him, and pressed him for some
 time to his heart. “and now,” said, “after today, you will come and
 live with me; you can occupy haydée’s apartment, and my daughter will
 at least be replaced by my son.”
 
“haydée?” said morrel, “what has become of her?”
 
“she departed last night.”
 
“to leave you?”
 
“to wait for me. hold yourself ready then to join at the
 champs-Élysées, and lead out of this house without anyone seeing my
 departure.”
 
maximilian hung his head, and obeyed with childlike reverence.
 


chapter 106. dividing the proceeds
 
the apartment on the first floor of the house in the rue
 saint-germain-des-prés, where albert morcerf had selected home for
 his mother, was let to very mysterious person. this was man whose
 face the concierge himself had never seen, for in the winter his chin
 was buried in one of the large red handkerchiefs worn by gentlemen’s
 coachmen on cold night, and in the summer made point of always
 blowing his nose just as approached the door. contrary to custom,
 this gentleman had not been watched, for as the report ran that was
 person of high rank, and one who would allow impertinent
 interference, his _incognito_ was strictly respected.
 
his visits were tolerably regular, though occasionally appeared a
 little before or after his time, but generally, both in summer and
 winter, took possession of his apartment about four o’clock, though
 never spent the night there. at half-past three in the winter the
 fire was lighted by the discreet servant, who had the superintendence
 of the little apartment, and in the summer ices were placed on the
 table at the same hour. at four o’clock, as we have already stated, the
 mysterious personage arrived.
 
twenty minutes afterwards carriage stopped at the house, lady
 alighted in black or dark blue dress, and always thickly veiled; she
 passed like shadow through the lodge, and ran upstairs without a
 sound escaping under the touch of her light foot. one ever asked her
 where she was going. her face, therefore, like that of the gentleman,
 was perfectly unknown to the two concierges, who were perhaps
 unequalled throughout the capital for discretion. we need not say she
 stopped at the first floor. then she tapped in peculiar manner at a
 door, which after being opened to admit her was again fastened, and
 curiosity penetrated farther. they used the same precautions in
 leaving as in entering the house. the lady always left first, and as
 soon as she had stepped into her carriage, it drove away, sometimes
 towards the right hand, sometimes to the left; then about twenty
 minutes afterwards the gentleman would also leave, buried in his cravat
 or concealed by his handkerchief.
 
the day after monte cristo had called upon danglars, the mysterious
 lodger entered at ten o’clock in the morning instead of four in the
 afternoon. almost directly afterwards, without the usual interval of
 time, cab arrived, and the veiled lady ran hastily upstairs. the door
 opened, but before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed:
 
“oh, lucien—oh, my friend!”
 
the concierge therefore heard for the first time that the lodger’s name
 was lucien; still, as was the very perfection of door-keeper, he
 made up his mind not to tell his wife.
 
“well, what is the matter, my dear?” asked the gentleman whose name the
 lady’s agitation revealed; “tell what is the matter.”
 
“oh, lucien, can i confide in you?”
 
“of course, you know you can do so. but what can be the matter? your
 note of this morning has completely bewildered me. this
 precipitation—this unusual appointment. come, ease of my anxiety, or
 else frighten at once.”
 
“lucien, great event has happened!” said the lady, glancing
 inquiringly at lucien,—“m. danglars left last night!”
 
“left?—m. danglars left? where has gone?”
 
“i do not know.”
 
“what do you mean? has gone intending not to return?”
 
“undoubtedly;—at ten o’clock at night his horses took him to the
 barrier of charenton; there post-chaise was waiting for him—he
 entered it with his valet chambre, saying that was going to
 fontainebleau.”
 
“then what did you mean——”
 
“stay—he left letter for me.”
 
“a letter?”
 
“yes; read it.”
 
and the baroness took from her pocket letter which she gave to
 debray. debray paused moment before reading, as if trying to guess
 its contents, or perhaps while making up his mind how to act, whatever
 it might contain. doubt his ideas were arranged in few minutes,
 for began reading the letter which caused so much uneasiness in the
 heart of the baroness, and which ran as follows:
 
“‘madame and most faithful wife.’”
 
debray mechanically stopped and looked at the baroness, whose face
 became covered with blushes.
 
“read,” she said.
 
debray continued:
 
“‘when you receive this, you will longer have husband. oh, you
 need not be alarmed, you will only have lost him as you have lost your
 daughter; i mean that i shall be travelling on one of the thirty or
 forty roads leading out of france. i owe you some explanations for my
 conduct, and as you are woman that can perfectly understand me, i
 will give them. listen, then. i received this morning five millions
 which i paid away; almost directly afterwards another demand for the
 same sum was presented to me; i put this creditor off till tomorrow and
 i intend leaving today, to escape that tomorrow, which would be rather
 too unpleasant for to endure. you understand this, do you not, my
 most precious wife? i say you understand this, because you are as
 conversant with my affairs as i am; indeed, i think you understand them
 better, since i am ignorant of what has become of considerable
 portion of my fortune, once very tolerable, while i am sure, madame,
 that you know perfectly well. for women have infallible instincts; they
 can even explain the marvellous by an algebraic calculation they have
 invented; but i, who only understand my own figures, know nothing more
 than that one day these figures deceived me. have you admired the
 rapidity of my fall? have you been slightly dazzled at the sudden
 fusion of my ingots? i confess i have seen nothing but the fire; let us
 hope you have found some gold among the ashes. with this consoling
 idea, i leave you, madame, and most prudent wife, without any
 conscientious reproach for abandoning you; you have friends left, and
 the ashes i have already mentioned, and above all the liberty i hasten
 to restore to you. and here, madame, i must add another word of
 explanation. so long as i hoped you were working for the good of our
 house and for the fortune of our daughter, i philosophically closed my
 eyes; but as you have transformed that house into vast ruin i will
 not be the foundation of another man’s fortune. you were rich when i
 married you, but little respected. excuse for speaking so very
 candidly, but as this is intended only for ourselves, i do not see why
 i should weigh my words. i have augmented our fortune, and it has
 continued to increase during the last fifteen years, till extraordinary
 and unexpected catastrophes have suddenly overturned it,—without any
 fault of mine, i can honestly declare. you, madame, have only sought to
 increase your own, and i am convinced that you have succeeded. i leave
 you, therefore, as i took you,—rich, but little respected. adieu! i
 also intend from this time to work on my own account. accept my
 acknowledgments for the example you have set me, and which i intend
 following.
 
“‘your very devoted husband,
 
“‘baron danglars.’”
 
the baroness had watched debray while read this long and painful
 letter, and saw him, notwithstanding his self-control, change color
 once or twice. when had ended the perusal, folded the letter and
 resumed his pensive attitude.
 
“well?” asked madame danglars, with an anxiety easy to be understood.
 
“well, madame?” unhesitatingly repeated debray.
 
“with what ideas does that letter inspire you?”
 
“oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires with the idea that m.
 danglars has left suspiciously.”
 
“certainly; but is this all you have to say to me?”
 
“i do not understand you,” said debray with freezing coldness.
 
“he is gone! gone, never to return!”
 
“oh, madame, do not think that!”
 
“i tell you will never return. i know his character; is
 inflexible in any resolutions formed for his own interests. if could
 have made any use of me, would have taken with him; leaves me
 in paris, as our separation will conduce to his benefit;—therefore he
 has gone, and i am free forever,” added madame danglars, in the same
 supplicating tone.
 
debray, instead of answering, allowed her to remain in an attitude of
 nervous inquiry.
 
“well?” she said at length, “do you not answer me?”
 
“i have but one question to ask you,—what do you intend to do?”
 
“i was going to ask you,” replied the baroness with beating heart.
 
“ah, then, you wish to ask advice of me?”
 
“yes; i do wish to ask your advice,” said madame danglars with anxious
 expectation.
 
“then if you wish to take my advice,” said the young man coldly, “i
 would recommend you to travel.”
 
“to travel!” she murmured.
 
“certainly; as m. danglars says, you are rich, and perfectly free. in
 my opinion, withdrawal from paris is absolutely necessary after the
 double catastrophe of mademoiselle danglars’ broken contract and m.
 danglars’ disappearance. the world will think you abandoned and poor,
 for the wife of bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up
 an appearance of opulence. you have only to remain in paris for about a
 fortnight, telling the world you are abandoned, and relating the
 details of this desertion to your best friends, who will soon spread
 the report. then you can quit your house, leaving your jewels and
 giving up your jointure, and everyone’s mouth will be filled with
 praises of your disinterestedness. they will know you are deserted, and
 think you also poor, for i alone know your real financial position, and
 am quite ready to give up my accounts as an honest partner.”
 
the dread with which the pale and motionless baroness listened to this,
 was equalled by the calm indifference with which debray had spoken.
 
“deserted?” she repeated; “ah, yes, i am, indeed, deserted! you are
 right, sir, and one can doubt my position.”
 
these were the only words that this proud and violently enamoured woman
 could utter in response to debray.
 
50137m
 


“but then you are rich,—very rich, indeed,” continued debray, taking
 out some papers from his pocket-book, which spread upon the table.
 madame danglars did not see them; she was engaged in stilling the
 beatings of her heart, and restraining the tears which were ready to
 gush forth. at length sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did not
 entirely master her agitation, she at least succeeded in preventing the
 fall of single tear.
 
“madame,” said debray, “it is nearly six months since we have been
 associated. you furnished principal of 100,000 francs. our
 partnership began in the month of april. in may we commenced
 operations, and in the course of the month gained 450,000 francs. in
 june the profit amounted to 900,000. in july we added 1,700,000
 francs,—it was, you know, the month of the spanish bonds. in august we
 lost 300,000 francs at the beginning of the month, but on the 13th we
 made up for it, and we now find that our accounts, reckoning from the
 first day of partnership up to yesterday, when i closed them, showed a
 capital of 2,400,000 francs, that is, 1,200,000 for each of us. now,
 madame,” said debray, delivering up his accounts in the methodical
 manner of stockbroker, “there are still 80,000 francs, the interest
 of this money, in my hands.”
 
“but,” said the baroness, “i thought you never put the money out to
 interest.”
 
“excuse me, madame,” said debray coldly, “i had your permission to do
 so, and i have made use of it. there are, then, 40,000 francs for your
 share, besides the 100,000 you furnished to begin with, making in
 all 1,340,000 francs for your portion. now, madame, i took the
 precaution of drawing out your money the day before yesterday; it is
 not long ago, you see, and i was in continual expectation of being
 called on to deliver up my accounts. there is your money,—half in
 bank-notes, the other half in checks payable to bearer. i say _there_,
 for as i did not consider my house safe enough, or lawyers sufficiently
 discreet, and as landed property carries evidence with it, and moreover
 since you have right to possess anything independent of your
 husband, i have kept this sum, now your whole fortune, in chest
 concealed under that closet, and for greater security i myself
 concealed it there.
 
“now, madame,” continued debray, first opening the closet, then the
 chest;—“now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000 francs each,
 resembling, as you see, large book bound in iron; to this i add a
 certificate in the funds of 25,000 francs; then, for the odd cash,
 making i think about 110,000 francs, here is check upon my banker,
 who, not being m. danglars, will pay you the amount, you may rest
 assured.”
 
madame danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, and the heap of
 bank-notes. this enormous fortune made great appearance on the
 table. madame danglars, with tearless eyes, but with her breast heaving
 with concealed emotion, placed the bank-notes in her bag, put the
 certificate and check into her pocket-book, and then, standing pale and
 mute, awaited one kind word of consolation.
 
but she waited in vain.
 
“now, madame,” said debray, “you have splendid fortune, an income of
 about 60,000 livres year, which is enormous for woman who cannot
 keep an establishment here for year, at least. you will be able to
 indulge all your fancies; besides, should you find your income
 insufficient, you can, for the sake of the past, madame, make use of
 mine; and i am ready to offer you all i possess, on loan.”
 
“thank you, sir—thank you,” replied the baroness; “you forget that what
 you have just paid is much more than poor woman requires, who
 intends for some time, at least, to retire from the world.”
 
debray was, for moment, surprised, but immediately recovering
 himself, bowed with an air which seemed to say, “as you please,
 madame.”
 
madame danglars had until then, perhaps, hoped for something; but when
 she saw the careless bow of debray, and the glance by which it was
 accompanied, together with his significant silence, she raised her
 head, and without passion or violence or even hesitation, ran
 downstairs, disdaining to address last farewell to one who could thus
 part from her.
 
“bah,” said debray, when she had left, “these are fine projects! she
 will remain at home, read novels, and speculate at cards, since she can
 longer do so on the bourse.”
 
then taking up his account book, cancelled with the greatest care
 all the entries of the amounts had just paid away.
 
“i have 1,060,000 francs remaining,” said. “what pity mademoiselle
 villefort is dead! she suited in every respect, and i would have
 married her.”
 
and calmly waited until the twenty minutes had elapsed after madame
 danglars’ departure before left the house. during this time he
 occupied himself in making figures, with his watch by his side.
 
asmodeus—that diabolical personage, who would have been created by
 every fertile imagination if sage had not acquired the priority in
 his great masterpiece—would have enjoyed singular spectacle, if he
 had lifted up the roof of the little house in the rue
 saint-germain-des-prés, while debray was casting up his figures.
 
above the room in which debray had been dividing two millions and a
 half with madame danglars was another, inhabited by persons who have
 played too prominent part in the incidents we have related for their
 appearance not to create some interest.
 
mercédès and albert were in that room.
 
mercédès was much changed within the last few days; not that even in
 her days of fortune she had ever dressed with the magnificent display
 which makes us longer able to recognize woman when she appears in
 plain and simple attire; nor indeed, had she fallen into that state
 of depression where it is impossible to conceal the garb of misery; no,
 the change in mercédès was that her eye longer sparkled, her lips no
 longer smiled, and there was now hesitation in uttering the words
 which formerly sprang so fluently from her ready wit.
 
it was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not want of
 courage which rendered her poverty burdensome. mercédès, although
 deposed from the exalted position she had occupied, lost in the sphere
 she had now chosen, like person passing from room splendidly
 lighted into utter darkness, appeared like queen, fallen from her
 palace to hovel, and who, reduced to strict necessity, could neither
 become reconciled to the earthen vessels she was herself forced to
 place upon the table, nor to the humble pallet which had become her
 bed.
 
the beautiful catalane and noble countess had lost both her proud
 glance and charming smile, because she saw nothing but misery around
 her; the walls were hung with one of the gray papers which economical
 landlords choose as not likely to show the dirt; the floor was
 uncarpeted; the furniture attracted the attention to the poor attempt
 at luxury; indeed, everything offended eyes accustomed to refinement
 and elegance.
 
madame morcerf had lived there since leaving her house; the
 continual silence of the spot oppressed her; still, seeing that albert
 continually watched her countenance to judge the state of her feelings,
 she constrained herself to assume monotonous smile of the lips alone,
 which, contrasted with the sweet and beaming expression that usually
 shone from her eyes, seemed like “moonlight on statue,”—yielding
 light without warmth.
 
albert, too, was ill at ease; the remains of luxury prevented him from
 sinking into his actual position. if wished to go out without
 gloves, his hands appeared too white; if wished to walk through the
 town, his boots seemed too highly polished. yet these two noble and
 intelligent creatures, united by the indissoluble ties of maternal and
 filial love, had succeeded in tacitly understanding one another, and
 economizing their stores, and albert had been able to tell his mother
 without extorting change of countenance:
 
“mother, we have more money.”
 
50141m
 


mercédès had never known misery; she had often, in her youth, spoken of
 poverty, but between want and necessity, those synonymous words, there
 is wide difference.
 
amongst the catalans, mercédès wished for thousand things, but still
 she never really wanted any. so long as the nets were good, they caught
 fish; and so long as they sold their fish, they were able to buy twine
 for new nets. and then, shut out from friendship, having but one
 affection, which could not be mixed up with her ordinary pursuits, she
 thought of herself—of one but herself. upon the little she earned
 she lived as well as she could; now there were two to be supported, and
 nothing to live upon.
 
winter approached. mercédès had fire in that cold and naked
 room—she, who was accustomed to stoves which heated the house from the
 hall to the boudoir; she had not even one little flower—she whose
 apartment had been conservatory of costly exotics. but she had her
 son. hitherto the excitement of fulfilling duty had sustained them.
 excitement, like enthusiasm, sometimes renders us unconscious to the
 things of earth. but the excitement had calmed down, and they felt
 themselves obliged to descend from dreams to reality; after having
 exhausted the ideal, they found they must talk of the actual.
 
“mother,” exclaimed albert, just as madame danglars was descending the
 stairs, “let us reckon our riches, if you please; i want capital to
 build my plans upon.”
 
“capital—nothing!” replied mercédès with mournful smile.
 
“no, mother,—capital 3,000 francs. and i have an idea of our leading a
 delightful life upon this 3,000 francs.”
 
“child!” sighed mercédès.
 
“alas, dear mother,” said the young man, “i have unhappily spent too
 much of your money not to know the value of it. these 3,000 francs are
 enormous, and i intend building upon this foundation miraculous
 certainty for the future.”
 
“you say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought to accept these
 3,000 francs?” said mercédès, coloring.
 
“i think so,” answered albert in firm tone. “we will accept them the
 more readily, since we have them not here; you know they are buried in
 the garden of the little house in the allées meilhan, at marseilles.
 with 200 francs we can reach marseilles.”
 
“with 200 francs?—are you sure, albert?”
 
“oh, as for that, i have made inquiries respecting the diligences and
 steamboats, and my calculations are made. you will take your place in
 the _coupé_ to châlons. you see, mother, i treat you handsomely for
 thirty-five francs.”
 
albert then took pen, and wrote:
 

frs. _coupé_,
 thirty-five
 francs........
 ..............
 ........ 35.
 from châlons
 to lyons you
 will go on by
 the
 steamboat.. 
6. from lyons
 to avignon
 (still by
 steamboat)....
 ......... 16.
 from avignon
 to marseilles,
 seven
 francs........
 ....... 7.
 expenses on
 the road,
 about fifty
 francs........
 ....... 50.
 total.........
 ..............
 ..............
 ............
 114 frs.
 
“let us put down 120,” added albert, smiling. “you see i am generous,
 am i not, mother?”
 
“but you, my poor child?”
 
“i? do you not see that i reserve eighty francs for myself? young man
 does not require luxuries; besides, i know what travelling is.”
 
“with post-chaise and valet chambre?”
 
“any way, mother.”
 
“well, be it so. but these 200 francs?”
 
“here they are, and 200 more besides. see, i have sold my watch for 100
 francs, and the guard and seals for 300. how fortunate that the
 ornaments were worth more than the watch. still the same story of
 superfluities! now i think we are rich, since instead of the 114 francs
 we require for the journey we find ourselves in possession of 250.”
 
“but we owe something in this house?”
 
“thirty francs; but i pay that out of my 150 francs,—that is
 understood,—and as i require only eighty francs for my journey, you see
 i am overwhelmed with luxury. but that is not all. what do you say to
 this, mother?”
 
and albert took out of little pocket-book with golden clasps, a
 remnant of his old fancies, or perhaps tender souvenir from one of
 the mysterious and veiled ladies who used to knock at his little
 door,—albert took out of this pocket-book note of 1,000 francs.
 
“what is this?” asked mercédès.
 
“a thousand francs.”
 
“but whence have you obtained them?”
 
“listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much to agitation.” and
 albert, rising, kissed his mother on both cheeks, then stood looking at
 her. “you cannot imagine, mother, how beautiful i think you!” said the
 young man, impressed with profound feeling of filial love. “you are,
 indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman i ever saw!”
 
“dear child!” said mercédès, endeavoring in vain to restrain tear
 which glistened in the corner of her eye. “indeed, you only wanted
 misfortune to change my love for you to admiration. i am not unhappy
 while i possess my son!”
 
“ah, just so,” said albert; “here begins the trial. do you know the
 decision we have come to, mother?”
 
“have we come to any?”
 
“yes; it is decided that you are to live at marseilles, and that i am
 to leave for africa, where i will earn for myself the right to use the
 name i now bear, instead of the one i have thrown aside.” mercédès
 sighed. “well, mother, i yesterday engaged myself as substitute in the
 spahis,”25 added the young man, lowering his eyes with certain
 feeling of shame, for even was unconscious of the sublimity of his
 self-abasement. “i thought my body was my own, and that i might sell
 it. i yesterday took the place of another. i sold myself for more than
 i thought i was worth,” added, attempting to smile; “i fetched 2,000
 francs.”
 
“then these 1,000 francs——” said mercédès, shuddering.
 
“are the half of the sum, mother; the other will be paid in year.”
 
mercédès raised her eyes to heaven with an expression it would be
 impossible to describe, and tears, which had hitherto been restrained,
 now yielded to her emotion, and ran down her cheeks.
 
“the price of his blood!” she murmured.
 
“yes, if i am killed,” said albert, laughing. “but i assure you,
 mother, i have strong intention of defending my person, and i never
 felt half so strong an inclination to live as i do now.”
 
“merciful heavens!”
 
“besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that i am to be
 killed? has lamoricière, that ney of the south, been killed? has
 changarnier been killed? has bedeau been killed? has morrel, whom we
 know, been killed? think of your joy, mother, when you see return
 with an embroidered uniform! i declare, i expect to look magnificent in
 it, and chose that regiment only from vanity.”
 
mercédès sighed while endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt
 that she ought not to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall
 upon her son.
 
“well, now you understand, mother!” continued albert; “here are more
 than 4,000 francs settled on you; upon these you can live at least two
 years.”
 
“do you think so?” said mercédès.
 
these words were uttered in so mournful tone that their real meaning
 did not escape albert; felt his heart beat, and taking his mother’s
 hand within his own said, tenderly:
 
“yes, you will live!”
 
“i shall live!—then you will not leave me, albert?”
 
“mother, i must go,” said albert in firm, calm voice; “you love me
 too well to wish to remain useless and idle with you; besides, i
 have signed.”
 
50145m
 


“you will obey your own wish and the will of heaven!”
 
“not my own wish, mother, but reason—necessity. are we not two
 despairing creatures? what is life to you?—nothing. what is life to
 me?—very little without you, mother; for believe me, but for you i
 should have ceased to live on the day i doubted my father and renounced
 his name. well, i will live, if you promise still to hope; and if
 you grant the care of your future prospects, you will redouble my
 strength. then i will go to the governor of algeria; has royal
 heart, and is essentially soldier; i will tell him my gloomy story. i
 will beg him to turn his eyes now and then towards me, and if keep
 his word and interest himself for me, in six months i shall be an
 officer, or dead. if i am an officer, your fortune is certain, for i
 shall have money enough for both, and, moreover, name we shall both
 be proud of, since it will be our own. if i am killed—well then mother,
 you can also die, and there will be an end of our misfortunes.”
 
“it is well,” replied mercédès, with her eloquent glance; “you are
 right, my love; let us prove to those who are watching our actions that
 we are worthy of compassion.”
 
“but let us not yield to gloomy apprehensions,” said the young man; “i
 assure you we are, or rather we shall be, very happy. you are woman
 at once full of spirit and resignation; i have become simple in my
 tastes, and am without passion, i hope. once in service, i shall be
 rich—once in m. dantès’ house, you will be at rest. let us strive, i
 beseech you,—let us strive to be cheerful.”
 
“yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy, albert.”
 
“and so our division is made, mother,” said the young man, affecting
 ease of mind. “we can now part; come, i shall engage your passage.”
 
“and you, my dear boy?”
 
“i shall stay here for few days longer; we must accustom ourselves to
 parting. i want recommendations and some information relative to
 africa. i will join you again at marseilles.”
 
“well, be it so—let us part,” said mercédès, folding around her
 shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which accidentally
 happened to be valuable black cashmere. albert gathered up his papers
 hastily, rang the bell to pay the thirty francs owed to the
 landlord, and offering his arm to his mother, they descended the
 stairs.
 
someone was walking down before them, and this person, hearing the
 rustling of silk dress, turned around. “debray!” muttered albert.
 
“you, morcerf?” replied the secretary, resting on the stairs. curiosity
 had vanquished the desire of preserving his _incognito_, and was
 recognized. it was, indeed, strange in this unknown spot to find the
 young man whose misfortunes had made so much noise in paris.
 
“morcerf!” repeated debray. then noticing in the dim light the still
 youthful and veiled figure of madame morcerf:
 
“pardon me,” added with smile, “i leave you, albert.” albert
 understood his thoughts.
 
“mother,” said, turning towards mercédès, “this is m. debray,
 secretary of the minister for the interior, once friend of mine.”
 
“how once?” stammered debray; “what do you mean?”
 
“i say so, m. debray, because i have friends now, and i ought not to
 have any. i thank you for having recognized me, sir.” debray stepped
 forward, and cordially pressed the hand of his interlocutor.
 
“believe me, dear albert,” said, with all the emotion was capable
 of feeling,—“believe me, i feel deeply for your misfortunes, and if in
 any way i can serve you, i am yours.”
 
“thank you, sir,” said albert, smiling. “in the midst of our
 misfortunes, we are still rich enough not to require assistance from
 anyone. we are leaving paris, and when our journey is paid, we shall
 have 5,000 francs left.”
 
the blood mounted to the temples of debray, who held million in his
 pocket-book, and unimaginative as was could not help reflecting
 that the same house had contained two women, one of whom, justly
 dishonored, had left it poor with 1,500,000 francs under her cloak,
 while the other, unjustly stricken, but sublime in her misfortune, was
 yet rich with few deniers. this parallel disturbed his usual
 politeness, the philosophy witnessed appalled him, muttered few
 words of general civility and ran downstairs.
 
that day the minister’s clerks and the subordinates had great deal to
 put up with from his ill-humor. but that same night, found himself
 the possessor of fine house, situated on the boulevard la
 madeleine, and an income of 50,000 livres.
 
the next day, just as debray was signing the deed, that is about five
 o’clock in the afternoon, madame morcerf, after having
 affectionately embraced her son, entered the _coupé_ of the diligence,
 which closed upon her.
 
man was hidden in lafitte’s banking-house, behind one of the little
 arched windows which are placed above each desk; saw mercédès enter
 the diligence, and also saw albert withdraw. then passed his hand
 across his forehead, which was clouded with doubt.
 
“alas,” exclaimed, “how can i restore the happiness i have taken
 away from these poor innocent creatures? god help me!”
 


chapter 107. the lions’ den
 
one division of force, in which the most dangerous and desperate
 prisoners are confined, is called the court of saint-bernard. the
 prisoners, in their expressive language, have named it the “lions’
 den,” probably because the captives possess teeth which frequently gnaw
 the bars, and sometimes the keepers also. it is prison within a
 prison; the walls are double the thickness of the rest. the gratings
 are every day carefully examined by jailers, whose herculean
 proportions and cold pitiless expression prove them to have been chosen
 to reign over their subjects for their superior activity and
 intelligence.
 
the courtyard of this quarter is enclosed by enormous walls, over which
 the sun glances obliquely, when it deigns to penetrate into this gulf
 of moral and physical deformity. on this paved yard are to be
 seen,—pacing to and fro from morning till night, pale, careworn, and
 haggard, like so many shadows,—the men whom justice holds beneath the
 steel she is sharpening. there, crouched against the side of the wall
 which attracts and retains the most heat, they may be seen sometimes
 talking to one another, but more frequently alone, watching the door,
 which sometimes opens to call forth one from the gloomy assemblage, or
 to throw in another outcast from society.
 
the court of saint-bernard has its own particular apartment for the
 reception of guests; it is long rectangle, divided by two upright
 gratings placed at distance of three feet from one another to prevent
 visitor from shaking hands with or passing anything to the prisoners.
 it is wretched, damp, nay, even horrible spot, more especially when
 we consider the agonizing conferences which have taken place between
 those iron bars. and yet, frightful though this spot may be, it is
 looked upon as kind of paradise by the men whose days are numbered;
 it is so rare for them to leave the lions’ den for any other place than
 the barrier saint-jacques, the galleys! or solitary confinement.
 
in the court which we have attempted to describe, and from which damp
 vapor was rising, young man with his hands in his pockets, who had
 excited much curiosity among the inhabitants of the “den,” might be
 seen walking. the cut of his clothes would have made him pass for an
 elegant man, if those clothes had not been torn to shreds; still they
 did not show signs of wear, and the fine cloth, beneath the careful
 hands of the prisoner, soon recovered its gloss in the parts which were
 still perfect, for the wearer tried his best to make it assume the
 appearance of new coat. bestowed the same attention upon the
 cambric front of shirt, which had considerably changed in color since
 his entrance into the prison, and polished his varnished boots with
 the corner of handkerchief embroidered with initials surmounted by a
 coronet.
 
some of the inmates of the “lions’ den” were watching the operations of
 the prisoner’s toilet with considerable interest.
 
“see, the prince is pluming himself,” said one of the thieves.
 
“he’s fine looking fellow,” said another; “if had only comb and
 hair-grease, he’d take the shine off the gentlemen in white kids.”
 
“his coat looks nearly new, and his boots are brilliant. it is pleasant
 to have such well-dressed brethren; and those gendarmes behaved
 shamefully. what jealousy; to tear such clothes!”
 
“he looks like big-bug,” said another; “dresses in fine style. and,
 then, to be here so young! oh, what larks!”
 
meanwhile the object of this hideous admiration approached the wicket,
 against which one of the keepers was leaning.
 
“come, sir,” said, “lend twenty francs; you will soon be paid;
 you run risks with me. remember, i have relations who possess more
 millions than you have deniers. come, i beseech you, lend twenty
 francs, so that i may buy dressing-gown; it is intolerable always to
 be in coat and boots! and what coat, sir, for prince of the
 cavalcanti!”
 
the keeper turned his back, and shrugged his shoulders; did not even
 laugh at what would have caused anyone else to do so; had heard so
 many utter the same things,—indeed, heard nothing else.
 
“come,” said andrea, “you are man void of compassion; i’ll have you
 turned out.”
 
this made the keeper turn around, and burst into loud laugh. the
 prisoners then approached and formed circle.
 
“i tell you that with that wretched sum,” continued andrea, “i could
 obtain coat, and room in which to receive the illustrious visitor i
 am daily expecting.”
 
“of course—of course,” said the prisoners;—“anyone can see he’s a
 gentleman!”
 
“well, then, lend him the twenty francs,” said the keeper, leaning on
 the other shoulder; “surely you will not refuse comrade!”
 
50151m
 


“i am comrade of these people,” said the young man, proudly, “you
 have right to insult thus.”
 
the thieves looked at one another with low murmurs, and storm
 gathered over the head of the aristocratic prisoner, raised less by his
 own words than by the manner of the keeper. the latter, sure of
 quelling the tempest when the waves became too violent, allowed them to
 rise to certain pitch that might be revenged on the importunate
 andrea, and besides it would afford him some recreation during the long
 day.
 
the thieves had already approached andrea, some screaming, _“la
 savate—la savate!”_26 cruel operation, which consists in cuffing a
 comrade who may have fallen into disgrace, not with an old shoe, but
 with an iron-heeled one. others proposed the _anguille_, another kind
 of recreation, in which handkerchief is filled with sand, pebbles,
 and two-sous pieces, when they have them, which the wretches beat like
 flail over the head and shoulders of the unhappy sufferer.
 
“let us horsewhip the fine gentleman!” said others.
 
but andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolled his tongue
 around his cheeks, and smacked his lips in manner equivalent to a
 hundred words among the bandits when forced to be silent. it was a
 masonic sign caderousse had taught him. was immediately recognized
 as one of them; the handkerchief was thrown down, and the iron-heeled
 shoe replaced on the foot of the wretch to whom it belonged.
 
some voices were heard to say that the gentleman was right; that he
 intended to be civil, in his way, and that they would set the example
 of liberty of conscience,—and the mob retired. the keeper was so
 stupefied at this scene that took andrea by the hands and began
 examining his person, attributing the sudden submission of the inmates
 of the lions’ den to something more substantial than mere fascination.
 
andrea made resistance, although protested against it. suddenly a
 voice was heard at the wicket.
 
“benedetto!” exclaimed an inspector. the keeper relaxed his hold.
 
“i am called,” said andrea.
 
“to the visitors’ room!” said the same voice.
 
“you see someone pays visit. ah, my dear sir, you will see whether
 cavalcanti is to be treated like common person!”
 
and andrea, gliding through the court like black shadow, rushed out
 through the wicket, leaving his comrades, and even the keeper, lost in
 wonder. certainly call to the visitors’ room had scarcely astonished
 andrea less than themselves, for the wily youth, instead of making use
 of his privilege of waiting to be claimed on his entry into force,
 had maintained rigid silence.
 
50153m
 


“everything,” said, “proves to be under the protection of some
 powerful person,—this sudden fortune, the facility with which i have
 overcome all obstacles, an unexpected family and an illustrious name
 awarded to me, gold showered down upon me, and the most splendid
 alliances about to be entered into. an unhappy lapse of fortune and the
 absence of my protector have cast down, certainly, but not forever.
 the hand which has retreated for while will be again stretched forth
 to save at the very moment when i shall think myself sinking into
 the abyss. why should i risk an imprudent step? it might alienate my
 protector. has two means of extricating from this dilemma,—the
 one by mysterious escape, managed through bribery; the other by
 buying off my judges with gold. i will say and do nothing until i am
 convinced that has quite abandoned me, and then——”
 
andrea had formed plan which was tolerably clever. the unfortunate
 youth was intrepid in the attack, and rude in the defence. had borne
 with the public prison, and with privations of all sorts; still, by
 degrees nature, or rather custom, had prevailed, and suffered from
 being naked, dirty, and hungry. it was at this moment of discomfort
 that the inspector’s voice called him to the visiting-room. andrea felt
 his heart leap with joy. it was too soon for visit from the examining
 magistrate, and too late for one from the director of the prison, or
 the doctor; it must, then, be the visitor hoped for. behind the
 grating of the room into which andrea had been led, saw, while his
 eyes dilated with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of m.
 bertuccio, who was also gazing with sad astonishment upon the iron
 bars, the bolted doors, and the shadow which moved behind the other
 grating.
 
“ah,” said andrea, deeply affected.
 
“good morning, benedetto,” said bertuccio, with his deep, hollow voice.
 
“you—you?” said the young man, looking fearfully around him.
 
“do you not recognize me, unhappy child?”
 
“silence,—be silent!” said andrea, who knew the delicate sense of
 hearing possessed by the walls; “for heaven’s sake, do not speak so
 loud!”
 
“you wish to speak with alone, do you not?” said bertuccio.
 
“oh, yes.”
 
“that is well.”
 
and bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, signed to keeper whom saw
 through the window of the wicket.
 
“read?” said.
 
“what is that?” asked andrea.
 
“an order to conduct you to room, and to leave you there to talk to
 me.”
 
“oh,” cried andrea, leaping with joy. then mentally added,—“still my
 unknown protector! i am not forgotten. they wish for secrecy, since we
 are to converse in private room. i understand, bertuccio has been
 sent by my protector.”
 
the keeper spoke for moment with an official, then opened the iron
 gates and conducted andrea to room on the first floor. the room was
 whitewashed, as is the custom in prisons, but it looked quite brilliant
 to prisoner, though stove, bed, chair, and table formed the
 whole of its sumptuous furniture. bertuccio sat down upon the chair,
 andrea threw himself upon the bed; the keeper retired.
 
“now,” said the steward, “what have you to tell me?”
 
“and you?” said andrea.
 
“you speak first.”
 
“oh, no. you must have much to tell me, since you have come to seek
 me.”
 
50155m
 


“well, be it so. you have continued your course of villany; you have
 robbed—you have assassinated.”
 
“well, i should say! if you had taken to private room only to tell
 this, you might have saved yourself the trouble. i know all these
 things. but there are some with which, on the contrary, i am not
 acquainted. let us talk of those, if you please. who sent you?”
 
“come, come, you are going on quickly, m. benedetto!”
 
“yes, and to the point. let us dispense with useless words. who sends
 you?”
 
“no one.”
 
“how did you know i was in prison?”
 
“i recognized you, some time since, as the insolent dandy who so
 gracefully mounted his horse in the champs-Élysées.”
 
“oh, the champs-Élysées? ah, yes; we burn, as they say at the game of
 pincette. the champs-Élysées? come, let us talk little about my
 father.”
 
“who, then, am i?”
 
“you, sir?—you are my adopted father. but it was not you, i presume,
 who placed at my disposal 100,000 francs, which i spent in four or five
 months; it was not you who manufactured an italian gentleman for my
 father; it was not you who introduced into the world, and had me
 invited to certain dinner at auteuil, which i fancy i am eating at
 this moment, in company with the most distinguished people in
 paris—amongst the rest with certain procureur, whose acquaintance i
 did very wrong not to cultivate, for would have been very useful to
 just now;—it was not you, in fact, who bailed for one or two
 millions, when the fatal discovery of my little secret took place.
 come, speak, my worthy corsican, speak!”
 
“what do you wish to say?”
 
“i will help you. you were speaking of the champs-Élysées just now,
 worthy foster-father.”
 
“well?”
 
“well, in the champs-Élysées there resides very rich gentleman.”
 
“at whose house you robbed and murdered, did you not?”
 
“i believe i did.”
 
“the count of monte cristo?”
 
“’tis you who have named him, as m. racine says. well, am i to rush
 into his arms, and strain him to my heart, crying, ‘my father, my
 father!’ like monsieur pixérécourt.”27
 
“do not let us jest,” gravely replied bertuccio, “and dare not to utter
 that name again as you have pronounced it.”
 
“bah,” said andrea, little overcome, by the solemnity of bertuccio’s
 manner, “why not?”
 
“because the person who bears it is too highly favored by heaven to be
 the father of such wretch as you.”
 
“oh, these are fine words.”
 
“and there will be fine doings, if you do not take care.”
 
“menaces—i do not fear them. i will say——”
 
“do you think you are engaged with pygmy like yourself?” said
 bertuccio, in so calm tone, and with so steadfast look, that andrea
 was moved to the very soul. “do you think you have to do with
 galley-slaves, or novices in the world? benedetto, you are fallen into
 terrible hands; they are ready to open for you—make use of them. do not
 play with the thunderbolt they have laid aside for moment, but which
 they can take up again instantly, if you attempt to intercept their
 movements.”
 
50157m
 


“my father—i will know who my father is,” said the obstinate youth; “i
 will perish if i must, but i _will_ know it. what does scandal signify
 to me? what possessions, what reputation, what ‘pull,’ as beauchamp
 says,—have i? you great people always lose something by scandal,
 notwithstanding your millions. come, who is my father?”
 
“i came to tell you.”
 
“ah,” cried benedetto, his eyes sparkling with joy. just then the door
 opened, and the jailer, addressing himself to bertuccio, said:
 
“excuse me, sir, but the examining magistrate is waiting for the
 prisoner.”
 
“and so closes our interview,” said andrea to the worthy steward; “i
 wish the troublesome fellow were at the devil!”
 
“i will return tomorrow,” said bertuccio.
 
“good! gendarmes, i am at your service. ah, sir, do leave few crowns
 for at the gate that i may have some things i am in need of!”
 
“it shall be done,” replied bertuccio.
 
andrea extended his hand; bertuccio kept his own in his pocket, and
 merely jingled few pieces of money.
 
“that’s what i mean,” said andrea, endeavoring to smile, quite overcome
 by the strange tranquillity of bertuccio.
 
“can i be deceived?” murmured, as stepped into the oblong and
 grated vehicle which they call “the salad basket.”
 
“never mind, we shall see! tomorrow, then!” added, turning towards
 bertuccio.
 
“tomorrow!” replied the steward.
 


chapter 108. the judge
 
we remember that the abbé busoni remained alone with noirtier in the
 chamber of death, and that the old man and the priest were the sole
 guardians of the young girl’s body. perhaps it was the christian
 exhortations of the abbé, perhaps his kind charity, perhaps his
 persuasive words, which had restored the courage of noirtier, for ever
 since had conversed with the priest his violent despair had yielded
 to calm resignation which surprised all who knew his excessive
 affection for valentine.
 
m. villefort had not seen his father since the morning of the death.
 the whole establishment had been changed; another valet was engaged for
 himself, new servant for noirtier, two women had entered madame de
 villefort’s service,—in fact, everywhere, to the concierge and
 coachmen, new faces were presented to the different masters of the
 house, thus widening the division which had always existed between the
 members of the same family. the assizes, also, were about to begin, and
 villefort, shut up in his room, exerted himself with feverish anxiety
 in drawing up the case against the murderer of caderousse. this affair,
 like all those in which the count of monte cristo had interfered,
 caused great sensation in paris. the proofs were certainly not
 convincing, since they rested upon few words written by an escaped
 galley-slave on his death-bed, and who might have been actuated by
 hatred or revenge in accusing his companion. but the mind of the
 procureur was made up; felt assured that benedetto was guilty, and
 hoped by his skill in conducting this aggravated case to flatter his
 self-love, which was about the only vulnerable point left in his frozen
 heart.
 
the case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant labor of
 villefort, who wished it to be the first on the list in the coming
 assizes. had been obliged to seclude himself more than ever, to
 evade the enormous number of applications presented to him for the
 purpose of obtaining tickets of admission to the court on the day of
 trial. and then so short time had elapsed since the death of poor
 valentine, and the gloom which overshadowed the house was so recent,
 that one wondered to see the father so absorbed in his professional
 duties, which were the only means had of dissipating his grief.
 
once only had villefort seen his father; it was the day after that upon
 which bertuccio had paid his second visit to benedetto, when the latter
 was to learn his father’s name. the magistrate, harassed and fatigued,
 had descended to the garden of his house, and in gloomy mood, similar
 to that in which tarquin lopped off the tallest poppies, began
 knocking off with his cane the long and dying branches of the
 rose-trees, which, placed along the avenue, seemed like the spectres of
 the brilliant flowers which had bloomed in the past season.
 
more than once had reached that part of the garden where the famous
 boarded gate stood overlooking the deserted enclosure, always returning
 by the same path, to begin his walk again, at the same pace and with
 the same gesture, when accidentally turned his eyes towards the
 house, whence heard the noisy play of his son, who had returned from
 school to spend the sunday and monday with his mother.
 
while doing so, observed m. noirtier at one of the open windows,
 where the old man had been placed that might enjoy the last rays of
 the sun which yet yielded some heat, and was now shining upon the dying
 flowers and red leaves of the creeper which twined around the balcony.
 
the eye of the old man was riveted upon spot which villefort could
 scarcely distinguish. his glance was so full of hate, of ferocity, and
 savage impatience, that villefort turned out of the path had been
 pursuing, to see upon what person this dark look was directed.
 
then saw beneath thick clump of linden-trees, which were nearly
 divested of foliage, madame villefort sitting with book in her
 hand, the perusal of which she frequently interrupted to smile upon her
 son, or to throw back his elastic ball, which obstinately threw from
 the drawing-room into the garden.
 
villefort became pale; understood the old man’s meaning.
 
noirtier continued to look at the same object, but suddenly his glance
 was transferred from the wife to the husband, and villefort himself had
 to submit to the searching investigation of eyes, which, while changing
 their direction and even their language, had lost none of their
 menacing expression. madame villefort, unconscious of the passions
 that exhausted their fire over her head, at that moment held her son’s
 ball, and was making signs to him to reclaim it with kiss. edward
 begged for long while, the maternal kiss probably not offering
 sufficient recompense for the trouble must take to obtain it;
 however at length decided, leaped out of the window into cluster
 of heliotropes and daisies, and ran to his mother, his forehead
 streaming with perspiration. madame villefort wiped his forehead,
 pressed her lips upon it, and sent him back with the ball in one hand
 and some bonbons in the other.
 
villefort, drawn by an irresistible attraction, like that of the bird
 to the serpent, walked towards the house. as approached it,
 noirtier’s gaze followed him, and his eyes appeared of such fiery
 brightness that villefort felt them pierce to the depths of his heart.
 in that earnest look might be read deep reproach, as well as a
 terrible menace. then noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as though to
 remind his of forgotten oath.
 
“it is well, sir,” replied villefort from below,—“it is well; have
 patience but one day longer; what i have said i will do.”
 
noirtier seemed to be calmed by these words, and turned his eyes with
 indifference to the other side. villefort violently unbuttoned his
 greatcoat, which seemed to strangle him, and passing his livid hand
 across his forehead, entered his study.
 
the night was cold and still; the family had all retired to rest but
 villefort, who alone remained up, and worked till five o’clock in the
 morning, reviewing the last interrogatories made the night before by
 the examining magistrates, compiling the depositions of the witnesses,
 and putting the finishing stroke to the deed of accusation, which was
 one of the most energetic and best conceived of any had yet
 delivered.
 
the next day, monday, was the first sitting of the assizes. the morning
 dawned dull and gloomy, and villefort saw the dim gray light shine upon
 the lines had traced in red ink. the magistrate had slept for a
 short time while the lamp sent forth its final struggles; its
 flickerings awoke him, and found his fingers as damp and purple as
 though they had been dipped in blood.
 
opened the window; bright yellow streak crossed the sky, and
 seemed to divide in half the poplars, which stood out in black relief
 on the horizon. in the clover-fields beyond the chestnut-trees, lark
 was mounting up to heaven, while pouring out her clear morning song.
 the damps of the dew bathed the head of villefort, and refreshed his
 memory.
 
“today,” said with an effort,—“today the man who holds the blade of
 justice must strike wherever there is guilt.”
 
involuntarily his eyes wandered towards the window of noirtier’s room,
 where had seen him the preceding night. the curtain was drawn, and
 yet the image of his father was so vivid to his mind that addressed
 the closed window as though it had been open, and as if through the
 opening had beheld the menacing old man.
 
“yes,” murmured,—“yes, be satisfied.”
 
his head dropped upon his chest, and in this position paced his
 study; then threw himself, dressed as was, upon sofa, less to
 sleep than to rest his limbs, cramped with cold and study. by degrees
 everyone awoke. villefort, from his study, heard the successive noises
 which accompany the life of house,—the opening and shutting of doors,
 the ringing of madame villefort’s bell, to summon the waiting-maid,
 mingled with the first shouts of the child, who rose full of the
 enjoyment of his age. villefort also rang; his new valet brought him
 the papers, and with them cup of chocolate.
 
“what are you bringing me?” said he.
 
“a cup of chocolate.”
 
“i did not ask for it. who has paid this attention?”
 
“my mistress, sir. she said you would have to speak great deal in the
 murder case, and that you should take something to keep up your
 strength;” and the valet placed the cup on the table nearest to the
 sofa, which was, like all the rest, covered with papers.
 
the valet then left the room. villefort looked for an instant with a
 gloomy expression, then, suddenly, taking it up with nervous motion,
 swallowed its contents at one draught. it might have been thought
 that hoped the beverage would be mortal, and that sought for
 death to deliver him from duty which would rather die than fulfil.
 then rose, and paced his room with smile it would have been
 terrible to witness. the chocolate was inoffensive, for m. villefort
 felt effects.
 
the breakfast-hour arrived, but m. villefort was not at table. the
 valet re-entered.
 
“madame villefort wishes to remind you, sir,” said, “that eleven
 o’clock has just struck, and that the trial commences at twelve.”
 
“well,” said villefort, “what then?”
 
“madame villefort is dressed; she is quite ready, and wishes to know
 if she is to accompany you, sir?”
 
“where to?”
 
“to the palais.”
 
“what to do?”
 
“my mistress wishes much to be present at the trial.”
 
“ah,” said villefort, with startling accent; “does she wish that?”
 
the servant drew back and said, “if you wish to go alone, sir, i will
 go and tell my mistress.”
 
villefort remained silent for moment, and dented his pale cheeks with
 his nails.
 
“tell your mistress,” at length answered, “that i wish to speak to
 her, and i beg she will wait for in her own room.”
 
“yes, sir.”
 
“then come to dress and shave me.”
 
“directly, sir.”
 
the valet re-appeared almost instantly, and, having shaved his master,
 assisted him to dress entirely in black. when had finished, said:
 
“my mistress said she should expect you, sir, as soon as you had
 finished dressing.”
 
“i am going to her.”
 
and villefort, with his papers under his arm and hat in hand, directed
 his steps toward the apartment of his wife.
 
at the door paused for moment to wipe his damp, pale brow. then
 entered the room. madame villefort was sitting on an ottoman and
 impatiently turning over the leaves of some newspapers and pamphlets
 which young edward, by way of amusing himself, was tearing to pieces
 before his mother could finish reading them. she was dressed to go out,
 her bonnet was placed beside her on chair, and her gloves were on her
 hands.
 
“ah, here you are, monsieur,” she said in her naturally calm voice;
 “but how pale you are! have you been working all night? why did you not
 come down to breakfast? well, will you take me, or shall i take
 edward?”
 
madame villefort had multiplied her questions in order to gain one
 answer, but to all her inquiries m. villefort remained mute and cold
 as statue.
 
“edward,” said villefort, fixing an imperious glance on the child, “go
 and play in the drawing-room, my dear; i wish to speak to your mamma.”
 
madame villefort shuddered at the sight of that cold countenance,
 that resolute tone, and the awfully strange preliminaries. edward
 raised his head, looked at his mother, and then, finding that she did
 not confirm the order, began cutting off the heads of his leaden
 soldiers.
 
“edward,” cried m. villefort, so harshly that the child started up
 from the floor, “do you hear me?—go!”
 
the child, unaccustomed to such treatment, arose, pale and trembling;
 it would be difficult to say whether his emotion were caused by fear or
 passion. his father went up to him, took him in his arms, and kissed
 his forehead.
 
“go,” said: “go, my child.” edward ran out.
 
m. villefort went to the door, which closed behind the child, and
 bolted.
 
“dear me!” said the young woman, endeavoring to read her husband’s
 inmost thoughts, while smile passed over her countenance which froze
 the impassibility of villefort; “what is the matter?”
 
“madame, where do you keep the poison you generally use?” said the
 magistrate, without any introduction, placing himself between his wife
 and the door.
 
madame villefort must have experienced something of the sensation of
 bird which, looking up, sees the murderous trap closing over its
 head.
 
hoarse, broken tone, which was neither cry nor sigh, escaped from
 her, while she became deadly pale.
 
“monsieur,” she said, “i—i do not understand you.”
 
and, in her first paroxysm of terror, she had raised herself from the
 sofa, in the next, stronger very likely than the other, she fell down
 again on the cushions.
 
“i asked you,” continued villefort, in perfectly calm tone, “where
 you conceal the poison by the aid of which you have killed my
 father-in-law, m. saint-méran, my mother-in-law, madame de
 saint-méran, barrois, and my daughter valentine.”
 
“ah, sir,” exclaimed madame villefort, clasping her hands, “what do
 you say?”
 
“it is not for you to interrogate, but to answer.”
 
“is it to the judge or to the husband?” stammered madame villefort.
 
“to the judge—to the judge, madame!” it was terrible to behold the
 frightful pallor of that woman, the anguish of her look, the trembling
 of her whole frame.
 
“ah, sir,” she muttered, “ah, sir,” and this was all.
 
“you do not answer, madame!” exclaimed the terrible interrogator. then
 added, with smile yet more terrible than his anger, “it is true,
 then; you do not deny it!” she moved forward. “and you cannot deny it!”
 added villefort, extending his hand toward her, as though to seize her
 in the name of justice. “you have accomplished these different crimes
 with impudent address, but which could only deceive those whose
 affections for you blinded them. since the death of madame de
 saint-méran, i have known that poisoner lived in my house. m.
 d’avrigny warned of it. after the death of barrois my suspicions
 were directed towards an angel,—those suspicions which, even when there
 is crime, are always alive in my heart; but after the death of
 valentine, there has been doubt in my mind, madame, and not only in
 mine, but in those of others; thus your crime, known by two persons,
 suspected by many, will soon become public, and, as i told you just
 now, you longer speak to the husband, but to the judge.”
 
50165m
 


the young woman hid her face in her hands.
 
“oh, sir,” she stammered, “i beseech you, do not believe appearances.”
 
“are you, then, coward?” cried villefort, in contemptuous voice.
 “but i have always observed that poisoners were cowards. can you be a
 coward, you, who have had the courage to witness the death of two old
 men and young girl murdered by you?”
 
“sir! sir!”
 
“can you be coward?” continued villefort, with increasing excitement,
 “you, who could count, one by one, the minutes of four death agonies?
 _you_, who have arranged your infernal plans, and removed the beverages
 with talent and precision almost miraculous? have you, then, who have
 calculated everything with such nicety, have you forgotten to calculate
 one thing—i mean where the revelation of your crimes will lead you to?
 oh, it is impossible—you must have saved some surer, more subtle and
 deadly poison than any other, that you might escape the punishment that
 you deserve. you have done this—i hope so, at least.”
 
madame villefort stretched out her hands, and fell on her knees.
 
“i understand,” said, “you confess; but confession made to the
 judges, confession made at the last moment, extorted when the crime
 cannot be denied, diminishes not the punishment inflicted on the
 guilty!”
 
“the punishment?” exclaimed madame villefort, “the punishment,
 monsieur? twice you have pronounced that word!”
 
“certainly. did you hope to escape it because you were four times
 guilty? did you think the punishment would be withheld because you are
 the wife of him who pronounces it?—no, madame, no; the scaffold awaits
 the poisoner, whoever she may be, unless, as i just said, the poisoner
 has taken the precaution of keeping for herself few drops of her
 deadliest poison.”
 
madame villefort uttered wild cry, and hideous and
 uncontrollable terror spread over her distorted features.
 
“oh, do not fear the scaffold, madame,” said the magistrate; “i will
 not dishonor you, since that would be dishonor to myself; no, if you
 have heard distinctly, you will understand that you are not to die
 on the scaffold.”
 
“no, i do not understand; what do you mean?” stammered the unhappy
 woman, completely overwhelmed.
 
“i mean that the wife of the first magistrate in the capital shall not,
 by her infamy, soil an unblemished name; that she shall not, with one
 blow, dishonor her husband and her child.”
 
“no, no—oh, no!”
 
“well, madame, it will be laudable action on your part, and i will
 thank you for it!”
 
“you will thank me—for what?”
 
“for what you have just said.”
 
“what did i say? oh, my brain whirls; i longer understand anything.
 oh, my god, my god!”
 
and she rose, with her hair dishevelled, and her lips foaming.
 
“have you answered the question i put to you on entering the
 room?—where do you keep the poison you generally use, madame?”
 
madame villefort raised her arms to heaven, and convulsively struck
 one hand against the other.
 
“no, no,” she vociferated, “no, you cannot wish that!”
 
50169m
 


“what i do not wish, madame, is that you should perish on the scaffold.
 do you understand?” asked villefort.
 
“oh, mercy, mercy, monsieur!”
 
“what i require is, that justice be done. i am on the earth to punish,
 madame,” added, with flaming glance; “any other woman, were it the
 queen herself, i would send to the executioner; but to you i shall be
 merciful. to you i will say, ‘have you not, madame, put aside some of
 the surest, deadliest, most speedy poison?’”
 
50170m
 


“oh, pardon me, sir; let live!”
 
“she is cowardly,” said villefort.
 
“reflect that i am your wife!”
 
“you are poisoner.”
 
“in the name of heaven!”
 
“no!”
 
“in the name of the love you once bore me!”
 
“no, no!”
 
“in the name of our child! ah, for the sake of our child, let live!”
 
50167m
 


“no, no, no, i tell you; one day, if i allow you to live, you will
 perhaps kill him, as you have the others!”
 
“i?—i kill my boy?” cried the distracted mother, rushing toward
 villefort; “i kill my son? ha, ha, ha!” and frightful, demoniac laugh
 finished the sentence, which was lost in hoarse rattle.
 
madame villefort fell at her husband’s feet. approached her.
 
“think of it, madame,” said; “if, on my return, justice has not been
 satisfied, i will denounce you with my own mouth, and arrest you with
 my own hands!”
 
she listened, panting, overwhelmed, crushed; her eye alone lived, and
 glared horribly.
 
“do you understand me?” said. “i am going down there to pronounce
 the sentence of death against murderer. if i find you alive on my
 return, you shall sleep tonight in the conciergerie.”
 
madame villefort sighed; her nerves gave way, and she sunk on the
 carpet. the king’s attorney seemed to experience sensation of pity;
 looked upon her less severely, and, bowing to her, said slowly:
 
“farewell, madame, farewell!”
 
that farewell struck madame villefort like the executioner’s knife.
 she fainted. the procureur went out, after having double-locked the
 door.
 


chapter 109. the assizes
 
the benedetto affair, as it was called at the palais, and by people in
 general, had produced tremendous sensation. frequenting the café de
 paris, the boulevard gand, and the bois boulogne, during his
 brief career of splendor, the false cavalcanti had formed host of
 acquaintances. the papers had related his various adventures, both as
 the man of fashion and the galley-slave; and as everyone who had been
 personally acquainted with prince andrea cavalcanti experienced a
 lively curiosity in his fate, they all determined to spare trouble
 in endeavoring to witness the trial of m. benedetto for the murder of
 his comrade in chains.
 
in the eyes of many, benedetto appeared, if not victim to, at least
 an instance of, the fallibility of the law. m. cavalcanti, his father,
 had been seen in paris, and it was expected that would re-appear to
 claim the illustrious outcast. many, also, who were not aware of the
 circumstances attending his withdrawal from paris, were struck with the
 worthy appearance, the gentlemanly bearing, and the knowledge of the
 world displayed by the old patrician, who certainly played the nobleman
 very well, so long as said nothing, and made arithmetical
 calculations.
 
as for the accused himself, many remembered him as being so amiable, so
 handsome, and so liberal, that they chose to think him the victim of
 some conspiracy, since in this world large fortunes frequently excite
 the malevolence and jealousy of some unknown enemy.
 
everyone, therefore, ran to the court; some to witness the sight,
 others to comment upon it. from seven o’clock in the morning crowd
 was stationed at the iron gates, and an hour before the trial commenced
 the hall was full of the privileged. before the entrance of the
 magistrates, and indeed frequently afterwards, court of justice, on
 days when some especial trial is to take place, resembles a
 drawing-room where many persons recognize each other and converse if
 they can do so without losing their seats; or, if they are separated by
 too great number of lawyers, communicate by signs.
 
it was one of the magnificent autumn days which make amends for short
 summer; the clouds which m. villefort had perceived at sunrise had
 all disappeared as if by magic, and one of the softest and most
 brilliant days of september shone forth in all its splendor.
 
beauchamp, one of the kings of the press, and therefore claiming the
 right of throne everywhere, was eying everybody through his monocle.
 perceived château-renaud and debray, who had just gained the good
 graces of sergeant-at-arms, and who had persuaded the latter to let
 them stand before, instead of behind him, as they ought to have done.
 the worthy sergeant had recognized the minister’s secretary and the
 millionnaire, and, by way of paying extra attention to his noble
 neighbors, promised to keep their places while they paid visit to
 beauchamp.
 
“well,” said beauchamp, “we shall see our friend!”
 
“yes, indeed!” replied debray. “that worthy prince. deuce take those
 italian princes!”
 
“a man, too, who could boast of dante for genealogist, and could
 reckon back to the _divina comedia_.”
 
“a nobility of the rope!” said château-renaud phlegmatically.
 
“he will be condemned, will not?” asked debray of beauchamp.
 
“my dear fellow, i think we should ask you that question; you know such
 news much better than we do. did you see the president at the
 minister’s last night?”
 
“yes.”
 
“what did say?”
 
“something which will surprise you.”
 
“oh, make haste and tell me, then; it is long time since that has
 happened.”
 
“well, told that benedetto, who is considered serpent of
 subtlety and giant of cunning, is really but very commonplace,
 silly rascal, and altogether unworthy of the experiments that will be
 made on his phrenological organs after his death.”
 
“bah,” said beauchamp, “he played the prince very well.”
 
“yes, for you who detest those unhappy princes, beauchamp, and are
 always delighted to find fault with them; but not for me, who discover
 gentleman by instinct, and who scent out an aristocratic family like
 very bloodhound of heraldry.”
 
“then you never believed in the principality?”
 
“yes.—in the principality, but not in the prince.”
 
“not so bad,” said beauchamp; “still, i assure you, passed very well
 with many people; i saw him at the ministers’ houses.”
 
“ah, yes,” said château-renaud. “the idea of thinking ministers
 understand anything about princes!”
 
“there is something in what you have just said,” said beauchamp,
 laughing.
 
“but,” said debray to beauchamp, “if i spoke to the president, _you_
 must have been with the procureur.”
 
“it was an impossibility; for the last week m. villefort has
 secluded himself. it is natural enough; this strange chain of domestic
 afflictions, followed by the less strange death of his daughter——”
 
“strange? what do you mean, beauchamp?”
 
“oh, yes; do you pretend that all this has been unobserved at the
 minister’s?” said beauchamp, placing his eye-glass in his eye, where he
 tried to make it remain.
 
“my dear sir,” said château-renaud, “allow to tell you that you do
 not understand that manœuvre with the eye-glass half so well as debray.
 give him lesson, debray.”
 
“stay,” said beauchamp, “surely i am not deceived.”
 
“what is it?”
 
“it is she!”
 
“whom do you mean?”
 
“they said she had left.”
 
“mademoiselle eugénie?” said château-renaud; “has she returned?”
 
“no, but her mother.”
 
“madame danglars? nonsense! impossible!” said château-renaud; “only ten
 days after the flight of her daughter, and three days from the
 bankruptcy of her husband?”
 
debray colored slightly, and followed with his eyes the direction of
 beauchamp’s glance.
 
“come,” said, “it is only veiled lady, some foreign princess,
 perhaps the mother of cavalcanti. but you were just speaking on very
 interesting topic, beauchamp.”
 
“i?”
 
“yes; you were telling us about the extraordinary death of valentine.”
 
“ah, yes, so i was. but how is it that madame villefort is not
 here?”
 
“poor, dear woman,” said debray, “she is doubt occupied in
 distilling balm for the hospitals, or in making cosmetics for herself
 or friends. do you know she spends two or three thousand crowns year
 in this amusement? but i wonder she is not here. i should have been
 pleased to see her, for i like her very much.”
 
“and i hate her,” said château-renaud.
 
“why?”
 
“i do not know. why do we love? why do we hate? i detest her, from
 antipathy.”
 
“or, rather, by instinct.”
 
“perhaps so. but to return to what you were saying, beauchamp.”
 
“well, do you know why they die so multitudinously at m. de
 villefort’s?”
 
“‘multitudinously’ is good,” said château-renaud.
 
“my good fellow, you’ll find the word in saint-simon.”
 
“but the thing itself is at m. villefort’s; but let’s get back to
 the subject.”
 
“talking of that,” said debray, “madame was making inquiries about that
 house, which for the last three months has been hung with black.”
 
“who is madame?” asked château-renaud.
 
“the minister’s wife, _pardieu!_”
 
“oh, your pardon! i never visit ministers; i leave that to the
 princes.”
 
“really, you were only before sparkling, but now you are brilliant;
 take compassion on us, or, like jupiter, you will wither us up.”
 
“i will not speak again,” said château-renaud; “pray have compassion
 upon me, and do not take up every word i say.”
 
“come, let us endeavor to get to the end of our story, beauchamp; i
 told you that yesterday madame made inquiries of upon the subject;
 enlighten me, and i will then communicate my information to her.”
 
“well, gentlemen, the reason people die so multitudinously (i like the
 word) at m. villefort’s is that there is an assassin in the house!”
 
the two young men shuddered, for the same idea had more than once
 occurred to them.
 
“and who is the assassin;” they asked together.
 
“young edward!” burst of laughter from the auditors did not in the
 least disconcert the speaker, who continued,—“yes, gentlemen; edward,
 the infant phenomenon, who is quite an adept in the art of killing.”
 
“you are jesting.”
 
“not at all. i yesterday engaged servant, who had just left m. de
 villefort—i intend sending him away tomorrow, for eats so
 enormously, to make up for the fast imposed upon him by his terror in
 that house. well, now listen.”
 
“we are listening.”
 
“it appears the dear child has obtained possession of bottle
 containing some drug, which every now and then uses against those
 who have displeased him. first, m. and madame saint-méran incurred
 his displeasure, so poured out three drops of his elixir—three drops
 were sufficient; then followed barrois, the old servant of m. noirtier,
 who sometimes rebuffed this little wretch—he therefore received the
 same quantity of the elixir; the same happened to valentine, of whom he
 was jealous; gave her the same dose as the others, and all was over
 for her as well as the rest.”
 
“why, what nonsense are you telling us?” said château-renaud.
 
“yes, it is an extraordinary story,” said beauchamp; “is it not?”
 
“it is absurd,” said debray.
 
“ah,” said beauchamp, “you doubt me? well, you can ask my servant, or
 rather him who will longer be my servant tomorrow, it was the talk
 of the house.”
 
“and this elixir, where is it? what is it?”
 
“the child conceals it.”
 
“but where did find it?”
 
“in his mother’s laboratory.”
 
“does his mother then, keep poisons in her laboratory?”
 
“how can i tell? you are questioning like king’s attorney. i only
 repeat what i have been told, and like my informant i can do more.
 the poor devil would eat nothing, from fear.”
 
“it is incredible!”
 
“no, my dear fellow, it is not at all incredible. you saw the child
 pass through the rue richelieu last year, who amused himself with
 killing his brothers and sisters by sticking pins in their ears while
 they slept. the generation who follow us are very precocious.”
 
“come, beauchamp,” said château-renaud, “i will bet anything you do not
 believe word of all you have been telling us. but i do not see the
 count of monte cristo here.”
 
“he is worn out,” said debray; “besides, could not well appear in
 public, since has been the dupe of the cavalcanti, who, it appears,
 presented themselves to him with false letters of credit, and cheated
 him out of 100,000 francs upon the hypothesis of this principality.”
 
“by the way, m. château-renaud,” asked beauchamp, “how is morrel?”
 
“_ma foi_, i have called three times without once seeing him. still,
 his sister did not seem uneasy, and told that though she had not
 seen him for two or three days, she was sure was well.”
 
“ah, now i think of it, the count of monte cristo cannot appear in the
 hall,” said beauchamp.
 
“why not?”
 
“because is an actor in the drama.”
 
“has assassinated anyone, then?”
 
“no, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him. you know that it
 was in leaving his house that m. caderousse was murdered by his
 friend benedetto. you know that the famous waistcoat was found in his
 house, containing the letter which stopped the signature of the
 marriage-contract. do you see the waistcoat? there it is, all
 blood-stained, on the desk, as testimony of the crime.”
 
“ah, very good.”
 
“hush, gentlemen, here is the court; let us go back to our places.”
 
noise was heard in the hall; the sergeant called his two patrons with
 an energetic “hem!” and the door-keeper appearing, called out with that
 shrill voice peculiar to his order, ever since the days of
 beaumarchais:
 
“the court, gentlemen!”
 


chapter 110. the indictment
 
the judges took their places in the midst of the most profound silence;
 the jury took their seats; m. villefort, the object of unusual
 attention, and we had almost said of general admiration, sat in the
 armchair and cast tranquil glance around him. everyone looked with
 astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calm expression
 personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and the aspect of man who
 was stranger to all human emotions excited something very like
 terror.
 
“gendarmes,” said the president, “lead in the accused.”
 
at these words the public attention became more intense, and all eyes
 were turned towards the door through which benedetto was to enter. the
 door soon opened and the accused appeared.
 
the same impression was experienced by all present, and one was
 deceived by the expression of his countenance. his features bore no
 sign of that deep emotion which stops the beating of the heart and
 blanches the cheek. his hands, gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the
 other in the opening of his white waistcoat, were not at all tremulous;
 his eye was calm and even brilliant. scarcely had entered the hall
 when glanced at the whole body of magistrates and assistants; his
 eye rested longer on the president, and still more so on the king’s
 attorney.
 
by the side of andrea was stationed the lawyer who was to conduct his
 defence, and who had been appointed by the court, for andrea disdained
 to pay any attention to those details, to which appeared to attach
 importance. the lawyer was young man with light hair whose face
 expressed hundred times more emotion than that which characterized
 the prisoner.
 
50181m
 


the president called for the indictment, revised as we know, by the
 clever and implacable pen of villefort. during the reading of this,
 which was long, the public attention was continually drawn towards
 andrea, who bore the inspection with spartan unconcern. villefort had
 never been so concise and eloquent. the crime was depicted in the most
 vivid colors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation, a
 review of his life from the earliest period, were set forth with all
 the talent that knowledge of human life could furnish to mind like
 that of the procureur. benedetto was thus forever condemned in public
 opinion before the sentence of the law could be pronounced.
 
andrea paid attention to the successive charges which were brought
 against him. m. villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no
 doubt practiced upon him all the psychological studies was
 accustomed to use, in vain endeavored to make him lower his eyes,
 notwithstanding the depth and profundity of his gaze. at length the
 reading of the indictment was ended.
 
“accused,” said the president, “your name and surname?”
 
andrea arose.
 
“excuse me, mr. president,” said, in clear voice, “but i see you
 are going to adopt course of questions through which i cannot follow
 you. i have an idea, which i will explain by and by, of making an
 exception to the usual form of accusation. allow me, then, if you
 please, to answer in different order, or i will not do so at all.”
 
the astonished president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at
 villefort. the whole assembly manifested great surprise, but andrea
 appeared quite unmoved.
 
“your age?” said the president; “will you answer that question?”
 
“i will answer that question, as well as the rest, mr. president, but
 in its turn.”
 
“your age?” repeated the president.
 
“i am twenty-one years old, or rather i shall be in few days, as i
 was born the night of the 27th of september, 1817.”
 
m. villefort, who was busy taking down some notes, raised his head
 at the mention of this date.
 
“where were you born?” continued the president.
 
“at auteuil, near paris.”
 
m. villefort second time raised his head, looked at benedetto as
 if had been gazing at the head of medusa, and became livid. as for
 benedetto, gracefully wiped his lips with fine cambric
 pocket-handkerchief.
 
“your profession?”
 
“first i was forger,” answered andrea, as calmly as possible; “then i
 became thief, and lately have become an assassin.”
 
murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burst from all parts of the
 assembly. the judges themselves appeared to be stupefied, and the jury
 manifested tokens of disgust for cynicism so unexpected in man of
 fashion. m. villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at
 first pale, had become red and burning; then suddenly arose and
 looked around as though had lost his senses—he wanted air.
 
50183m
 


“are you looking for anything, mr. procureur?” asked benedetto, with
 his most ingratiating smile.
 
m. villefort answered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself down
 again upon his chair.
 
“and now, prisoner, will you consent to tell your name?” said the
 president. “the brutal affectation with which you have enumerated and
 classified your crimes calls for severe reprimand on the part of the
 court, both in the name of morality, and for the respect due to
 humanity. you appear to consider this point of honor, and it may be
 for this reason, that you have delayed acknowledging your name. you
 wished it to be preceded by all these titles.”
 
“it is quite wonderful, mr. president, how entirely you have read my
 thoughts,” said benedetto, in his softest voice and most polite manner.
 “this is, indeed, the reason why i begged you to alter the order of the
 questions.”
 
the public astonishment had reached its height. there was longer any
 deceit or bravado in the manner of the accused. the audience felt that
 startling revelation was to follow this ominous prelude.
 
“well,” said the president; “your name?”
 
“i cannot tell you my name, since i do not know it; but i know my
 father’s, and can tell it to you.”
 
painful giddiness overwhelmed villefort; great drops of acrid sweat
 fell from his face upon the papers which held in his convulsed hand.
 
“repeat your father’s name,” said the president.
 
not whisper, not breath, was heard in that vast assembly; everyone
 waited anxiously.
 
“my father is king’s attorney,” replied andrea calmly.
 
50179m
 


“king’s attorney?” said the president, stupefied, and without noticing
 the agitation which spread over the face of m. villefort; “king’s
 attorney?”
 
“yes; and if you wish to know his name, i will tell it,—he is named
 villefort.”
 
the explosion, which had been so long restrained from feeling of
 respect to the court of justice, now burst forth like thunder from the
 breasts of all present; the court itself did not seek to restrain the
 feelings of the audience. the exclamations, the insults addressed to
 benedetto, who remained perfectly unconcerned, the energetic gestures,
 the movement of the gendarmes, the sneers of the scum of the crowd
 always sure to rise to the surface in case of any disturbance—all this
 lasted five minutes, before the door-keepers and magistrates were able
 to restore silence. in the midst of this tumult the voice of
 the president was heard to exclaim:
 
“are you playing with justice, accused, and do you dare set your
 fellow-citizens an example of disorder which even in these times has
 never been equalled?”
 
several persons hurried up to m. villefort, who sat half bowed over
 in his chair, offering him consolation, encouragement, and
 protestations of zeal and sympathy. order was re-established in the
 hall, except that few people still moved about and whispered to one
 another. lady, it was said, had just fainted; they had supplied her
 with smelling-bottle, and she had recovered. during the scene of
 tumult, andrea had turned his smiling face towards the assembly; then,
 leaning with one hand on the oaken rail of the dock, in the most
 graceful attitude possible, said:
 
“gentlemen, i assure you i had idea of insulting the court, or of
 making useless disturbance in the presence of this honorable
 assembly. they ask my age; i tell it. they ask where i was born; i
 answer. they ask my name, i cannot give it, since my parents abandoned
 me. but though i cannot give my own name, not possessing one, i can
 tell them my father’s. now i repeat, my father is named m. de
 villefort, and i am ready to prove it.”
 
there was an energy, conviction, and sincerity in the manner of the
 young man, which silenced the tumult. all eyes were turned for moment
 towards the procureur, who sat as motionless as though thunderbolt
 had changed him into corpse.
 
“gentlemen,” said andrea, commanding silence by his voice and manner;
 “i owe you the proofs and explanations of what i have said.”
 
“but,” said the irritated president, “you called yourself benedetto,
 declared yourself an orphan, and claimed corsica as your country.”
 
“i said anything i pleased, in order that the solemn declaration i have
 just made should not be withheld, which otherwise would certainly have
 been the case. i now repeat that i was born at auteuil on the night of
 the 27th of september, 1817, and that i am the of the procureur, m.
 villefort. do you wish for any further details? i will give them. i
 was born in no. 28, rue fontaine, in room hung with red damask;
 my father took in his arms, telling my mother i was dead, wrapped me
 in napkin marked with an h and an n, and carried into garden,
 where buried alive.”
 
shudder ran through the assembly when they saw that the confidence of
 the prisoner increased in proportion to the terror of m. villefort.
 
“but how have you become acquainted with all these details?” asked the
 president.
 
“i will tell you, mr. president. man who had sworn vengeance against
 my father, and had long watched his opportunity to kill him, had
 introduced himself that night into the garden in which my father buried
 me. was concealed in thicket; saw my father bury something in
 the ground, and stabbed him; then thinking the deposit might contain
 some treasure turned up the ground, and found still living. the
 man carried to the foundling asylum, where i was registered under
 the number 37. three months afterwards, woman travelled from rogliano
 to paris to fetch me, and having claimed as her son, carried me
 away. thus, you see, though born in paris, i was brought up in
 corsica.”
 
there was moment’s silence, during which one could have fancied the
 hall empty, so profound was the stillness.
 
“proceed,” said the president.
 
“certainly, i might have lived happily amongst those good people, who
 adored me, but my perverse disposition prevailed over the virtues which
 my adopted mother endeavored to instil into my heart. i increased in
 wickedness till i committed crime. one day when i cursed providence for
 making so wicked, and ordaining to such fate, my adopted father
 said to me, ‘do not blaspheme, unhappy child, the crime is that of your
 father, not yours,—of your father, who consigned you to hell if you
 died, and to misery if miracle preserved you alive.’ after that i
 ceased to blaspheme, but i cursed my father. that is why i have uttered
 the words for which you blame me; that is why i have filled this whole
 assembly with horror. if i have committed an additional crime, punish
 me, but if you will allow that ever since the day of my birth my fate
 has been sad, bitter, and lamentable, then pity me.”
 
“but your mother?” asked the president.
 
“my mother thought dead; she is not guilty. i did not even wish to
 know her name, nor do i know it.”
 
just then piercing cry, ending in sob, burst from the centre of the
 crowd, who encircled the lady who had before fainted, and who now fell
 into violent fit of hysterics. she was carried out of the hall, the
 thick veil which concealed her face dropped off, and madame danglars
 was recognized. notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing
 sensation in his ears, and the madness which turned his brain,
 villefort rose as perceived her.
 
“the proofs, the proofs!” said the president; “remember this tissue of
 horrors must be supported by the clearest proofs.”
 
“the proofs?” said benedetto, laughing; “do you want proofs?”
 
“yes.”
 
“well, then, look at m. villefort, and then ask for proofs.”
 
everyone turned towards the procureur, who, unable to bear the
 universal gaze now riveted on him alone, advanced staggering into the
 midst of the tribunal, with his hair dishevelled and his face indented
 with the mark of his nails. the whole assembly uttered long murmur of
 astonishment.
 
“father,” said benedetto, “i am asked for proofs, do you wish to
 give them?”
 
“no, no, it is useless,” stammered m. villefort in hoarse voice;
 “no, it is useless!”
 
“how useless?” cried the president, “what do you mean?”
 
“i mean that i feel it impossible to struggle against this deadly
 weight which crushes me. gentlemen, i know i am in the hands of an
 avenging god! we need proofs; everything relating to this young man
 is true.”
 
dull, gloomy silence, like that which precedes some awful phenomenon
 of nature, pervaded the assembly, who shuddered in dismay.
 
“what, m. villefort,” cried the president, “do you yield to an
 hallucination? what, are you longer in possession of your senses?
 this strange, unexpected, terrible accusation has disordered your
 reason. come, recover.”
 
the procureur dropped his head; his teeth chattered like those of man
 under violent attack of fever, and yet was deadly pale.
 
“i am in possession of all my senses, sir,” said; “my body alone
 suffers, as you may suppose. i acknowledge myself guilty of all the
 young man has brought against me, and from this hour hold myself under
 the authority of the procureur who will succeed me.”
 
and as spoke these words with hoarse, choking voice, staggered
 towards the door, which was mechanically opened by door-keeper. the
 whole assembly were dumb with astonishment at the revelation and
 confession which had produced catastrophe so different from that
 which had been expected during the last fortnight by the parisian
 world.
 
“well,” said beauchamp, “let them now say that drama is unnatural!”
 
“_ma foi!_” said château-renaud, “i would rather end my career like m.
 morcerf; pistol-shot seems quite delightful compared with this
 catastrophe.”
 
“and moreover, it kills,” said beauchamp.
 
“and to think that i had an idea of marrying his daughter,” said
 debray. “she did well to die, poor girl!”
 
“the sitting is adjourned, gentlemen,” said the president; “fresh
 inquiries will be made, and the case will be tried next session by
 another magistrate.”
 
as for andrea, who was calm and more interesting than ever, left the
 hall, escorted by gendarmes, who involuntarily paid him some attention.
 
“well, what do you think of this, my fine fellow?” asked debray of the
 sergeant-at-arms, slipping louis into his hand.
 
“there will be extenuating circumstances,” replied.
 


chapter 111. expiation
 
notwithstanding the density of the crowd, m. villefort saw it open
 before him. there is something so awe-inspiring in great afflictions
 that even in the worst times the first emotion of crowd has generally
 been to sympathize with the sufferer in great catastrophe. many
 people have been assassinated in tumult, but even criminals have
 rarely been insulted during trial. thus villefort passed through the
 mass of spectators and officers of the palais, and withdrew. though he
 had acknowledged his guilt, was protected by his grief. there are
 some situations which men understand by instinct, but which reason is
 powerless to explain; in such cases the greatest poet is who gives
 utterance to the most natural and vehement outburst of sorrow. those
 who hear the bitter cry are as much impressed as if they listened to an
 entire poem, and when the sufferer is sincere they are right in
 regarding his outburst as sublime.
 
it would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which
 villefort left the palais. every pulse beat with feverish excitement,
 every nerve was strained, every vein swollen, and every part of his
 body seemed to suffer distinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his
 agony thousand-fold. made his way along the corridors through
 force of habit; threw aside his magisterial robe, not out of
 deference to etiquette, but because it was an unbearable burden, a
 veritable garb of nessus, insatiate in torture. having staggered as far
 as the rue dauphine, perceived his carriage, awoke his sleeping
 coachman by opening the door himself, threw himself on the cushions,
 and pointed towards the faubourg saint-honoré; the carriage drove on.
 
all the weight of his fallen fortune seemed suddenly to crush him; he
 could not foresee the consequences; could not contemplate the future
 with the indifference of the hardened criminal who merely faces a
 contingency already familiar.
 


god was still in his heart. “god,” murmured, not knowing what he
 said,—“god—god!” behind the event that had overwhelmed him saw the
 hand of god. the carriage rolled rapidly onward. villefort, while
 turning restlessly on the cushions, felt something press against him.
 put out his hand to remove the object; it was fan which madame de
 villefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened recollection
 which darted through his mind like lightning. thought of his wife.
 
50189m
 


“oh!” exclaimed, as though red-hot iron were piercing his heart.
 
during the last hour his own crime had alone been presented to his
 mind; now another object, not less terrible, suddenly presented itself.
 his wife! had just acted the inexorable judge with her, had
 condemned her to death, and she, crushed by remorse, struck with
 terror, covered with the shame inspired by the eloquence of _his_
 irreproachable virtue,—she, poor, weak woman, without help or the
 power of defending herself against his absolute and supreme will,—she
 might at that very moment, perhaps, be preparing to die!
 
an hour had elapsed since her condemnation; at that moment, doubtless,
 she was recalling all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon
 for her sins; perhaps she was even writing letter imploring
 forgiveness from her virtuous husband—a forgiveness she was purchasing
 with her death! villefort again groaned with anguish and despair.
 
“ah,” exclaimed, “that woman became criminal only from associating
 with me! i carried the infection of crime with me, and she has caught
 it as she would the typhus fever, the cholera, the plague! and yet i
 have punished her—i have dared to tell her—_i_ have—‘repent and die!’
 but no, she must not die; she shall live, and with me. we will flee
 from paris and go as far as the earth reaches. i told her of the
 scaffold; oh, heavens, i forgot that it awaits also! how could i
 pronounce that word? yes, we will fly; i will confess all to her,—i
 will tell her daily that i also have committed crime!—oh, what an
 alliance—the tiger and the serpent; worthy wife of such as i am! she
 _must_ live that my infamy may diminish hers.”
 
and villefort dashed open the window in front of the carriage.
 
“faster, faster!” cried, in tone which electrified the coachman.
 the horses, impelled by fear, flew towards the house.
 
“yes, yes,” repeated villefort, as approached his home—“yes, that
 woman must live; she must repent, and educate my son, the sole
 survivor, with the exception of the indestructible old man, of the
 wreck of my house. she loves him; it was for his sake she has committed
 these crimes. we ought never to despair of softening the heart of a
 mother who loves her child. she will repent, and one will know that
 she has been guilty. the events which have taken place in my house,
 though they now occupy the public mind, will be forgotten in time, or
 if, indeed, few enemies should persist in remembering them, why then
 i will add them to my list of crimes. what will it signify if one, two,
 or three more are added? my wife and child shall escape from this gulf,
 carrying treasures with them; she will live and may yet be happy, since
 her child, in whom all her love is centred, will be with her. i shall
 have performed good action, and my heart will be lighter.”
 
and the procureur breathed more freely than had done for some time.
 
50191m
 


the carriage stopped at the door of the house. villefort leaped out of
 the carriage, and saw that his servants were surprised at his early
 return; could read other expression on their features. neither of
 them spoke to him; they merely stood aside to let him pass by, as
 usual, nothing more. as passed by m. noirtier’s room, perceived
 two figures through the half-open door; but experienced curiosity
 to know who was visiting his father; anxiety carried him on further.
 
“come,” said, as ascended the stairs leading to his wife’s room,
 “nothing is changed here.”
 
then closed the door of the landing.
 
“no one must disturb us,” said; “i must speak freely to her, accuse
 myself, and say”—he approached the door, touched the crystal handle,
 which yielded to his hand. “not locked,” cried; “that is well.”
 
and entered the little room in which edward slept; for though the
 child went to school during the day, his mother could not allow him to
 be separated from her at night. with single glance villefort’s eye
 ran through the room.
 
“not here,” said; “doubtless she is in her bedroom.” rushed
 towards the door, found it bolted, and stopped, shuddering.
 
“héloïse!” cried. fancied heard the sound of piece of
 furniture being removed.
 
“héloïse!” repeated.
 
“who is there?” answered the voice of her sought. thought that
 voice more feeble than usual.
 
“open the door!” cried villefort. “open; it is i.”
 
but notwithstanding this request, notwithstanding the tone of anguish
 in which it was uttered, the door remained closed. villefort burst it
 open with violent blow. at the entrance of the room which led to her
 boudoir, madame villefort was standing erect, pale, her features
 contracted, and her eyes glaring horribly.
 
“héloïse, héloïse!” said, “what is the matter? speak!” the young
 woman extended her stiff white hands towards him.
 
“it is done, monsieur,” she said with rattling noise which seemed to
 tear her throat. “what more do you want?” and she fell full length on
 the floor.
 
villefort ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsively clasped a
 crystal bottle with golden stopper. madame villefort was dead.
 villefort, maddened with horror, stepped back to the threshhold of the
 door, fixing his eyes on the corpse.
 
“my son!” exclaimed suddenly, “where is my son?—edward, edward!” and
 rushed out of the room, still crying, “edward, edward!” the name was
 pronounced in such tone of anguish that the servants ran up.
 
“where is my son?” asked villefort; “let him be removed from the house,
 that may not see——”
 
“master edward is not downstairs, sir,” replied the valet.
 
“then must be playing in the garden; go and see.”
 
50193m
 


“no, sir; madame villefort sent for him half an hour ago; went
 into her room, and has not been downstairs since.”
 
cold perspiration burst out on villefort’s brow; his legs trembled,
 and his thoughts flew about madly in his brain like the wheels of a
 disordered watch.
 
“in madame villefort’s room?” murmured and slowly returned, with
 one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other supporting himself
 against the wall. to enter the room must again see the body of his
 unfortunate wife. to call edward must reawaken the echo of that room
 which now appeared like sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the
 silence of the tomb. his tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.
 
“edward!” stammered—“edward!”
 
the child did not answer. where, then, could be, if had entered
 his mother’s room and not since returned? stepped forward. the
 corpse of madame villefort was stretched across the doorway leading
 to the room in which edward must be; those glaring eyes seemed to watch
 over the threshold, and the lips bore the stamp of terrible and
 mysterious irony. through the open door was visible portion of the
 boudoir, containing an upright piano and blue satin couch. villefort
 stepped forward two or three paces, and beheld his child lying—no doubt
 asleep—on the sofa. the unhappy man uttered an exclamation of joy; a
 ray of light seemed to penetrate the abyss of despair and darkness. he
 had only to step over the corpse, enter the boudoir, take the child in
 his arms, and flee far, far away.
 
villefort was longer the civilized man; was tiger hurt unto
 death, gnashing his teeth in his wound. longer feared realities,
 but phantoms. leaped over the corpse as if it had been burning
 brazier. took the child in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called
 him, but the child made response. pressed his burning lips to the
 cheeks, but they were icy cold and pale; felt the stiffened limbs;
 pressed his hand upon the heart, but it longer beat,—the child
 was dead.
 
folded paper fell from edward’s breast. villefort, thunderstruck,
 fell upon his knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled on the
 floor by the side of its mother. picked up the paper, and,
 recognizing his wife’s writing, ran his eyes rapidly over its contents;
 it ran as follows:
 
“you know that i was good mother, since it was for my son’s sake i
 became criminal. good mother cannot depart without her son.”
 
villefort could not believe his eyes,—he could not believe his reason;
 dragged himself towards the child’s body, and examined it as a
 lioness contemplates its dead cub. then piercing cry escaped from his
 breast, and cried,
 
“still the hand of god.”
 
the presence of the two victims alarmed him; could not bear solitude
 shared only by two corpses. until then had been sustained by rage,
 by his strength of mind, by despair, by the supreme agony which led the
 titans to scale the heavens, and ajax to defy the gods. now arose,
 his head bowed beneath the weight of grief, and, shaking his damp,
 dishevelled hair, who had never felt compassion for anyone
 determined to seek his father, that might have someone to whom he
 could relate his misfortunes,—someone by whose side might weep.
 
50195m
 


descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and
 entered noirtier’s room. the old man appeared to be listening
 attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the
 abbé busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual. villefort, perceiving
 the abbé, passed his hand across his brow. the past came to him like
 one of those waves whose wrath foams fiercer than the others.
 
recollected the call had made upon him after the dinner at
 auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on
 the day of valentine’s death.
 
“you here, sir!” exclaimed; “do you, then, never appear but to act
 as an escort to death?”
 
busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement depicted on the
 magistrate’s face, the savage lustre of his eyes, understood that
 the revelation had been made at the assizes; but beyond this was
 ignorant.
 
“i came to pray over the body of your daughter.”
 
“and now why are you here?”
 
“i come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid your debt, and
 that from this moment i will pray to god to forgive you, as i do.”
 
“good heavens!” exclaimed villefort, stepping back fearfully, “surely
 that is not the voice of the abbé busoni!”
 
“no!” the abbé threw off his wig, shook his head, and his hair, no
 longer confined, fell in black masses around his manly face.
 
“it is the face of the count of monte cristo!” exclaimed the procureur,
 with haggard expression.
 
“you are not exactly right, m. procureur; you must go farther back.”
 
“that voice, that voice!—where did i first hear it?”
 
“you heard it for the first time at marseilles, twenty-three years ago,
 the day of your marriage with mademoiselle saint-méran. refer to
 your papers.”
 
“you are not busoni?—you are not monte cristo? oh, heavens! you are,
 then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy! i must have wronged
 you in some way at marseilles. oh, woe to me!”
 
“yes; you are now on the right path,” said the count, crossing his arms
 over his broad chest; “search—search!”
 
“but what have i done to you?” exclaimed villefort, whose mind was
 balancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a
 dream nor reality; “what have i done to you? tell me, then! speak!”
 
“you condemned to horrible, tedious death; you killed my father;
 you deprived of liberty, of love, and happiness.”
 
“who are you, then? who are you?”
 
“i am the spectre of wretch you buried in the dungeons of the château
 d’if. god gave that spectre the form of the count of monte cristo when
 at length issued from his tomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds,
 and led him to you!”
 
“ah, i recognize you—i recognize you!” exclaimed the king’s attorney;
 “you are——”
 
“i am edmond dantès!”
 
“you are edmond dantès,” cried villefort, seizing the count by the
 wrist; “then come here!”
 
and up the stairs dragged monte cristo; who, ignorant of what had
 happened, followed him in astonishment, foreseeing some new
 catastrophe.
 
“there, edmond dantès!” said, pointing to the bodies of his wife and
 child, “see, are you well avenged?”
 
monte cristo became pale at this horrible sight; felt that had
 passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that could longer say,
 “god is for and with me.” with an expression of indescribable anguish
 threw himself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt
 its pulse, and then rushed with him into valentine’s room, of which he
 double-locked the door.
 
“my child,” cried villefort, “he carries away the body of my child! oh,
 curses, woe, death to you!”
 
tried to follow monte cristo; but as though in dream was
 transfixed to the spot,—his eyes glared as though they were starting
 through the sockets; griped the flesh on his chest until his nails
 were stained with blood; the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as
 though they would burst their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain
 with living fire. this lasted several minutes, until the frightful
 overturn of reason was accomplished; then uttering loud cry followed
 by burst of laughter, rushed down the stairs.
 
quarter of an hour afterwards the door of valentine’s room opened,
 and monte cristo reappeared. pale, with dull eye and heavy heart, all
 the noble features of that face, usually so calm and serene, were
 overcast by grief. in his arms held the child, whom skill had
 been able to recall to life. bending on one knee, placed it
 reverently by the side of its mother, with its head upon her breast.
 then, rising, went out, and meeting servant on the stairs, he
 asked:
 
“where is m. villefort?”
 
the servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden. monte cristo
 ran down the steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld
 villefort, encircled by his servants, with spade in his hand, and
 digging the earth with fury.
 
“it is not here!” cried. “it is not here!”
 
50197m
 


and then moved farther on, and began again to dig.
 
monte cristo approached him, and said in low voice, with an
 expression almost humble:
 
“sir, you have indeed lost son; but——”
 
villefort interrupted him; had neither listened nor heard.
 
“oh, i _will_ find it,” cried; “you may pretend is not here, but
 i _will_ find him, though i dig forever!”
 
monte cristo drew back in horror.
 
“oh,” said, “he is mad!” and as though feared that the walls of
 the accursed house would crumble around him, rushed into the street,
 for the first time doubting whether had the right to do as had
 done. “oh, enough of this,—enough of this,” cried; “let save the
 last.” on entering his house, met morrel, who wandered about like a
 ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return to the tomb.
 
“prepare yourself, maximilian,” said with smile; “we leave paris
 tomorrow.”
 
“have you nothing more to do there?” asked morrel.
 
“no,” replied monte cristo; “god grant i may not have done too much
 already.”
 
the next day they indeed left, accompanied only by baptistin. haydée
 had taken away ali, and bertuccio remained with noirtier.
 


chapter 112. the departure
 
the recent events formed the theme of conversation throughout all
 paris. emmanuel and his wife conversed with natural astonishment in
 their little apartment in the rue meslay upon the three successive,
 sudden, and most unexpected catastrophes of morcerf, danglars, and
 villefort. maximilian, who was paying them visit, listened to their
 conversation, or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomed
 state of apathy.
 
“indeed,” said julie, “might we not almost fancy, emmanuel, that those
 people, so rich, so happy but yesterday, had forgotten in their
 prosperity that an evil genius—like the wicked fairies in perrault’s
 stories who present themselves unbidden at wedding or baptism—hovered
 over them, and appeared all at once to revenge himself for their fatal
 neglect?”
 
“what dire misfortune!” said emmanuel, thinking of morcerf and
 danglars.
 
“what dreadful sufferings!” said julie, remembering valentine, but
 whom, with delicacy natural to women, she did not name before her
 brother.
 
“if the supreme being has directed the fatal blow,” said emmanuel, “it
 must be that in his great goodness has perceived nothing in the past
 lives of these people to merit mitigation of their awful punishment.”
 
“do you not form very rash judgment, emmanuel?” said julie. “when my
 father, with pistol in his hand, was once on the point of committing
 suicide, had anyone then said, ‘this man deserves his misery,’ would
 not that person have been deceived?”
 
“yes; but your father was not allowed to fall. being was commissioned
 to arrest the fatal hand of death about to descend on him.”
 
emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound of the bell
 was heard, the well-known signal given by the porter that visitor had
 arrived. nearly at the same instant the door was opened and the count
 of monte cristo appeared on the threshold. the young people uttered a
 cry of joy, while maximilian raised his head, but let it fall again
 immediately.
 
50201m
 


“maximilian,” said the count, without appearing to notice the different
 impressions which his presence produced on the little circle, “i come
 to seek you.”
 
“to seek me?” repeated morrel, as if awakening from dream.
 
“yes,” said monte cristo; “has it not been agreed that i should take
 you with me, and did i not tell you yesterday to prepare for
 departure?”
 
“i am ready,” said maximilian; “i came expressly to wish them
 farewell.”
 
“whither are you going, count?” asked julie.
 
“in the first instance to marseilles, madame.”
 
“to marseilles!” exclaimed the young couple.
 
“yes, and i take your brother with me.”
 
“oh, count.” said julie, “will you restore him to us cured of his
 melancholy?” morrel turned away to conceal the confusion of his
 countenance.
 
“you perceive, then, that is not happy?” said the count.
 
“yes,” replied the young woman; “and fear much that finds our home
 but dull one.”
 
“i will undertake to divert him,” replied the count.
 
“i am ready to accompany you, sir,” said maximilian. “adieu, my kind
 friends! emmanuel—julie—farewell!”
 
“how farewell?” exclaimed julie; “do you leave us thus, so suddenly,
 without any preparations for your journey, without even passport?”
 
“needless delays but increase the grief of parting,” said monte cristo,
 “and maximilian has doubtless provided himself with everything
 requisite; at least, i advised him to do so.”
 
“i have passport, and my clothes are ready packed,” said morrel in
 his tranquil but mournful manner.
 
“good,” said monte cristo, smiling; “in these prompt arrangements we
 recognize the order of well-disciplined soldier.”
 
“and you leave us,” said julie, “at moment’s warning? you do not give
 us day—no, not even an hour before your departure?”
 
“my carriage is at the door, madame, and i must be in rome in five
 days.”
 
“but does maximilian go to rome?” exclaimed emmanuel.
 
“i am going wherever it may please the count to take me,” said morrel,
 with smile full of grief; “i am under his orders for the next month.”
 
“oh, heavens, how strangely expresses himself, count!” said julie.
 
“maximilian goes with _me_,” said the count, in his kindest and most
 persuasive manner; “therefore do not make yourself uneasy on your
 brother’s account.”
 
“once more farewell, my dear sister; emmanuel, adieu!” morrel repeated.
 
“his carelessness and indifference touch to the heart,” said julie.
 “oh, maximilian, maximilian, you are certainly concealing something
 from us.”
 
“pshaw!” said monte cristo, “you will see him return to you gay,
 smiling, and joyful.”
 
maximilian cast look of disdain, almost of anger, on the count.
 
“we must leave you,” said monte cristo.
 
50203m
 


“before you quit us, count,” said julie, “will you permit us to express
 to you all that the other day——”
 
“madame,” interrupted the count, taking her two hands in his, “all that
 you could say in words would never express what i read in your eyes;
 the thoughts of your heart are fully understood by mine. like
 benefactors in romances, i should have left you without seeing you
 again, but that would have been virtue beyond my strength, because i
 am weak and vain man, fond of the tender, kind, and thankful glances
 of my fellow-creatures. on the eve of departure i carry my egotism so
 far as to say, ‘do not forget me, my kind friends, for probably you
 will never see again.’”
 
“never see you again?” exclaimed emmanuel, while two large tears rolled
 down julie’s cheeks, “never behold you again? it is not man, then,
 but some angel that leaves us, and this angel is on the point of
 returning to heaven after having appeared on earth to do good.”
 
“say not so,” quickly returned monte cristo—“say not so, my friends;
 angels never err, celestial beings remain where they wish to be. fate
 is not more powerful than they; it is they who, on the contrary,
 overcome fate. no, emmanuel, i am but man, and your admiration is as
 unmerited as your words are sacrilegious.”
 
and pressing his lips on the hand of julie, who rushed into his arms,
 extended his other hand to emmanuel; then tearing himself from this
 abode of peace and happiness, made sign to maximilian, who
 followed him passively, with the indifference which had been
 perceptible in him ever since the death of valentine had so stunned
 him.
 
“restore my brother to peace and happiness,” whispered julie to monte
 cristo. and the count pressed her hand in reply, as had done eleven
 years before on the staircase leading to morrel’s study.
 
“you still confide, then, in sinbad the sailor?” asked he, smiling.
 
“oh, yes,” was the ready answer.
 
“well, then, sleep in peace, and put your trust in the lord.”
 
as we have before said, the post-chaise was waiting; four powerful
 horses were already pawing the ground with impatience, while ali,
 apparently just arrived from long walk, was standing at the foot of
 the steps, his face bathed in perspiration.
 
“well,” asked the count in arabic, “have you been to see the old man?”
 ali made sign in the affirmative.
 
“and have you placed the letter before him, as i ordered you to do?”
 
the slave respectfully signalized that had.
 
“and what did say, or rather do?” ali placed himself in the light,
 so that his master might see him distinctly, and then imitating in his
 intelligent manner the countenance of the old man, closed his eyes,
 as noirtier was in the custom of doing when saying “yes.”
 
“good; accepts,” said monte cristo. “now let us go.”
 
50205m
 


these words had scarcely escaped him, when the carriage was on its way,
 and the feet of the horses struck shower of sparks from the pavement.
 maximilian settled himself in his corner without uttering word. half
 an hour had passed when the carriage stopped suddenly; the count had
 just pulled the silken check-string, which was fastened to ali’s
 finger. the nubian immediately descended and opened the carriage door.
 it was lovely starlight night—they had just reached the top of the
 hill villejuif, from whence paris appears like sombre tossing its
 millions of phosphoric waves into light—waves indeed more noisy, more
 passionate, more changeable, more furious, more greedy, than those of
 the tempestuous ocean,—waves which never rest as those of the sea
 sometimes do,—waves ever dashing, ever foaming, ever ingulfing what
 falls within their grasp.
 
the count stood alone, and at sign from his hand, the carriage went
 on for short distance. with folded arms, gazed for some time upon
 the great city. when had fixed his piercing look on this modern
 babylon, which equally engages the contemplation of the religious
 enthusiast, the materialist, and the scoffer,—
 
“great city,” murmured he, inclining his head, and joining his hands as
 if in prayer, “less than six months have elapsed since first i entered
 thy gates. i believe that the spirit of god led my steps to thee and
 that also enables to quit thee in triumph; the secret cause of my
 presence within thy walls i have confided alone to him who only has had
 the power to read my heart. god only knows that i retire from thee
 without pride or hatred, but not without many regrets; only knows
 that the power confided to has never been made subservient to my
 personal good or to any useless cause. oh, great city, it is in thy
 palpitating bosom that i have found that which i sought; like patient
 miner, i have dug deep into thy very entrails to root out evil thence.
 now my work is accomplished, my mission is terminated, now thou canst
 neither afford pain nor pleasure. adieu, paris, adieu!”
 
his look wandered over the vast plain like that of some genius of the
 night; passed his hand over his brow, got into the carriage, the
 door was closed on him, and the vehicle quickly disappeared down the
 other side of the hill in whirlwind of dust and noise.
 
ten leagues were passed and not single word was uttered. morrel was
 dreaming, and monte cristo was looking at the dreamer.
 
“morrel,” said the count to him at length, “do you repent having
 followed me?”
 
“no, count; but to leave paris——”
 
“if i thought happiness might await you in paris, morrel, i would have
 left you there.”
 
“valentine reposes within the walls of paris, and to leave paris is
 like losing her second time.”
 
“maximilian,” said the count, “the friends that we have lost do not
 repose in the bosom of the earth, but are buried deep in our hearts,
 and it has been thus ordained that we may always be accompanied by
 them. i have two friends, who in this way never depart from me; the one
 who gave being, and the other who conferred knowledge and
 intelligence on me. their spirits live in me. i consult them when
 doubtful, and if i ever do any good, it is due to their beneficent
 counsels. listen to the voice of your heart, morrel, and ask it whether
 you ought to preserve this melancholy exterior towards me.”
 
“my friend,” said maximilian, “the voice of my heart is very sorrowful,
 and promises nothing but misfortune.”
 
“it is the way of weakened minds to see everything through black
 cloud. the soul forms its own horizons; your soul is darkened, and
 consequently the sky of the future appears stormy and unpromising.”
 
“that may possibly be true,” said maximilian, and again subsided
 into his thoughtful mood.
 
the journey was performed with that marvellous rapidity which the
 unlimited power of the count ever commanded. towns fled from them like
 shadows on their path, and trees shaken by the first winds of autumn
 seemed like giants madly rushing on to meet them, and retreating as
 rapidly when once reached. the following morning they arrived at
 châlons, where the count’s steamboat waited for them. without the loss
 of an instant, the carriage was placed on board and the two travellers
 embarked without delay. the boat was built for speed; her two
 paddle-wheels were like two wings with which she skimmed the water like
 bird.
 
morrel was not insensible to that sensation of delight which is
 generally experienced in passing rapidly through the air, and the wind
 which occasionally raised the hair from his forehead seemed on the
 point of dispelling momentarily the clouds collected there.
 
as the distance increased between the travellers and paris, almost
 superhuman serenity appeared to surround the count; might have been
 taken for an exile about to revisit his native land.
 
ere long marseilles presented herself to view,—marseilles, white,
 fervid, full of life and energy,—marseilles, the younger sister of tyre
 and carthage, the successor to them in the empire of the
 mediterranean,—marseilles, old, yet always young. powerful memories
 were stirred within them by the sight of the round tower, fort
 saint-nicolas, the city hall designed by puget,28 the port with its
 brick quays, where they had both played in childhood, and it was with
 one accord that they stopped on the canebière.
 
vessel was setting sail for algiers, on board of which the bustle
 usually attending departure prevailed. the passengers and their
 relations crowded on the deck, friends taking tender but sorrowful
 leave of each other, some weeping, others noisy in their grief, the
 whole forming spectacle that might be exciting even to those who
 witnessed similar sights daily, but which had power to disturb the
 current of thought that had taken possession of the mind of maximilian
 from the moment had set foot on the broad pavement of the quay.
 
“here,” said he, leaning heavily on the arm of monte cristo,—“here is
 the spot where my father stopped, when the _pharaon_ entered the port;
 it was here that the good old man, whom you saved from death and
 dishonor, threw himself into my arms. i yet feel his warm tears on my
 face, and his were not the only tears shed, for many who witnessed our
 meeting wept also.”
 
monte cristo gently smiled and said,—“i was there;” at the same time
 pointing to the corner of street. as spoke, and in the very
 direction indicated, groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard,
 and woman was seen waving her hand to passenger on board the vessel
 about to sail. monte cristo looked at her with an emotion that must
 have been remarked by morrel had not his eyes been fixed on the vessel.
 
“oh, heavens!” exclaimed morrel, “i do not deceive myself—that young
 man who is waving his hat, that youth in the uniform of lieutenant,
 is albert morcerf!”
 
“yes,” said monte cristo, “i recognized him.”
 
“how so?—you were looking the other way.”
 
50209m
 


the count smiled, as was in the habit of doing when did not want
 to make any reply, and again turned towards the veiled woman, who
 soon disappeared at the corner of the street. turning to his friend:
 
“dear maximilian,” said the count, “have you nothing to do in this
 land?”
 
“i have to weep over the grave of my father,” replied morrel in a
 broken voice.
 
“well, then, go,—wait for there, and i will soon join you.”
 
“you leave me, then?”
 
“yes; i also have pious visit to pay.”
 
morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the count extended to
 him; then with an inexpressibly sorrowful inclination of the head he
 quitted the count and bent his steps to the east of the city. monte
 cristo remained on the same spot until maximilian was out of sight; he
 then walked slowly towards the allées meilhan to seek out small
 house with which our readers were made familiar at the beginning of
 this story.
 
it yet stood, under the shade of the fine avenue of lime-trees, which
 forms one of the most frequent walks of the idlers of marseilles,
 covered by an immense vine, which spreads its aged and blackened
 branches over the stone front, burnt yellow by the ardent sun of the
 south. two stone steps worn away by the friction of many feet led to
 the door, which was made of three planks; the door had never been
 painted or varnished, so great cracks yawned in it during the dry
 season to close again when the rains came on. the house, with all its
 crumbling antiquity and apparent misery, was yet cheerful and
 picturesque, and was the same that old dantès formerly inhabited—the
 only difference being that the old man occupied merely the garret,
 while the whole house was now placed at the command of mercédès by the
 count.
 
the woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so much regret
 entered this house; she had scarcely closed the door after her when
 monte cristo appeared at the corner of street, so that found and
 lost her again almost at the same instant. the worn out steps were old
 acquaintances of his; knew better than anyone else how to open that
 weather-beaten door with the large headed nail which served to raise
 the latch within. entered without knocking, or giving any other
 intimation of his presence, as if had been friend or the master of
 the place. at the end of passage paved with bricks, was little
 garden, bathed in sunshine, and rich in warmth and light. in this
 garden mercédès had found, at the place indicated by the count, the sum
 of money which he, through sense of delicacy, had described as having
 been placed there twenty-four years previously. the trees of the garden
 were easily seen from the steps of the street-door.
 
monte cristo, on stepping into the house, heard sigh that was almost
 deep sob; looked in the direction whence it came, and there under
 an arbor of virginia jessamine,29 with its thick foliage and beautiful
 long purple flowers, saw mercédès seated, with her head bowed, and
 weeping bitterly. she had raised her veil, and with her face hidden by
 her hands was giving free scope to the sighs and tears which had been
 so long restrained by the presence of her son.
 
monte cristo advanced few steps, which were heard on the gravel.
 mercédès raised her head, and uttered cry of terror on beholding a
 man before her.
 
50211m
 


“madame,” said the count, “it is longer in my power to restore you
 to happiness, but i offer you consolation; will you deign to accept it
 as coming from friend?”
 
“i am, indeed, most wretched,” replied mercédès. “alone in the world, i
 had but my son, and has left me!”
 
“he possesses noble heart, madame,” replied the count, “and has
 acted rightly. feels that every man owes tribute to his country;
 some contribute their talents, others their industry; these devote
 their blood, those their nightly labors, to the same cause. had he
 remained with you, his life must have become hateful burden, nor
 would have participated in your griefs. will increase in strength
 and honor by struggling with adversity, which will convert into
 prosperity. leave him to build up the future for you, and i venture to
 say you will confide it to safe hands.”
 
“oh,” replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking her head, “the
 prosperity of which you speak, and which, from the bottom of my heart,
 i pray god in his mercy to grant him, i can never enjoy. the bitter cup
 of adversity has been drained by to the very dregs, and i feel that
 the grave is not far distant. you have acted kindly, count, in bringing
 back to the place where i have enjoyed so much bliss. i ought to
 meet death on the same spot where happiness was once all my own.”
 
“alas,” said monte cristo, “your words sear and embitter my heart, the
 more so as you have every reason to hate me. i have been the cause of
 all your misfortunes; but why do you pity, instead of blaming me? you
 render still more unhappy——”
 
“hate you, blame you—_you_, edmond! hate, reproach, the man that has
 spared my son’s life! for was it not your fatal and sanguinary
 intention to destroy that of whom m. morcerf was so proud? oh,
 look at closely, and discover, if you can, even the semblance of a
 reproach in me.”
 
the count looked up and fixed his eyes on mercédès, who arose partly
 from her seat and extended both her hands towards him.
 
“oh, look at me,” continued she, with feeling of profound melancholy,
 “my eyes longer dazzle by their brilliancy, for the time has long
 fled since i used to smile on edmond dantès, who anxiously looked out
 for from the window of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old
 father. years of grief have created an abyss between those days and the
 present. i neither reproach you nor hate you, my friend. oh, no,
 edmond, it is myself that i blame, myself that i hate! oh, miserable
 creature that i am!” cried she, clasping her hands, and raising her
 eyes to heaven. “i once possessed piety, innocence, and love, the three
 ingredients of the happiness of angels, and now what am i?”
 
monte cristo approached her, and silently took her hand.
 
“no,” said she, withdrawing it gently—“no, my friend, touch not. you
 have spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under your vengeance i
 was the most guilty. they were influenced by hatred, by avarice, and by
 self-love; but i was base, and for want of courage acted against my
 judgment. nay, do not press my hand, edmond; you are thinking, i am
 sure, of some kind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me,
 reserve it for others more worthy of your kindness. see” (and she
 exposed her face completely to view)—“see, misfortune has silvered my
 hair, my eyes have shed so many tears that they are encircled by rim
 of purple, and my brow is wrinkled. you, edmond, on the contrary,—you
 are still young, handsome, dignified; it is because you have had faith;
 because you have had strength, because you have had trust in god, and
 god has sustained you. but as for me, i have been coward; i have
 denied god and has abandoned me.”
 
50213m
 


mercédès burst into tears; her woman’s heart was breaking under its
 load of memories. monte cristo took her hand and imprinted kiss on
 it; but she herself felt that it was kiss of greater warmth than
 would have bestowed on the hand of some marble statue of saint.
 
“it often happens,” continued she, “that first fault destroys the
 prospects of whole life. i believed you dead; why did i survive you?
 what good has it done to mourn for you eternally in the secret
 recesses of my heart?—only to make woman of thirty-nine look like a
 woman of fifty. why, having recognized you, and i the only one to do
 so—why was i able to save my alone? ought i not also to have
 rescued the man that i had accepted for husband, guilty though he
 were? yet i let him die! what do i say? oh, merciful heavens, was i not
 accessory to his death by my supine insensibility, by my contempt for
 him, not remembering, or not willing to remember, that it was for my
 sake had become traitor and perjurer? in what am i benefited by
 accompanying my so far, since i now abandon him, and allow him to
 depart alone to the baneful climate of africa? oh, i have been base,
 cowardly, i tell you; i have abjured my affections, and like all
 renegades i am of evil omen to those who surround me!”
 
“no, mercédès,” said monte cristo, “no; you judge yourself with too
 much severity. you are noble-minded woman, and it was your grief that
 disarmed me. still i was but an agent, led on by an invisible and
 offended deity, who chose not to withhold the fatal blow that i was
 destined to hurl. i take that god to witness, at whose feet i have
 prostrated myself daily for the last ten years, that i would have
 sacrificed my life to you, and with my life the projects that were
 indissolubly linked with it. but—and i say it with some pride,
 mercédès—god needed me, and i lived. examine the past and the present,
 and endeavor to dive into futurity, and then say whether i am not a
 divine instrument. the most dreadful misfortunes, the most frightful
 sufferings, the abandonment of all those who loved me, the persecution
 of those who did not know me, formed the trials of my youth; when
 suddenly, from captivity, solitude, misery, i was restored to light and
 liberty, and became the possessor of fortune so brilliant, so
 unbounded, so unheard-of, that i must have been blind not to be
 conscious that god had endowed with it to work out his own great
 designs. from that time i looked upon this fortune as something
 confided to for particular purpose. not thought was given to a
 life which you once, mercédès, had the power to render blissful; not
 one hour of peaceful calm was mine; but i felt myself driven on like an
 exterminating angel. like adventurous captains about to embark on some
 enterprise full of danger, i laid in my provisions, i loaded my
 weapons, i collected every means of attack and defence; i inured my
 body to the most violent exercises, my soul to the bitterest trials; i
 taught my arm to slay, my eyes to behold excruciating sufferings, and
 my mouth to smile at the most horrid spectacles. good-natured,
 confiding, and forgiving as i had been, i became revengeful, cunning,
 and wicked, or rather, immovable as fate. then i launched out into the
 path that was opened to me. i overcame every obstacle, and reached the
 goal; but woe to those who stood in my pathway!”
 
50215m
 


“enough,” said mercédès; “enough, edmond! believe me, that she who
 alone recognized you has been the only one to comprehend you; and had
 she crossed your path, and you had crushed her like glass, still,
 edmond, still she must have admired you! like the gulf between and
 the past, there is an abyss between you, edmond, and the rest of
 mankind; and i tell you freely that the comparison i draw between you
 and other men will ever be one of my greatest tortures. no, there is
 nothing in the world to resemble you in worth and goodness! but we must
 say farewell, edmond, and let us part.”
 
“before i leave you, mercédès, have you request to make?” said the
 count.
 
“i desire but one thing in this world, edmond,—the happiness of my
 son.”
 
“pray to the almighty to spare his life, and i will take upon myself to
 promote his happiness.”
 
“thank you, edmond.”
 
“but have you request to make for yourself, mercédès?”
 
“for myself i want nothing. i live, as it were, between two graves. one
 is that of edmond dantès, lost to long, long since. had my love!
 that word ill becomes my faded lip now, but it is memory dear to my
 heart, and one that i would not lose for all that the world contains.
 the other grave is that of the man who met his death from the hand of
 edmond dantès. i approve of the deed, but i must pray for the dead.”
 
“your shall be happy, mercédès,” repeated the count.
 
“then i shall enjoy as much happiness as this world can possibly
 confer.”
 
“but what are your intentions?”
 
mercédès smiled sadly.
 
“to say that i shall live here, like the mercédès of other times,
 gaining my bread by labor, would not be true, nor would you believe me.
 i have longer the strength to do anything but to spend my days in
 prayer. however, i shall have occasion to work, for the little sum
 of money buried by you, and which i found in the place you mentioned,
 will be sufficient to maintain me. rumor will probably be busy
 respecting me, my occupations, my manner of living—that will signify
 but little, that concerns god, you, and myself.”
 
“mercédès,” said the count, “i do not say it to blame you, but you made
 an unnecessary sacrifice in relinquishing the whole of the fortune
 amassed by m. morcerf; half of it at least by right belonged to you,
 in virtue of your vigilance and economy.”
 
“i perceive what you are intending to propose to me; but i cannot
 accept it, edmond—my would not permit it.”
 
“nothing shall be done without the full approbation of albert de
 morcerf. i will make myself acquainted with his intentions and will
 submit to them. but if be willing to accept my offers, will you
 oppose them?”
 
“you well know, edmond, that i am longer reasoning creature; i
 have will, unless it be the will never to decide. i have been so
 overwhelmed by the many storms that have broken over my head, that i am
 become passive in the hands of the almighty, like sparrow in the
 talons of an eagle. i live, because it is not ordained for to die.
 if succor be sent to me, i will accept it.”
 
“ah, madame,” said monte cristo, “you should not talk thus! it is not
 so we should evince our resignation to the will of heaven; on the
 contrary, we are all free agents.”
 
“alas!” exclaimed mercédès, “if it were so, if i possessed free-will,
 but without the power to render that will efficacious, it would drive
 to despair.”
 
monte cristo dropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her
 grief.
 
“will you not even say you will see again?” asked.
 
“on the contrary, we shall meet again,” said mercédès, pointing to
 heaven with solemnity. “i tell you so to prove to you that i still
 hope.”
 
and after pressing her own trembling hand upon that of the count,
 mercédès rushed up the stairs and disappeared. monte cristo slowly left
 the house and turned towards the quay. but mercédès did not witness his
 departure, although she was seated at the little window of the room
 which had been occupied by old dantès. her eyes were straining to see
 the ship which was carrying her over the vast sea; but still her
 voice involuntarily murmured softly:
 
“edmond, edmond, edmond!”
 


chapter 113. the past
 
the count departed with sad heart from the house in which had left
 mercédès, probably never to behold her again. since the death of little
 edward great change had taken place in monte cristo. having reached
 the summit of his vengeance by long and tortuous path, saw an
 abyss of doubt yawning before him. more than this, the conversation
 which had just taken place between mercédès and himself had awakened so
 many recollections in his heart that felt it necessary to combat
 with them. man of the count’s temperament could not long indulge in
 that melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys
 superior ones. thought must have made an error in his
 calculations if now found cause to blame himself.
 
“i cannot have deceived myself,” said; “i must look upon the past in
 false light. what!” continued, “can i have been following false
 path?—can the end which i proposed be mistaken end?—can one hour have
 sufficed to prove to an architect that the work upon which founded
 all his hopes was an impossible, if not sacrilegious, undertaking? i
 cannot reconcile myself to this idea—it would madden me. the reason why
 i am now dissatisfied is that i have not clear appreciation of the
 past. the past, like the country through which we walk, becomes
 indistinct as we advance. my position is like that of person wounded
 in dream; feels the wound, though cannot recollect when he
 received it.
 
“come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagant prodigal, thou
 awakened sleeper, thou all-powerful visionary, thou invincible
 millionaire,—once again review thy past life of starvation and
 wretchedness, revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted,
 and where despair received thee. too many diamonds, too much gold and
 splendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which monte cristo seeks
 to behold dantès. hide thy diamonds, bury thy gold, shroud thy
 splendor, exchange riches for poverty, liberty for prison, living
 body for corpse!”
 
as thus reasoned, monte cristo walked down the rue caisserie.
 it was the same through which, twenty-four years ago, had been
 conducted by silent and nocturnal guard; the houses, today so smiling
 and animated, were on that night dark, mute, and closed.
 
“and yet they were the same,” murmured monte cristo, “only now it is
 broad daylight instead of night; it is the sun which brightens the
 place, and makes it appear so cheerful.”
 
proceeded towards the quay by the rue saint-laurent, and advanced to
 the consigne; it was the point where had embarked. pleasure-boat
 with striped awning was going by. monte cristo called the owner, who
 immediately rowed up to him with the eagerness of boatman hoping for
 good fare.
 
the weather was magnificent, and the excursion treat. the sun, red
 and flaming, was sinking into the embrace of the welcoming ocean. the
 sea, smooth as crystal, was now and then disturbed by the leaping of
 fish, which were pursued by some unseen enemy and sought for safety in
 another element; while on the extreme verge of the horizon might be
 seen the fishermen’s boats, white and graceful as the sea-gull, or the
 merchant vessels bound for corsica or spain.
 
but notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formed boats, and
 the golden light in which the whole scene was bathed, the count of
 monte cristo, wrapped in his cloak, could think only of this terrible
 voyage, the details of which were one by one recalled to his memory.
 the solitary light burning at the catalans; that first sight of the
 château d’if, which told him whither they were leading him; the
 struggle with the gendarmes when wished to throw himself overboard;
 his despair when found himself vanquished, and the sensation when
 the muzzle of the carbine touched his forehead—all these were brought
 before him in vivid and frightful reality.
 
like the streams which the heat of the summer has dried up, and which
 after the autumnal storms gradually begin oozing drop by drop, so did
 the count feel his heart gradually fill with the bitterness which
 formerly nearly overwhelmed edmond dantès. clear sky, swift-flitting
 boats, and brilliant sunshine disappeared; the heavens were hung with
 black, and the gigantic structure of the château d’if seemed like the
 phantom of mortal enemy. as they reached the shore, the count
 instinctively shrunk to the extreme end of the boat, and the owner was
 obliged to call out, in his sweetest tone of voice:
 
“sir, we are at the landing.”
 
monte cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the same rock, he
 had been violently dragged by the guards, who forced him to ascend the
 slope at the points of their bayonets. the journey had seemed very long
 to dantès, but monte cristo found it equally short. each stroke of the
 oar seemed to awaken new throng of ideas, which sprang up with the
 flying spray of the sea.
 
50219m
 


there had been prisoners confined in the château d’if since the
 revolution of july; it was only inhabited by guard, kept there for
 the prevention of smuggling. concierge waited at the door to exhibit
 to visitors this monument of curiosity, once scene of terror.
 
the count inquired whether any of the ancient jailers were still there;
 but they had all been pensioned, or had passed on to some other
 employment. the concierge who attended him had only been there since
 1830. visited his own dungeon. again beheld the dull light vainly
 endeavoring to penetrate the narrow opening. his eyes rested upon the
 spot where had stood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed
 the new stones indicated where the breach made by the abbé faria had
 been. monte cristo felt his limbs tremble; seated himself upon log
 of wood.
 
“are there any stories connected with this prison besides the one
 relating to the poisoning of mirabeau?” asked the count; “are there any
 traditions respecting these dismal abodes,—in which it is difficult to
 believe men can ever have imprisoned their fellow-creatures?”
 
“yes, sir; indeed, the jailer antoine told one connected with this
 very dungeon.”
 
monte cristo shuddered; antoine had been his jailer. had almost
 forgotten his name and face, but at the mention of the name recalled
 his person as used to see it, the face encircled by beard, wearing
 the brown jacket, the bunch of keys, the jingling of which still
 seemed to hear. the count turned around, and fancied saw him in the
 corridor, rendered still darker by the torch carried by the concierge.
 
“would you like to hear the story, sir?”
 
“yes; relate it,” said monte cristo, pressing his hand to his heart to
 still its violent beatings; felt afraid of hearing his own history.
 
“this dungeon,” said the concierge, “was, it appears, some time ago
 occupied by very dangerous prisoner, the more so since was full of
 industry. another person was confined in the château at the same time,
 but was not wicked, was only poor mad priest.”
 
“ah, indeed?—mad!” repeated monte cristo; “and what was his mania?”
 
“he offered millions to anyone who would set him at liberty.”
 
monte cristo raised his eyes, but could not see the heavens; there
 was stone veil between him and the firmament. thought that there
 had been less thick veil before the eyes of those to whom faria
 offered the treasures.
 
“could the prisoners see each other?” asked.
 
“oh, no, sir, it was expressly forbidden; but they eluded the vigilance
 of the guards, and made passage from one dungeon to the other.”
 
“and which of them made this passage?”
 
“oh, it must have been the young man, certainly, for was strong and
 industrious, while the abbé was aged and weak; besides, his mind was
 too vacillating to allow him to carry out an idea.”
 
“blind fools!” murmured the count.
 
“however, be that as it may, the young man made tunnel, how or by
 what means one knows; but made it, and there is the evidence yet
 remaining of his work. do you see it?” and the man held the torch to
 the wall.
 
50223m
 


“ah, yes; i see,” said the count, in voice hoarse from emotion.
 
“the result was that the two men communicated with one another; how
 long they did so, nobody knows. one day the old man fell ill and died.
 now guess what the young one did?”
 
“tell me.”
 
“he carried off the corpse, which placed in his own bed with its
 face to the wall; then entered the empty dungeon, closed the
 entrance, and slipped into the sack which had contained the dead body.
 did you ever hear of such an idea?”
 
monte cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again to experience all the
 sensations had felt when the coarse canvas, yet moist with the cold
 dews of death, had touched his face.
 
the jailer continued:
 
“now this was his project. fancied that they buried the dead at the
 château d’if, and imagining they would not expend much labor on the
 grave of prisoner, calculated on raising the earth with his
 shoulders, but unfortunately their arrangements at the château
 frustrated his projects. they never buried the dead; they merely
 attached heavy cannon-ball to the feet, and then threw them into the
 sea. this is what was done. the young man was thrown from the top of
 the rock; the corpse was found on the bed next day, and the whole truth
 was guessed, for the men who performed the office then mentioned what
 they had not dared to speak of before, that at the moment the corpse
 was thrown into the deep, they heard shriek, which was almost
 immediately stifled by the water in which it disappeared.”
 
the count breathed with difficulty; the cold drops ran down his
 forehead, and his heart was full of anguish.
 
“no,” muttered, “the doubt i felt was but the commencement of
 forgetfulness; but here the wound reopens, and the heart again thirsts
 for vengeance. and the prisoner,” continued aloud, “was ever
 heard of afterwards?”
 
“oh, no; of course not. you can understand that one of two things must
 have happened; must either have fallen flat, in which case the blow,
 from height of ninety feet, must have killed him instantly, or he
 must have fallen upright, and then the weight would have dragged him to
 the bottom, where remained—poor fellow!”
 
“then you pity him?” said the count.
 
“_ma foi_, yes; though was in his own element.”
 
“what do you mean?”
 
“the report was that had been naval officer, who had been confined
 for plotting with the bonapartists.”
 
“great is truth,” muttered the count, “fire cannot burn, nor water
 drown it! thus the poor sailor lives in the recollection of those who
 narrate his history; his terrible story is recited in the
 chimney-corner, and shudder is felt at the description of his transit
 through the air to be swallowed by the deep.” then, the count added
 aloud, “was his name ever known?”
 
“oh, yes; but only as no. 34.”
 
“oh, villefort, villefort,” murmured the count, “this scene must often
 have haunted thy sleepless hours!”
 
“do you wish to see anything more, sir?” said the concierge.
 
“yes, especially if you will show the poor abbé’s room.”
 
“ah! no. 27.”
 
“yes; no. 27.” repeated the count, who seemed to hear the voice of the
 abbé answering him in those very words through the wall when asked his
 name.
 
“come, sir.”
 
“wait,” said monte cristo, “i wish to take one final glance around this
 room.”
 
“this is fortunate,” said the guide; “i have forgotten the other key.”
 
“go and fetch it.”
 
“i will leave you the torch, sir.”
 
“no, take it away; i can see in the dark.”
 
“why, you are like no. 34. they said was so accustomed to darkness
 that could see pin in the darkest corner of his dungeon.”
 
“he spent fourteen years to arrive at that,” muttered the count.
 
the guide carried away the torch. the count had spoken correctly.
 scarcely had few seconds elapsed, ere saw everything as distinctly
 as by daylight. then looked around him, and really recognized his
 dungeon.
 
“yes,” said, “there is the stone upon which i used to sit; there is
 the impression made by my shoulders on the wall; there is the mark of
 my blood made when one day i dashed my head against the wall. oh, those
 figures, how well i remember them! i made them one day to calculate the
 age of my father, that i might know whether i should find him still
 living, and that of mercédès, to know if i should find her still free.
 after finishing that calculation, i had minute’s hope. i did not
 reckon upon hunger and infidelity!” and bitter laugh escaped the
 count.
 
saw in fancy the burial of his father, and the marriage of mercédès.
 on the other side of the dungeon perceived an inscription, the white
 letters of which were still visible on the green wall:
 
“‘_oh, god!_’” read, “‘_preserve my memory!_’”
 
“oh, yes,” cried, “that was my only prayer at last; i longer
 begged for liberty, but memory; i dreaded to become mad and forgetful.
 oh, god, thou hast preserved my memory; i thank thee, i thank thee!”
 
at this moment the light of the torch was reflected on the wall; the
 guide was coming; monte cristo went to meet him.
 
“follow me, sir;” and without ascending the stairs the guide conducted
 him by subterraneous passage to another entrance. there, again, monte
 cristo was assailed by multitude of thoughts. the first thing that
 met his eye was the meridian, drawn by the abbé on the wall, by which
 calculated the time; then saw the remains of the bed on which the
 poor prisoner had died. the sight of this, instead of exciting the
 anguish experienced by the count in the dungeon, filled his heart with
 soft and grateful sentiment, and tears fell from his eyes.
 
“this is where the mad abbé was kept, sir, and that is where the young
 man entered;” and the guide pointed to the opening, which had remained
 unclosed. “from the appearance of the stone,” continued, “a learned
 gentleman discovered that the prisoners might have communicated
 together for ten years. poor things! those must have been ten weary
 years.”
 
dantès took some louis from his pocket, and gave them to the man who
 had twice unconsciously pitied him. the guide took them, thinking them
 merely few pieces of little value; but the light of the torch
 revealed their true worth.
 
“sir,” said, “you have made mistake; you have given gold.”
 
“i know it.”
 
the concierge looked upon the count with surprise.
 
“sir,” cried, scarcely able to believe his good fortune—“sir, i
 cannot understand your generosity!”
 
“oh, it is very simple, my good fellow; i have been sailor, and your
 story touched more than it would others.”
 
“then, sir, since you are so liberal, i ought to offer you something.”
 
50227m
 


“what have you to offer to me, my friend? shells? straw-work? thank
 you!”
 
“no, sir, neither of those; something connected with this story.”
 
“really? what is it?”
 
“listen,” said the guide; “i said to myself, ‘something is always left
 in cell inhabited by one prisoner for fifteen years,’ so i began to
 sound the wall.”
 
“ah,” cried monte cristo, remembering the abbé’s two hiding-places.
 
“after some search, i found that the floor gave hollow sound near the
 head of the bed, and at the hearth.”
 
“yes,” said the count, “yes.”
 
“i raised the stones, and found——”
 
“a rope-ladder and some tools?”
 
“how do you know that?” asked the guide in astonishment.
 
“i do not know—i only guess it, because that sort of thing is generally
 found in prisoners’ cells.”
 
“yes, sir, rope-ladder and tools.”
 
“and have you them yet?”
 
“no, sir; i sold them to visitors, who considered them great
 curiosities; but i have still something left.”
 
“what is it?” asked the count, impatiently.
 
“a sort of book, written upon strips of cloth.”
 
“go and fetch it, my good fellow; and if it be what i hope, you will do
 well.”
 
“i will run for it, sir;” and the guide went out.
 
then the count knelt down by the side of the bed, which death had
 converted into an altar.
 
“oh, second father,” exclaimed, “thou who hast given liberty,
 knowledge, riches; thou who, like beings of superior order to
 ourselves, couldst understand the science of good and evil; if in the
 depths of the tomb there still remain something within us which can
 respond to the voice of those who are left on earth; if after death the
 soul ever revisit the places where we have lived and suffered,—then,
 noble heart, sublime soul, then i conjure thee by the paternal love
 thou didst bear me, by the filial obedience i vowed to thee, grant me
 some sign, some revelation! remove from the remains of doubt, which,
 if it change not to conviction, must become remorse!” the count bowed
 his head, and clasped his hands together.
 
“here, sir,” said voice behind him.
 
monte cristo shuddered, and arose. the concierge held out the strips of
 cloth upon which the abbé faria had spread the riches of his mind. the
 manuscript was the great work by the abbé faria upon the kingdoms of
 italy. the count seized it hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the
 epigraph, and read:
 
“thou shalt tear out the dragons’ teeth, and shall trample the lions
 under foot, saith the lord.”
 
“ah,” exclaimed, “here is my answer. thanks, father, thanks.” and
 feeling in his pocket, took thence small pocket-book, which
 contained ten bank-notes, each of 1,000 francs.
 
“here,” said, “take this pocket-book.”
 
“do you give it to me?”
 
“yes; but only on condition that you will not open it till i am gone;”
 and placing in his breast the treasure had just found, which was
 more valuable to him than the richest jewel, rushed out of the
 corridor, and reaching his boat, cried, “to marseilles!”
 
then, as departed, fixed his eyes upon the gloomy prison.
 
“woe,” cried, “to those who confined in that wretched prison; and
 woe to those who forgot that i was there!”
 
50229m
 


as repassed the catalans, the count turned around and burying his
 head in his cloak murmured the name of woman. the victory was
 complete; twice had overcome his doubts. the name pronounced, in
 voice of tenderness, amounting almost to love, was that of haydée.
 
on landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where felt sure
 of finding morrel. he, too, ten years ago, had piously sought out a
 tomb, and sought it vainly. he, who returned to france with millions,
 had been unable to find the grave of his father, who had perished from
 hunger. morrel had indeed placed cross over the spot, but it had
 fallen down and the grave-digger had burnt it, as did all the old
 wood in the churchyard.
 
the worthy merchant had been more fortunate. dying in the arms of his
 children, had been by them laid by the side of his wife, who had
 preceded him in eternity by two years. two large slabs of marble, on
 which were inscribed their names, were placed on either side of a
 little enclosure, railed in, and shaded by four cypress-trees. morrel
 was leaning against one of these, mechanically fixing his eyes on the
 graves. his grief was so profound that was nearly unconscious.
 
50231m
 


“maximilian,” said the count, “you should not look on the graves, but
 there;” and pointed upwards.
 
“the dead are everywhere,” said morrel; “did you not yourself tell me
 so as we left paris?”
 
“maximilian,” said the count, “you asked during the journey to allow
 you to remain some days at marseilles. do you still wish to do so?”
 
“i have wishes, count; only i fancy i could pass the time less
 painfully here than anywhere else.”
 
“so much the better, for i must leave you; but i carry your word with
 me, do i not?”
 
“ah, count, i shall forget it.”
 
“no, you will not forget it, because you are man of honor, morrel,
 because you have taken an oath, and are about to do so again.”
 
“oh, count, have pity upon me. i am so unhappy.”
 
“i have known man much more unfortunate than you, morrel.”
 
“impossible!”
 
“alas,” said monte cristo, “it is the infirmity of our nature always to
 believe ourselves much more unhappy than those who groan by our sides!”
 
“what can be more wretched than the man who has lost all loved and
 desired in the world?”
 
“listen, morrel, and pay attention to what i am about to tell you. i
 knew man who like you had fixed all his hopes of happiness upon a
 woman. was young, had an old father whom loved, betrothed
 bride whom adored. was about to marry her, when one of the
 caprices of fate,—which would almost make us doubt the goodness of
 providence, if that providence did not afterwards reveal itself by
 proving that all is but means of conducting to an end,—one of those
 caprices deprived him of his mistress, of the future of which had
 dreamed (for in his blindness forgot could only read the
 present), and cast him into dungeon.”
 
“ah,” said morrel, “one quits dungeon in week, month, or year.”
 
“he remained there fourteen years, morrel,” said the count, placing his
 hand on the young man’s shoulder. maximilian shuddered.
 
“fourteen years!” muttered.
 
“fourteen years!” repeated the count. “during that time had many
 moments of despair. also, morrel, like you, considered himself the
 unhappiest of men.”
 
“well?” asked morrel.
 
“well, at the height of his despair god assisted him through human
 means. at first, perhaps, did not recognize the infinite mercy of
 the lord, but at last took patience and waited. one day he
 miraculously left the prison, transformed, rich, powerful. his first
 cry was for his father; but that father was dead.”
 
“my father, too, is dead,” said morrel.
 
“yes; but your father died in your arms, happy, respected, rich, and
 full of years; his father died poor, despairing, almost doubtful of
 providence; and when his sought his grave ten years afterwards, his
 tomb had disappeared, and one could say, ‘there sleeps the father
 you so well loved.’”
 
“oh!” exclaimed morrel.
 
“he was, then, more unhappy than you, morrel, for could not
 even find his father’s grave.”
 
“but then had the woman loved still remaining?”
 
“you are deceived, morrel, that woman——”
 
“she was dead?”
 
“worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one of the
 persecutors of her betrothed. you see, then, morrel, that was more
 unhappy lover than you.”
 
“and has found consolation?”
 
“he has at least found peace.”
 
“and does ever expect to be happy?”
 
“he hopes so, maximilian.”
 
the young man’s head fell on his breast.
 
“you have my promise,” said, after minute’s pause, extending his
 hand to monte cristo. “only remember——”
 
“on the 5th of october, morrel, i shall expect you at the island of
 monte cristo. on the 4th yacht will wait for you in the port of
 bastia, it will be called the _eurus_. you will give your name to the
 captain, who will bring you to me. it is understood—is it not?”
 
“but, count, do you remember that the 5th of october——”
 
“child,” replied the count, “not to know the value of man’s word! i
 have told you twenty times that if you wish to die on that day, i will
 assist you. morrel, farewell!”
 
“do you leave me?”
 
“yes; i have business in italy. i leave you alone in your struggle with
 misfortune—alone with that strong-winged eagle which god sends to bear
 aloft the elect to his feet. the story of ganymede, maximilian, is not
 fable, but an allegory.”
 
“when do you leave?”
 
“immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour i shall be far from
 you. will you accompany to the harbor, maximilian?”
 
50233m
 


“i am entirely yours, count.”
 
morrel accompanied the count to the harbor. the white steam was
 ascending like plume of feathers from the black chimney. the steamer
 soon disappeared, and in an hour afterwards, as the count had said, was
 scarcely distinguishable in the horizon amidst the fogs of the night.
 


chapter 114. peppino
 
at the same time that the steamer disappeared behind cape morgiou, a
 man travelling post on the road from florence to rome had just passed
 the little town of aquapendente. was travelling fast enough to cover
 great deal of ground without exciting suspicion. this man was dressed
 in greatcoat, or rather surtout, little worse for the journey,
 but which exhibited the ribbon of the legion of honor still fresh and
 brilliant, decoration which also ornamented the under coat. might
 be recognized, not only by these signs, but also from the accent with
 which spoke to the postilion, as frenchman.
 
another proof that was native of the universal country was
 apparent in the fact of his knowing other italian words than the
 terms used in music, and which like the “goddam” of figaro, served all
 possible linguistic requirements. “_allegro!_” called out to the
 postilions at every ascent. “_moderato!_” cried as they descended.
 and heaven knows there are hills enough between rome and florence by
 the way of aquapendente! these two words greatly amused the men to whom
 they were addressed. on reaching storta, the point from whence rome
 is first visible, the traveller evinced none of the enthusiastic
 curiosity which usually leads strangers to stand up and endeavor to
 catch sight of the dome of saint peter’s, which may be seen long before
 any other object is distinguishable. no, merely drew pocketbook
 from his pocket, and took from it paper folded in four, and after
 having examined it in manner almost reverential, said:
 
“good! i have it still!”
 
50235m
 


the carriage entered by the porta popolo, turned to the left, and
 stopped at the hôtel d’espagne. old pastrini, our former acquaintance,
 received the traveller at the door, hat in hand. the traveller
 alighted, ordered good dinner, and inquired the address of the house
 of thomson & french, which was immediately given to him, as it was one
 of the most celebrated in rome. it was situated in the via dei banchi,
 near st. peter’s.
 
in rome, as everywhere else, the arrival of post-chaise is an event.
 ten young descendants of marius and the gracchi, barefooted and out at
 elbows, with one hand resting on the hip and the other gracefully
 curved above the head, stared at the traveller, the post-chaise, and
 the horses; to these were added about fifty little vagabonds from the
 papal states, who earned pittance by diving into the tiber at high
 water from the bridge of st. angelo. now, as these street arabs of
 rome, more fortunate than those of paris, understand every language,
 more especially the french, they heard the traveller order an
 apartment, dinner, and finally inquire the way to the house of
 thomson & french.
 
the result was that when the new-comer left the hotel with the
 _cicerone_, man detached himself from the rest of the idlers, and
 without having been seen by the traveller, and appearing to excite no
 attention from the guide, followed the stranger with as much skill as a
 parisian police agent would have used.
 
the frenchman had been so impatient to reach the house of thomson &
 french that would not wait for the horses to be harnessed, but left
 word for the carriage to overtake him on the road, or to wait for him
 at the bankers’ door. reached it before the carriage arrived. the
 frenchman entered, leaving in the anteroom his guide, who immediately
 entered into conversation with two or three of the industrious idlers
 who are always to be found in rome at the doors of banking-houses,
 churches, museums, or theatres. with the frenchman, the man who had
 followed him entered too; the frenchman knocked at the inner door, and
 entered the first room; his shadow did the same.
 
“messrs. thomson & french?” inquired the stranger.
 
an attendant arose at sign from confidential clerk at the first
 desk.
 
“whom shall i announce?” said the attendant.
 
“baron danglars.”
 
“follow me,” said the man.
 
door opened, through which the attendant and the baron disappeared.
 the man who had followed danglars sat down on bench. the clerk
 continued to write for the next five minutes; the man preserved
 profound silence, and remained perfectly motionless. then the pen of
 the clerk ceased to move over the paper; raised his head, and
 appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy:
 
“ah, ha,” said, “here you are, peppino!”
 
“yes,” was the laconic reply. “you have found out that there is
 something worth having about this large gentleman?”
 
“there is great merit due to me, for we were informed of it.”
 
“you know his business here, then.”
 
“_pardieu_, has come to draw, but i don’t know how much!”
 
“you will know presently, my friend.”
 
“very well, only do not give false information as you did the other
 day.”
 
“what do you mean?—of whom do you speak? was it the englishman who
 carried off 3,000 crowns from here the other day?”
 
50237m
 


“no; really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them. i mean the russian
 prince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and we only found 22,000.”
 
“you must have searched badly.”
 
“luigi vampa himself searched.”
 
“in that case must either have paid his debts——”
 
“a russian do that?”
 
“or spent the money?”
 
“possibly, after all.”
 
“certainly. but you must let make my observations, or the frenchman
 will transact his business without my knowing the sum.”
 
peppino nodded, and taking rosary from his pocket began to mutter a
 few prayers while the clerk disappeared through the same door by which
 danglars and the attendant had gone out. at the expiration of ten
 minutes the clerk returned with beaming countenance.
 
“well?” asked peppino of his friend.
 
“joy, joy—the sum is large!”
 
“five or six millions, is it not?”
 
“yes, you know the amount.”
 
“on the receipt of the count of monte cristo?”
 
“why, how came you to be so well acquainted with all this?”
 
“i told you we were informed beforehand.”
 
“then why do you apply to me?”
 
“that i may be sure i have the right man.”
 
“yes, it is indeed he. five millions—a pretty sum, eh, peppino?”
 
“hush—here is our man!” the clerk seized his pen, and peppino his
 beads; one was writing and the other praying when the door opened.
 danglars looked radiant with joy; the banker accompanied him to the
 door. peppino followed danglars.
 
according to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at the door.
 the guide held the door open. guides are useful people, who will turn
 their hands to anything. danglars leaped into the carriage like young
 man of twenty. the _cicerone_ reclosed the door, and sprang up by the
 side of the coachman. peppino mounted the seat behind.
 
“will your excellency visit saint peter’s?” asked the _cicerone_.
 
“i did not come to rome to see,” said danglars aloud; then added
 softly, with an avaricious smile, “i came to touch!” and rapped his
 pocket-book, in which had just placed letter.
 
“then your excellency is going——”
 
“to the hotel.”
 
“casa pastrini!” said the _cicerone_ to the coachman, and the carriage
 drove rapidly on.
 
50239m
 


ten minutes afterwards the baron entered his apartment, and peppino
 stationed himself on the bench outside the door of the hotel, after
 having whispered something in the ear of one of the descendants of
 marius and the gracchi whom we noticed at the beginning of the chapter,
 who immediately ran down the road leading to the capitol at his fullest
 speed. danglars was tired and sleepy; therefore went to bed, placing
 his pocketbook under his pillow. peppino had little spare time, so he
 had game of _morra_ with the facchini, lost three crowns, and then to
 console himself drank bottle of orvieto.
 
the next morning danglars awoke late, though went to bed so early;
 had not slept well for five or six nights, even if had slept at
 all. breakfasted heartily, and caring little, as said, for the
 beauties of the eternal city, ordered post-horses at noon. but danglars
 had not reckoned upon the formalities of the police and the idleness of
 the posting-master. the horses only arrived at two o’clock, and the
 _cicerone_ did not bring the passport till three.
 
all these preparations had collected number of idlers round the door
 of signor pastrini’s; the descendants of marius and the gracchi were
 also not wanting. the baron walked triumphantly through the crowd, who
 for the sake of gain styled him “your excellency.” as danglars had
 hitherto contented himself with being called baron, felt rather
 flattered at the title of excellency, and distributed dozen silver
 coins among the beggars, who were ready, for twelve more, to call him
 “your highness.”
 
“which road?” asked the postilion in italian.
 
“the ancona road,” replied the baron. signor pastrini interpreted the
 question and answer, and the horses galloped off.
 
danglars intended travelling to venice, where would receive one part
 of his fortune, and then proceeding to vienna, where would find the
 rest, meant to take up his residence in the latter town, which he
 had been told was city of pleasure.
 
had scarcely advanced three leagues out of rome when daylight began
 to disappear. danglars had not intended starting so late, or would
 have remained; put his head out and asked the postilion how long it
 would be before they reached the next town. “_non capisco_” (do not
 understand), was the reply. danglars bent his head, which meant to
 imply, “very well.” the carriage again moved on.
 
“i will stop at the first posting-house,” said danglars to himself.
 
still felt the same self-satisfaction which had experienced the
 previous evening, and which had procured him so good night’s rest. he
 was luxuriously stretched in good english calash, with double
 springs; was drawn by four good horses, at full gallop; knew the
 relay to be at distance of seven leagues. what subject of meditation
 could present itself to the banker, so fortunately become bankrupt?
 
danglars thought for ten minutes about his wife in paris; another ten
 minutes about his daughter travelling with mademoiselle d’armilly; the
 same period was given to his creditors, and the manner in which he
 intended spending their money; and then, having subject left for
 contemplation, shut his eyes, and fell asleep. now and then jolt
 more violent than the rest caused him to open his eyes; then felt
 that was still being carried with great rapidity over the same
 country, thickly strewn with broken aqueducts, which looked like
 granite giants petrified while running race. but the night was cold,
 dull, and rainy, and it was much more pleasant for traveller to
 remain in the warm carriage than to put his head out of the window to
 make inquiries of postilion whose only answer was “_non capisco_.”
 
50241m
 


danglars therefore continued to sleep, saying to himself that would
 be sure to awake at the posting-house. the carriage stopped. danglars
 fancied that they had reached the long-desired point; opened his
 eyes and looked through the window, expecting to find himself in the
 midst of some town, or at least village; but saw nothing except what
 seemed like ruin, where three or four men went and came like shadows.
 
danglars waited moment, expecting the postilion to come and demand
 payment with the termination of his stage. intended taking advantage
 of the opportunity to make fresh inquiries of the new conductor; but
 the horses were unharnessed, and others put in their places, without
 anyone claiming money from the traveller. danglars, astonished, opened
 the door; but strong hand pushed him back, and the carriage rolled
 on. the baron was completely roused.
 
“eh?” said to the postilion, “eh, _mio caro?_”
 
this was another little piece of italian the baron had learned from
 hearing his daughter sing italian duets with cavalcanti. but _mio caro_
 did not reply. danglars then opened the window.
 
“come, my friend,” said, thrusting his hand through the opening,
 “where are we going?”
 
“_dentro testa!_” answered solemn and imperious voice, accompanied
 by menacing gesture.
 
danglars thought _dentro testa_ meant, “put in your head!” was
 making rapid progress in italian. obeyed, not without some
 uneasiness, which, momentarily increasing, caused his mind, instead of
 being as unoccupied as it was when began his journey, to fill with
 ideas which were very likely to keep traveller awake, more especially
 one in such situation as danglars. his eyes acquired that quality
 which in the first moment of strong emotion enables them to see
 distinctly, and which afterwards fails from being too much taxed.
 before we are alarmed, we see correctly; when we are alarmed, we see
 double; and when we have been alarmed, we see nothing but trouble.
 danglars observed man in cloak galloping at the right hand of the
 carriage.
 
“some gendarme!” exclaimed. “can i have been intercepted by french
 telegrams to the pontifical authorities?”
 
resolved to end his anxiety. “where are you taking me?” asked.
 
“_dentro testa_,” replied the same voice, with the same menacing
 accent.
 
danglars turned to the left; another man on horseback was galloping on
 that side.
 
“decidedly,” said danglars, with the perspiration on his forehead, “i
 must be under arrest.” and threw himself back in the calash, not
 this time to sleep, but to think.
 
directly afterwards the moon rose. then saw the great aqueducts,
 those stone phantoms which had before remarked, only then they were
 on the right hand, now they were on the left. understood that they
 had described circle, and were bringing him back to rome.
 
“oh, unfortunate!” cried, “they must have obtained my arrest.”
 
the carriage continued to roll on with frightful speed. an hour of
 terror elapsed, for every spot they passed showed that they were on the
 road back. at length saw dark mass, against which it seemed as if
 the carriage was about to dash; but the vehicle turned to one side,
 leaving the barrier behind and danglars saw that it was one of the
 ramparts encircling rome.
 
50243m
 


“_mon dieu!_” cried danglars, “we are not returning to rome; then it is
 not justice which is pursuing me! gracious heavens; another idea
 presents itself—what if they should be——”
 
his hair stood on end. remembered those interesting stories, so
 little believed in paris, respecting roman bandits; remembered the
 adventures that albert morcerf had related when it was intended that
 should marry mademoiselle eugénie. “they are robbers, perhaps,” he
 muttered.
 
just then the carriage rolled on something harder than gravel road.
 danglars hazarded look on both sides of the road, and perceived
 monuments of singular form, and his mind now recalled all the details
 morcerf had related, and comparing them with his own situation, felt
 sure that must be on the appian way. on the left, in sort of
 valley, perceived circular excavation. it was caracalla’s circus.
 on word from the man who rode at the side of the carriage, it
 stopped. at the same time the door was opened. “_scendi!_” exclaimed a
 commanding voice.
 
danglars instantly descended; although did not yet speak italian, he
 understood it very well. more dead than alive, looked around him.
 four men surrounded him, besides the postilion.
 
“_di quà_,” said one of the men, descending little path leading out
 of the appian way. danglars followed his guide without opposition, and
 had occasion to turn around to see whether the three others were
 following him. still it appeared as though they were stationed at equal
 distances from one another, like sentinels. after walking for about ten
 minutes, during which danglars did not exchange single word with his
 guide, found himself between hillock and clump of high weeds;
 three men, standing silent, formed triangle, of which was the
 centre. wished to speak, but his tongue refused to move.
 
“_avanti!_” said the same sharp and imperative voice.
 
this time danglars had double reason to understand, for if the word and
 gesture had not explained the speaker’s meaning, it was clearly
 expressed by the man walking behind him, who pushed him so rudely that
 struck against the guide. this guide was our friend peppino, who
 dashed into the thicket of high weeds, through path which none but
 lizards or polecats could have imagined to be an open road.
 
peppino stopped before rock overhung by thick hedges; the rock, half
 open, afforded passage to the young man, who disappeared like the
 evil spirits in the fairy tales. the voice and gesture of the man who
 followed danglars ordered him to do the same. there was longer any
 doubt, the bankrupt was in the hands of roman banditti. danglars
 acquitted himself like man placed between two dangerous positions,
 and who is rendered brave by fear. notwithstanding his large stomach,
 certainly not intended to penetrate the fissures of the campagna, he
 slid down like peppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet. as he
 touched the ground, opened his eyes.
 
50245m
 


the path was wide, but dark. peppino, who cared little for being
 recognized now that was in his own territories, struck light and
 lit torch. two other men descended after danglars forming the
 rearguard, and pushing danglars whenever happened to stop, they came
 by gentle declivity to the intersection of two corridors. the walls
 were hollowed out in sepulchres, one above the other, and which seemed
 in contrast with the white stones to open their large dark eyes, like
 those which we see on the faces of the dead. sentinel struck the
 rings of his carbine against his left hand.
 
“who comes there?” cried.
 
“a friend, friend!” said peppino; “but where is the captain?”
 
“there,” said the sentinel, pointing over his shoulder to spacious
 crypt, hollowed out of the rock, the lights from which shone into the
 passage through the large arched openings.
 
“fine spoil, captain, fine spoil!” said peppino in italian, and taking
 danglars by the collar of his coat dragged him to an opening
 resembling door, through which they entered the apartment which the
 captain appeared to have made his dwelling-place.
 
“is this the man?” asked the captain, who was attentively reading
 plutarch’s _life of alexander_.
 
“himself, captain—himself.”
 
“very well, show him to me.”
 
at this rather impertinent order, peppino raised his torch to the face
 of danglars, who hastily withdrew that might not have his eyelashes
 burnt. his agitated features presented the appearance of pale and
 hideous terror.
 
“the man is tired,” said the captain, “conduct him to his bed.”
 
“oh,” murmured danglars, “that bed is probably one of the coffins
 hollowed in the wall, and the sleep i shall enjoy will be death from
 one of the poniards i see glistening in the darkness.”
 
from their beds of dried leaves or wolf-skins at the back of the
 chamber now arose the companions of the man who had been found by
 albert morcerf reading _cæsar’s commentaries_, and by danglars
 studying the _life of alexander_. the banker uttered groan and
 followed his guide; neither supplicated nor exclaimed. longer
 possessed strength, will, power, or feeling; followed where they led
 him. at length found himself at the foot of staircase, and he
 mechanically lifted his foot five or six times. then low door was
 opened before him, and bending his head to avoid striking his forehead
 entered small room cut out of the rock. the cell was clean, though
 empty, and dry, though situated at an immeasurable distance under the
 earth. bed of dried grass covered with goat-skins was placed in one
 corner. danglars brightened up on beholding it, fancying that it gave
 some promise of safety.
 
“oh, god be praised,” said; “it is real bed!”
 
this was the second time within the hour that had invoked the name
 of god. had not done so for ten years before.
 
“_ecco!_” said the guide, and pushing danglars into the cell, closed
 the door upon him.
 
bolt grated and danglars was prisoner. if there had been bolt,
 it would have been impossible for him to pass through the midst of the
 garrison who held the catacombs of st. sebastian, encamped round a
 master whom our readers must have recognized as the famous luigi vampa.
 
danglars, too, had recognized the bandit, whose existence would not
 believe when albert morcerf mentioned him in paris; and not only did
 recognize him, but the cell in which albert had been confined, and
 which was probably kept for the accommodation of strangers. these
 recollections were dwelt upon with some pleasure by danglars, and
 restored him to some degree of tranquillity. since the bandits had not
 despatched him at once, felt that they would not kill him at all.
 they had arrested him for the purpose of robbery, and as had only a
 few louis about him, doubted not would be ransomed.
 
remembered that morcerf had been taxed at 4,000 crowns, and as he
 considered himself of much greater importance than morcerf fixed his
 own price at 8,000 crowns. eight thousand crowns amounted to 48,000
 livres; would then have about 5,050,000 francs left. with this sum
 could manage to keep out of difficulties. therefore, tolerably
 secure in being able to extricate himself from his position, provided
 were not rated at the unreasonable sum of 5,050,000 francs, he
 stretched himself on his bed, and after turning over two or three
 times, fell asleep with the tranquillity of the hero whose life luigi
 vampa was studying.
 


chapter 115. luigi vampa’s bill of fare
 
we awake from every sleep except the one dreaded by danglars. awoke.
 to parisian accustomed to silken curtains, walls hung with velvet
 drapery, and the soft perfume of burning wood, the white smoke of which
 diffuses itself in graceful curves around the room, the appearance of
 the whitewashed cell which greeted his eyes on awakening seemed like
 the continuation of some disagreeable dream. but in such situation a
 single moment suffices to change the strongest doubt into certainty.
 
“yes, yes,” murmured, “i am in the hands of the brigands of whom
 albert morcerf spoke.” his first idea was to breathe, that might
 know whether was wounded. borrowed this from _don quixote_, the
 only book had ever read, but which still slightly remembered.
 
“no,” cried, “they have not wounded, but perhaps they have robbed
 me!” and thrust his hands into his pockets. they were untouched; the
 hundred louis had reserved for his journey from rome to venice were
 in his trousers pocket, and in that of his greatcoat found the
 little note-case containing his letter of credit for 5,050,000 francs.
 
“singular bandits!” exclaimed; “they have left my purse and
 pocket-book. as i was saying last night, they intend to be ransomed.
 hello, here is my watch! let see what time it is.”
 
danglars’ watch, one of breguet’s repeaters, which had carefully
 wound up on the previous night, struck half past five. without this,
 danglars would have been quite ignorant of the time, for daylight did
 not reach his cell. should demand an explanation from the bandits,
 or should wait patiently for them to propose it? the last
 alternative seemed the most prudent, so waited until twelve o’clock.
 during all this time sentinel, who had been relieved at eight
 o’clock, had been watching his door.
 
50249m
 


danglars suddenly felt strong inclination to see the person who kept
 watch over him. had noticed that few rays, not of daylight, but
 from lamp, penetrated through the ill-joined planks of the door; he
 approached just as the brigand was refreshing himself with mouthful
 of brandy, which, owing to the leathern bottle containing it, sent
 forth an odor which was extremely unpleasant to danglars. “faugh!” he
 exclaimed, retreating to the farther corner of his cell.
 
at twelve this man was replaced by another functionary, and danglars,
 wishing to catch sight of his new guardian, approached the door again.
 
was an athletic, gigantic bandit, with large eyes, thick lips, and a
 flat nose; his red hair fell in dishevelled masses like snakes around
 his shoulders.
 
“ah, ha,” cried danglars, “this fellow is more like an ogre than
 anything else; however, i am rather too old and tough to be very good
 eating!”
 
we see that danglars was collected enough to jest; at the same time, as
 though to disprove the ogreish propensities, the man took some black
 bread, cheese, and onions from his wallet, which began devouring
 voraciously.
 
“may i be hanged,” said danglars, glancing at the bandit’s dinner
 through the crevices of the door,—“may i be hanged if i can understand
 how people can eat such filth!” and withdrew to seat himself upon
 his goat-skin, which reminded him of the smell of the brandy.
 
but the mysteries of nature are incomprehensible, and there are certain
 invitations contained in even the coarsest food which appeal very
 irresistibly to fasting stomach. danglars felt his own not to be very
 well supplied just then, and gradually the man appeared less ugly, the
 bread less black, and the cheese more fresh, while those dreadful
 vulgar onions recalled to his mind certain sauces and side-dishes,
 which his cook prepared in very superior manner whenever said,
 “monsieur deniseau, let have nice little fricassee today.” got
 up and knocked on the door; the bandit raised his head. danglars knew
 that was heard, so redoubled his blows.
 
“_che cosa?_” asked the bandit.
 
“come, come,” said danglars, tapping his fingers against the door, “i
 think it is quite time to think of giving something to eat!”
 
but whether did not understand him, or whether had received no
 orders respecting the nourishment of danglars, the giant, without
 answering, went on with his dinner. danglars’ feelings were hurt, and
 not wishing to put himself under obligations to the brute, the banker
 threw himself down again on his goat-skin and did not breathe another
 word.
 
four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by another bandit.
 danglars, who really began to experience sundry gnawings at the
 stomach, arose softly, again applied his eye to the crack of the door,
 and recognized the intelligent countenance of his guide. it was,
 indeed, peppino who was preparing to mount guard as comfortably as
 possible by seating himself opposite to the door, and placing between
 his legs an earthen pan, containing chick-peas stewed with bacon. near
 the pan also placed pretty little basket of villetri grapes and a
 flask of orvieto. peppino was decidedly an epicure. danglars watched
 these preparations and his mouth watered.
 
“come,” said to himself, “let try if will be more tractable
 than the other;” and tapped gently at the door.
 
“_on va_,” (coming) exclaimed peppino, who from frequenting the house
 of signor pastrini understood french perfectly in all its idioms.
 
danglars immediately recognized him as the man who had called out in
 such furious manner, “put in your head!” but this was not the time
 for recrimination, so assumed his most agreeable manner and said
 with gracious smile:
 
“excuse me, sir, but are they not going to give any dinner?”
 
“does your excellency happen to be hungry?”
 
“happen to be hungry,—that’s pretty good, when i haven’t eaten for
 twenty-four hours!” muttered danglars. then added aloud, “yes, sir,
 i am hungry—very hungry.”
 
“and your excellency wants something to eat?”
 
“at once, if possible”
 
“nothing easier,” said peppino. “here you can get anything you want; by
 paying for it, of course, as among honest folk.”
 
“of course!” cried danglars. “although, in justice, the people who
 arrest and imprison you, ought, at least, to feed you.”
 
“that is not the custom, excellency,” said peppino.
 
“a bad reason,” replied danglars, who reckoned on conciliating his
 keeper; “but i am content. let have some dinner!”
 
“at once! what would your excellency like?”
 
and peppino placed his pan on the ground, so that the steam rose
 directly under the nostrils of danglars. “give your orders.”
 
“have you kitchens here?”
 
“kitchens?—of course—complete ones.”
 
“and cooks?”
 
“excellent!”
 
“well, fowl, fish, game,—it signifies little, so that i eat.”
 
“as your excellency pleases. you mentioned fowl, i think?”
 
“yes, fowl.”
 
peppino, turning around, shouted, “a fowl for his excellency!” his
 voice yet echoed in the archway when handsome, graceful, and
 half-naked young man appeared, bearing fowl in silver dish on his
 head, without the assistance of his hands.
 
“i could almost believe myself at the café paris,” murmured
 danglars.
 
“here, your excellency,” said peppino, taking the fowl from the young
 bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table, which with the stool and
 the goat-skin bed formed the entire furniture of the cell. danglars
 asked for knife and fork.
 
“here, excellency,” said peppino, offering him little blunt knife and
 boxwood fork. danglars took the knife in one hand and the fork in the
 other, and was about to cut up the fowl.
 
“pardon me, excellency,” said peppino, placing his hand on the banker’s
 shoulder; “people pay here before they eat. they might not be
 satisfied, and——”
 
“ah, ha,” thought danglars, “this is not so much like paris, except
 that i shall probably be skinned! never mind, i’ll fix that all right.
 i have always heard how cheap poultry is in italy; i should think a
 fowl is worth about twelve sous at rome.—there,” said, throwing a
 louis down.
 
peppino picked up the louis, and danglars again prepared to carve the
 fowl.
 
“stay moment, your excellency,” said peppino, rising; “you still owe
 something.”
 
“i said they would skin me,” thought danglars; but resolving to resist
 the extortion, said, “come, how much do i owe you for this fowl?”
 
“your excellency has given louis on account.”
 
“a louis on account for fowl?”
 
“certainly; and your excellency now owes 4,999 louis.”
 
danglars opened his enormous eyes on hearing this gigantic joke.
 
“very droll,” muttered, “very droll indeed,” and again began to
 carve the fowl, when peppino stopped the baron’s right hand with his
 left, and held out his other hand.
 
“come, now,” said.
 
“is it not joke?” said danglars.
 
“we never joke,” replied peppino, solemn as quaker.
 
“what! hundred thousand francs for fowl!”
 
“ah, excellency, you cannot imagine how hard it is to rear fowls in
 these horrible caves!”
 
“come, come, this is very droll—very amusing—i allow; but, as i am very
 hungry, pray allow to eat. stay, here is another louis for you.”
 
“then that will make only 4,998 louis more,” said peppino with the same
 indifference. “i shall get them all in time.”
 
“oh, as for that,” said danglars, angry at this prolongation of the
 jest,—“as for that you won’t get them at all. go to the devil! you do
 not know with whom you have to deal!”
 
50253m
 


peppino made sign, and the youth hastily removed the fowl. danglars
 threw himself upon his goat-skin, and peppino, reclosing the door,
 again began eating his peas and bacon. though danglars could not see
 peppino, the noise of his teeth allowed doubt as to his occupation.
 was certainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man.
 “brute!” said danglars. peppino pretended not to hear him, and without
 even turning his head continued to eat slowly. danglars’ stomach felt
 so empty, that it seemed as if it would be impossible ever to fill it
 again; still had patience for another half-hour, which appeared to
 him like century. again arose and went to the door.
 
“come, sir, do not keep starving here any longer, but tell what
 they want.”
 
“nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what you want. give
 your orders, and we will execute them.”
 
“then open the door directly.” peppino obeyed. “now look here, i want
 something to eat! to eat—do you hear?”
 
“are you hungry?”
 
“come, you understand me.”
 
“what would your excellency like to eat?”
 
“a piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all price in this
 accursed place.”
 
“bread? very well. holloa, there, some bread!” called. the youth
 brought small loaf. “how much?” asked danglars.
 
“four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis,” said peppino; “you
 have paid two louis in advance.”
 
50255m
 


“what? one hundred thousand francs for loaf?”
 
“one hundred thousand francs,” repeated peppino.
 
“but you only asked 100,000 francs for fowl!”
 
“we have fixed price for all our provisions. it signifies nothing
 whether you eat much or little—whether you have ten dishes or one—it is
 always the same price.”
 
“what, still keeping up this silly jest? my dear fellow, it is
 perfectly ridiculous—stupid! you had better tell at once that you
 intend starving to death.”
 
“oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit suicide.
 pay and eat.”
 
“and what am i to pay with, brute?” said danglars, enraged. “do you
 suppose i carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?”
 
“your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that will be
 fifty fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half fowl for the 50,000.”
 
danglars shuddered. the bandage fell from his eyes, and understood
 the joke, which did not think quite so stupid as had done just
 before.
 
“come,” said, “if i pay you the 100,000 francs, will you be
 satisfied, and allow to eat at my ease?”
 
“certainly,” said peppino.
 
“but how can i pay them?”
 
“oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with messrs. thomson &
 french, via dei banchi, rome; give draft for 4,998 louis on these
 gentlemen, and our banker shall take it.”
 
danglars thought it as well to comply with good grace, so took the
 pen, ink, and paper peppino offered him, wrote the draft, and signed
 it.
 
“here,” said, “here is draft at sight.”
 
“and here is your fowl.”
 
danglars sighed while carved the fowl; it appeared very thin for the
 price it had cost. as for peppino, examined the paper attentively,
 put it into his pocket, and continued eating his peas.
 


chapter 116. the pardon
 
the next day danglars was again hungry; certainly the air of that
 dungeon was very provocative of appetite. the prisoner expected that he
 would be at expense that day, for like an economical man had
 concealed half of his fowl and piece of the bread in the corner of
 his cell. but had sooner eaten than felt thirsty; had
 forgotten that. struggled against his thirst till his tongue clave
 to the roof of his mouth; then, longer able to resist, called
 out. the sentinel opened the door; it was new face. thought it
 would be better to transact business with his old acquaintance, so he
 sent for peppino.
 
“here i am, your excellency,” said peppino, with an eagerness which
 danglars thought favorable to him. “what do you want?”
 
“something to drink.”
 
“your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price near rome.”
 
“then give water,” cried danglars, endeavoring to parry the blow.
 
“oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency,—there has
 been such drought.”
 
“come,” thought danglars, “it is the same old story.” and while he
 smiled as attempted to regard the affair as joke, felt his
 temples get moist with perspiration.
 
“come, my friend,” said danglars, seeing that made impression on
 peppino, “you will not refuse glass of wine?”
 
“i have already told you that we do not sell at retail.”
 
“well, then, let have bottle of the least expensive.”
 
“they are all the same price.”
 
“and what is that?”
 
“twenty-five thousand francs bottle.”
 
“tell me,” cried danglars, in tone whose bitterness harpagon30 alone
 has been capable of revealing—“tell that you wish to despoil of
 all; it will be sooner over than devouring piecemeal.”
 
“it is possible such may be the master’s intention.”
 
“the master?—who is he?”
 
“the person to whom you were conducted yesterday.”
 
“where is he?”
 
“here.”
 
“let see him.”
 
“certainly.”
 
and the next moment luigi vampa appeared before danglars.
 
“you sent for me?” said to the prisoner.
 
“are you, sir, the chief of the people who brought here?”
 
“yes, your excellency. what then?”
 
“how much do you require for my ransom?”
 
“merely the 5,000,000 you have about you.” danglars felt dreadful
 spasm dart through his heart.
 
“but this is all i have left in the world,” said, “out of an immense
 fortune. if you deprive of that, take away my life also.”
 
“we are forbidden to shed your blood.”
 
“and by whom are you forbidden?”
 
“by him we obey.”
 
“you do, then, obey someone?”
 
“yes, chief.”
 
“i thought you said you were the chief?”
 
“so i am of these men; but there is another over me.”
 
“and did your superior order you to treat in this way?”
 
“yes.”
 
“but my purse will be exhausted.”
 
“probably.”
 
“come,” said danglars, “will you take million?”
 
“no.”
 
“two millions?—three?—four? come, four? i will give them to you on
 condition that you let go.”
 
“why do you offer 4,000,000 for what is worth 5,000,000? this is a
 kind of usury, banker, that i do not understand.”
 
“take all, then—take all, i tell you, and kill me!”
 
“come, come, calm yourself. you will excite your blood, and that would
 produce an appetite it would require million day to satisfy. be
 more economical.”
 
“but when i have more money left to pay you?” asked the infuriated
 danglars.
 
“then you must suffer hunger.”
 
“suffer hunger?” said danglars, becoming pale.
 
“most likely,” replied vampa coolly.
 
“but you say you do not wish to kill me?”
 
“no.”
 
“and yet you will let perish with hunger?”
 
“ah, that is different thing.”
 
“well, then, wretches,” cried danglars, “i will defy your infamous
 calculations—i would rather die at once! you may torture, torment, kill
 me, but you shall not have my signature again!”
 
“as your excellency pleases,” said vampa, as left the cell.
 
danglars, raving, threw himself on the goat-skin. who could these men
 be? who was the invisible chief? what could be his intentions towards
 him? and why, when everyone else was allowed to be ransomed, might he
 not also be? oh, yes; certainly speedy, violent death would be fine
 means of deceiving these remorseless enemies, who appeared to pursue
 him with such incomprehensible vengeance. but to die? for the first
 time in his life, danglars contemplated death with mixture of dread
 and desire; the time had come when the implacable spectre, which exists
 in the mind of every human creature, arrested his attention and called
 out with every pulsation of his heart, “thou shalt die!”
 
danglars resembled timid animal excited in the chase; first it flies,
 then despairs, and at last, by the very force of desperation, sometimes
 succeeds in eluding its pursuers. danglars meditated an escape; but the
 walls were solid rock, man was sitting reading at the only outlet to
 the cell, and behind that man shapes armed with guns continually
 passed. his resolution not to sign lasted two days, after which he
 offered million for some food. they sent him magnificent supper,
 and took his million.
 
from this time the prisoner resolved to suffer longer, but to have
 everything wanted. at the end of twelve days, after having made a
 splendid dinner, reckoned his accounts, and found that had only
 50,000 francs left. then strange reaction took place; who had just
 abandoned 5,000,000 endeavored to save the 50,000 francs had left,
 and sooner than give them up resolved to enter again upon life of
 privation—he was deluded by the hopefulness that is premonition of
 madness.
 
he, who for so long time had forgotten god, began to think that
 miracles were possible—that the accursed cavern might be discovered by
 the officers of the papal states, who would release him; that then he
 would have 50,000 remaining, which would be sufficient to save him from
 starvation; and finally prayed that this sum might be preserved to
 him, and as prayed wept. three days passed thus, during which his
 prayers were frequent, if not heartfelt. sometimes was delirious,
 and fancied saw an old man stretched on pallet; he, also, was
 dying of hunger.
 
on the fourth, was longer man, but living corpse. had
 picked up every crumb that had been left from his former meals, and was
 beginning to eat the matting which covered the floor of his cell. then
 entreated peppino, as would guardian angel, to give him food;
 offered him 1,000 francs for mouthful of bread. but peppino did
 not answer. on the fifth day dragged himself to the door of the
 cell.
 
“are you not christian?” said, falling on his knees. “do you wish
 to assassinate man who, in the eyes of heaven, is brother? oh, my
 former friends, my former friends!” murmured, and fell with his face
 to the ground. then rising in despair, exclaimed, “the chief, the
 chief!”
 
“here i am,” said vampa, instantly appearing; “what do you want?”
 
“take my last gold,” muttered danglars, holding out his pocket-book,
 “and let live here; i ask more for liberty—i only ask to live!”
 
“then you suffer great deal?”
 
“oh, yes, yes, cruelly!”
 
“still, there have been men who suffered more than you.”
 
“i do not think so.”
 
“yes; those who have died of hunger.”
 
danglars thought of the old man whom, in his hours of delirium, had
 seen groaning on his bed. struck his forehead on the ground and
 groaned. “yes,” said, “there have been some who have suffered more
 than i have, but then they must have been martyrs at least.”
 
“do you repent?” asked deep, solemn voice, which caused danglars’
 hair to stand on end. his feeble eyes endeavored to distinguish
 objects, and behind the bandit saw man enveloped in cloak, half
 lost in the shadow of stone column.
 
“of what must i repent?” stammered danglars.
 
“of the evil you have done,” said the voice.
 
“oh, yes; oh, yes, i do indeed repent.” and struck his breast with
 his emaciated fist.
 
“then i forgive you,” said the man, dropping his cloak, and advancing
 to the light.
 
“the count of monte cristo!” said danglars, more pale from terror than
 had been just before from hunger and misery.
 
“you are mistaken—i am not the count of monte cristo.”
 
“then who are you?”
 
50261m
 


“i am whom you sold and dishonored—i am whose betrothed you
 prostituted—i am upon whom you trampled that you might raise
 yourself to fortune—i am whose father you condemned to die of
 hunger—i am whom you also condemned to starvation, and who yet
 forgives you, because hopes to be forgiven—i am edmond dantès!”
 
danglars uttered cry, and fell prostrate.
 
“rise,” said the count, “your life is safe; the same good fortune has
 not happened to your accomplices—one is mad, the other dead. keep the
 50,000 francs you have left—i give them to you. the 5,000,000 you stole
 from the hospitals has been restored to them by an unknown hand. and
 now eat and drink; i will entertain you tonight. vampa, when this man
 is satisfied, let him be free.”
 
danglars remained prostrate while the count withdrew; when raised
 his head saw disappearing down the passage nothing but shadow,
 before which the bandits bowed.
 
according to the count’s directions, danglars was waited on by vampa,
 who brought him the best wine and fruits of italy; then, having
 conducted him to the road, and pointed to the post-chaise, left him
 leaning against tree. remained there all night, not knowing where
 was. when daylight dawned saw that was near stream; was
 thirsty, and dragged himself towards it. as stooped down to drink,
 saw that his hair had become entirely white.
 


chapter 117. the fifth of october
 
it was about six o’clock in the evening; an opal-colored light, through
 which an autumnal sun shed its golden rays, descended on the blue
 ocean. the heat of the day had gradually decreased, and light breeze
 arose, seeming like the respiration of nature on awakening from the
 burning siesta of the south. delicious zephyr played along the coasts
 of the mediterranean, and wafted from shore to shore the sweet perfume
 of plants, mingled with the fresh smell of the sea.
 
light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was gliding amidst the
 first dews of night over the immense lake, extending from gibraltar to
 the dardanelles, and from tunis to venice. the vessel resembled swan
 with its wings opened towards the wind, gliding on the water. it
 advanced swiftly and gracefully, leaving behind it glittering stretch
 of foam. by degrees the sun disappeared behind the western horizon; but
 as though to prove the truth of the fanciful ideas in heathen
 mythology, its indiscreet rays reappeared on the summit of every wave,
 as if the god of fire had just sunk upon the bosom of amphitrite, who
 in vain endeavored to hide her lover beneath her azure mantle.
 
the yacht moved rapidly on, though there did not appear to be
 sufficient wind to ruffle the curls on the head of young girl.
 standing on the prow was tall man, of dark complexion, who saw with
 dilating eyes that they were approaching dark mass of land in the
 shape of cone, which rose from the midst of the waves like the hat of
 catalan.
 
“is that monte cristo?” asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht
 was for the time submitted, in melancholy voice.
 
“yes, your excellency,” said the captain, “we have reached it.”
 
“we have reached it!” repeated the traveller in an accent of
 indescribable sadness.
 
then added, in low tone, “yes; that is the haven.”
 
and then again plunged into train of thought, the character of
 which was better revealed by sad smile, than it would have been by
 tears. few minutes afterwards flash of light, which was
 extinguished instantly, was seen on the land, and the sound of firearms
 reached the yacht.
 
“your excellency,” said the captain, “that was the land signal, will
 you answer yourself?”
 
“what signal?”
 
the captain pointed towards the island, up the side of which ascended a
 volume of smoke, increasing as it rose.
 
“ah, yes,” said, as if awaking from dream. “give it to me.”
 
the captain gave him loaded carbine; the traveller slowly raised it,
 and fired in the air. ten minutes afterwards, the sails were furled,
 and they cast anchor about hundred fathoms from the little harbor.
 the gig was already lowered, and in it were four oarsmen and a
 coxswain. the traveller descended, and instead of sitting down at the
 stern of the boat, which had been decorated with blue carpet for his
 accommodation, stood up with his arms crossed. the rowers waited, their
 oars half lifted out of the water, like birds drying their wings.
 
50265m
 


“give way,” said the traveller. the eight oars fell into the sea
 simultaneously without splashing drop of water, and the boat,
 yielding to the impulsion, glided forward. in an instant they found
 themselves in little harbor, formed in natural creek; the boat
 grounded on the fine sand.
 
“will your excellency be so good as to mount the shoulders of two of
 our men, they will carry you ashore?” the young man answered this
 invitation with gesture of indifference, and stepped out of the boat;
 the immediately rose to his waist.
 
“ah, your excellency,” murmured the pilot, “you should not have done
 so; our master will scold us for it.”
 
the young man continued to advance, following the sailors, who chose a
 firm footing. thirty strides brought them to dry land; the young man
 stamped on the ground to shake off the wet, and looked around for
 someone to show him his road, for it was quite dark. just as turned,
 hand rested on his shoulder, and voice which made him shudder
 exclaimed:
 
“good-evening, maximilian; you are punctual, thank you!”
 
“ah, is it you, count?” said the young man, in an almost joyful accent,
 pressing monte cristo’s hand with both his own.
 
“yes; you see i am as exact as you are. but you are dripping, my dear
 fellow; you must change your clothes, as calypso said to telemachus.
 come, i have habitation prepared for you in which you will soon
 forget fatigue and cold.”
 
monte cristo perceived that the young man had turned around; indeed,
 morrel saw with surprise that the men who had brought him had left
 without being paid, or uttering word. already the sound of their oars
 might be heard as they returned to the yacht.
 
“oh, yes,” said the count, “you are looking for the sailors.”
 
“yes, i paid them nothing, and yet they are gone.”
 
“never mind that, maximilian,” said monte cristo, smiling. “i have made
 an agreement with the navy, that the access to my island shall be free
 of all charge. i have made bargain.”
 
morrel looked at the count with surprise. “count,” said, “you are
 not the same here as in paris.”
 
“how so?”
 
“here you laugh.” the count’s brow became clouded.
 
“you are right to recall to myself, maximilian,” said; “i was
 delighted to see you again, and forgot for the moment that all
 happiness is fleeting.”
 
“oh, no, no, count,” cried maximilian, seizing the count’s hands, “pray
 laugh; be happy, and prove to me, by your indifference, that life is
 endurable to sufferers. oh, how charitable, kind, and good you are; you
 affect this gayety to inspire with courage.”
 
“you are wrong, morrel; i was really happy.”
 
“then you forget me, so much the better.”
 
“how so?”
 
“yes; for as the gladiator said to the emperor, when entered the
 arena, ‘he who is about to die salutes you.’”
 
“then you are not consoled?” asked the count, surprised.
 
“oh,” exclaimed morrel, with glance full of bitter reproach, “do you
 think it possible that i could be?”
 
“listen,” said the count. “do you understand the meaning of my words?
 you cannot take for commonplace man, mere rattle, emitting a
 vague and senseless noise. when i ask you if you are consoled, i speak
 to you as man for whom the human heart has secrets. well, morrel,
 let us both examine the depths of your heart. do you still feel the
 same feverish impatience of grief which made you start like wounded
 lion? have you still that devouring thirst which can only be appeased
 in the grave? are you still actuated by the regret which drags the
 living to the pursuit of death; or are you only suffering from the
 prostration of fatigue and the weariness of hope deferred? has the loss
 of memory rendered it impossible for you to weep? oh, my dear friend,
 if this be the case,—if you can longer weep, if your frozen heart be
 dead, if you put all your trust in god, then, maximilian, you are
 consoled—do not complain.”
 
“count,” said morrel, in firm and at the same time soft voice,
 “listen to me, as to man whose thoughts are raised to heaven, though
 remains on earth; i come to die in the arms of friend. certainly,
 there are people whom i love. i love my sister julie,—i love her
 husband emmanuel; but i require strong mind to smile on my last
 moments. my sister would be bathed in tears and fainting; i could not
 bear to see her suffer. emmanuel would tear the weapon from my hand,
 and alarm the house with his cries. you, count, who are more than
 mortal, will, i am sure, lead to death by pleasant path, will you
 not?”
 
50267m
 


“my friend,” said the count, “i have still one doubt,—are you weak
 enough to pride yourself upon your sufferings?”
 
“no, indeed,—i am calm,” said morrel, giving his hand to the count; “my
 pulse does not beat slower or faster than usual. no, i feel that i have
 reached the goal, and i will go farther. you told to wait and
 hope; do you know what you did, unfortunate adviser? i waited month,
 or rather i suffered for month! i did hope (man is poor wretched
 creature), i did hope. what i cannot tell,—something wonderful, an
 absurdity, miracle,—of what nature alone can tell who has mingled
 with our reason that folly we call hope. yes, i did wait—yes, i did
 hope, count, and during this quarter of an hour we have been talking
 together, you have unconsciously wounded, tortured my heart, for every
 word you have uttered proved that there was hope for me. oh, count,
 i shall sleep calmly, deliciously in the arms of death.”
 
morrel uttered these words with an energy which made the count shudder.
 
“my friend,” continued morrel, “you named the fifth of october as the
 end of the period of waiting,—today is the fifth of october,” took
 out his watch, “it is now nine o’clock,—i have yet three hours to
 live.”
 
“be it so,” said the count, “come.” morrel mechanically followed the
 count, and they had entered the grotto before perceived it. felt
 carpet under his feet, door opened, perfumes surrounded him, and a
 brilliant light dazzled his eyes. morrel hesitated to advance; he
 dreaded the enervating effect of all that saw. monte cristo drew him
 in gently.
 
“why should we not spend the last three hours remaining to us of life,
 like those ancient romans, who when condemned by nero, their emperor
 and heir, sat down at table covered with flowers, and gently glided
 into death, amid the perfume of heliotropes and roses?”
 
morrel smiled. “as you please,” said; “death is always death,—that
 is forgetfulness, repose, exclusion from life, and therefore from
 grief.”
 
sat down, and monte cristo placed himself opposite to him. they were
 in the marvellous dining-room before described, where the statues had
 baskets on their heads always filled with fruits and flowers. morrel
 had looked carelessly around, and had probably noticed nothing.
 
“let us talk like men,” said, looking at the count.
 
“go on!”
 
“count,” said morrel, “you are the epitome of all human knowledge, and
 you seem like being descended from wiser and more advanced world
 than ours.”
 
“there is something true in what you say,” said the count, with that
 smile which made him so handsome; “i have descended from planet
 called grief.”
 
50269m
 


“i believe all you tell without questioning its meaning; for
 instance, you told to live, and i did live; you told to hope, and
 i almost did so. i am almost inclined to ask you, as though you had
 experienced death, ‘is it painful to die?’”
 
monte cristo looked upon morrel with indescribable tenderness. “yes,”
 said, “yes, doubtless it is painful, if you violently break the
 outer covering which obstinately begs for life. if you plunge dagger
 into your flesh, if you insinuate bullet into your brain, which the
 least shock disorders,—then certainly, you will suffer pain, and you
 will repent quitting life for repose you have bought at so dear a
 price.”
 
“yes; i know that there is secret of luxury and pain in death, as
 well as in life; the only thing is to understand it.”
 
“you have spoken truly, maximilian; according to the care we bestow
 upon it, death is either friend who rocks us gently as nurse, or an
 enemy who violently drags the soul from the body. some day, when the
 world is much older, and when mankind will be masters of all the
 destructive powers in nature, to serve for the general good of
 humanity; when mankind, as you were just saying, have discovered the
 secrets of death, then that death will become as sweet and voluptuous
 as slumber in the arms of your beloved.”
 
“and if you wished to die, you would choose this death, count?”
 
“yes.”
 
morrel extended his hand. “now i understand,” said, “why you had me
 brought here to this desolate spot, in the midst of the ocean, to this
 subterranean palace; it was because you loved me, was it not, count? it
 was because you loved well enough to give one of those sweet
 means of death of which we were speaking; death without agony, a
 death which allows to fade away while pronouncing valentine’s name
 and pressing your hand.”
 
“yes, you have guessed rightly, morrel,” said the count, “that is what
 i intended.”
 
“thanks; the idea that tomorrow i shall longer suffer, is sweet to
 my heart.”
 
“do you then regret nothing?”
 
“no,” replied morrel.
 
“not even me?” asked the count with deep emotion. morrel’s clear eye
 was for the moment clouded, then it shone with unusual lustre, and a
 large tear rolled down his cheek.
 
“what,” said the count, “do you still regret anything in the world, and
 yet die?”
 
“oh, i entreat you,” exclaimed morrel in low voice, “do not speak
 another word, count; do not prolong my punishment.”
 
the count fancied that was yielding, and this belief revived the
 horrible doubt that had overwhelmed him at the château d’if.
 
“i am endeavoring,” thought, “to make this man happy; i look upon
 this restitution as weight thrown into the scale to balance the evil
 i have wrought. now, supposing i am deceived, supposing this man has
 not been unhappy enough to merit happiness. alas, what would become of
 who can only atone for evil by doing good?”
 
50271m
 


then said aloud: “listen, morrel, i see your grief is great, but
 still you do not like to risk your soul.” morrel smiled sadly.
 
“count,” said, “i swear to you my soul is longer my own.”
 
“maximilian, you know i have relation in the world. i have
 accustomed myself to regard you as my son: well, then, to save my son,
 i will sacrifice my life, nay, even my fortune.”
 
“what do you mean?”
 
“i mean, that you wish to quit life because you do not understand all
 the enjoyments which are the fruits of large fortune. morrel, i
 possess nearly hundred millions and i give them to you; with such a
 fortune you can attain every wish. are you ambitious? every career is
 open to you. overturn the world, change its character, yield to mad
 ideas, be even criminal—but live.”
 
“count, i have your word,” said morrel coldly; then taking out his
 watch, added, “it is half-past eleven.”
 
“morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very eyes?”
 
“then let go,” said maximilian, “or i shall think you did not love
 for my own sake, but for yours;” and arose.
 
“it is well,” said monte cristo whose countenance brightened at these
 words; “you wish it—you are inflexible. yes, as you said, you are
 indeed wretched and miracle alone can cure you. sit down, morrel, and
 wait.”
 
morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking closet with key
 suspended from his gold chain, took from it little silver casket,
 beautifully carved and chased, the corners of which represented four
 bending figures, similar to the caryatides, the forms of women, symbols
 of the angels aspiring to heaven.
 
placed the casket on the table; then opening it took out little
 golden box, the top of which flew open when touched by secret spring.
 this box contained an unctuous substance partly solid, of which it was
 impossible to discover the color, owing to the reflection of the
 polished gold, sapphires, rubies, emeralds, which ornamented the box.
 it was mixed mass of blue, red, and gold.
 
the count took out small quantity of this with gilt spoon, and
 offered it to morrel, fixing long steadfast glance upon him. it was
 then observable that the substance was greenish.
 
“this is what you asked for,” said, “and what i promised to give
 you.”
 
“i thank you from the depths of my heart,” said the young man, taking
 the spoon from the hands of monte cristo. the count took another spoon,
 and again dipped it into the golden box. “what are you going to do, my
 friend?” asked morrel, arresting his hand.
 
“well, the fact is, morrel, i was thinking that i too am weary of life,
 and since an opportunity presents itself——”
 
“stay!” said the young man. “you who love, and are beloved; you, who
 have faith and hope,—oh, do not follow my example. in your case it
 would be crime. adieu, my noble and generous friend, adieu; i will go
 and tell valentine what you have done for me.”
 
and slowly, though without any hesitation, only waiting to press the
 count’s hand fervently, swallowed the mysterious substance offered
 by monte cristo. then they were both silent. ali, mute and attentive,
 brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared. by degrees, the light of
 the lamps gradually faded in the hands of the marble statues which held
 them, and the perfumes appeared less powerful to morrel. seated
 opposite to him, monte cristo watched him in the shadow, and morrel saw
 nothing but the bright eyes of the count. an overpowering sadness took
 possession of the young man, his hands relaxed their hold, the objects
 in the room gradually lost their form and color, and his disturbed
 vision seemed to perceive doors and curtains open in the wall.
 
50273m
 


“friend,” cried, “i feel that i am dying; thanks!”
 
made last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside
 him. then it appeared to him that monte cristo smiled, not with the
 strange and fearful expression which had sometimes revealed to him the
 secrets of his heart, but with the benevolent kindness of father for
 child. at the same time the count appeared to increase in stature,
 his form, nearly double its usual height, stood out in relief against
 the red tapestry, his black hair was thrown back, and stood in the
 attitude of an avenging angel. morrel, overpowered, turned around in
 the armchair; delicious torpor permeated every vein. change of
 ideas presented themselves to his brain, like new design on the
 kaleidoscope. enervated, prostrate, and breathless, became
 unconscious of outward objects; seemed to be entering that vague
 delirium preceding death. wished once again to press the count’s
 hand, but his own was immovable. wished to articulate last
 farewell, but his tongue lay motionless and heavy in his throat, like a
 stone at the mouth of sepulchre. involuntarily his languid eyes
 closed, and still through his eyelashes well-known form seemed to
 move amid the obscurity with which thought himself enveloped.
 
the count had just opened door. immediately brilliant light from
 the next room, or rather from the palace adjoining, shone upon the room
 in which was gently gliding into his last sleep. then saw woman
 of marvellous beauty appear on the threshold of the door separating the
 two rooms. pale, and sweetly smiling, she looked like an angel of mercy
 conjuring the angel of vengeance.
 
“is it heaven that opens before me?” thought the dying man; “that angel
 resembles the one i have lost.”
 
monte cristo pointed out morrel to the young woman, who advanced
 towards him with clasped hands and smile upon her lips.
 
“valentine, valentine!” mentally ejaculated; but his lips uttered no
 sound, and as though all his strength were centred in that internal
 emotion, sighed and closed his eyes. valentine rushed towards him;
 his lips again moved.
 
“he is calling you,” said the count; “he to whom you have confided your
 destiny—he from whom death would have separated you, calls you to him.
 happily, i vanquished death. henceforth, valentine, you will never
 again be separated on earth, since has rushed into death to find
 you. without me, you would both have died. may god accept my atonement
 in the preservation of these two existences!”
 
valentine seized the count’s hand, and in her irresistible impulse of
 joy carried it to her lips.
 
50275m
 


“oh, thank again!” said the count; “tell till you are weary, that
 i have restored you to happiness; you do not know how much i require
 this assurance.”
 
“oh, yes, yes, i thank you with all my heart,” said valentine; “and if
 you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude, oh, then, ask haydée! ask my
 beloved sister haydée, who ever since our departure from france, has
 caused to wait patiently for this happy day, while talking to of
 you.”
 
“you then love haydée?” asked monte cristo with an emotion in vain
 endeavored to dissimulate.
 
“oh, yes, with all my soul.”
 
“well, then, listen, valentine,” said the count; “i have favor to ask
 of you.”
 
“of me? oh, am i happy enough for that?”
 
“yes; you have called haydée your sister,—let her become so indeed,
 valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancy that you owe to me;
 protect her, for” (the count’s voice was thick with emotion)
 “henceforth she will be alone in the world.”
 
“alone in the world!” repeated voice behind the count, “and why?”
 
monte cristo turned around; haydée was standing pale, motionless,
 looking at the count with an expression of fearful amazement.
 
“because tomorrow, haydée, you will be free; you will then assume your
 proper position in society, for i will not allow my destiny to
 overshadow yours. daughter of prince, i restore to you the riches and
 name of your father.”
 
haydée became pale, and lifting her transparent hands to heaven,
 exclaimed in voice stifled with tears, “then you leave me, my lord?”
 
“haydée, haydée, you are young and beautiful; forget even my name, and
 be happy.”
 
“it is well,” said haydée; “your order shall be executed, my lord; i
 will forget even your name, and be happy.” and she stepped back to
 retire.
 
“oh, heavens,” exclaimed valentine, who was supporting the head of
 morrel on her shoulder, “do you not see how pale she is? do you not see
 how she suffers?”
 
haydée answered with heartrending expression,
 
“why should understand this, my sister? is my master, and i am
 his slave; has the right to notice nothing.”
 
the count shuddered at the tones of voice which penetrated the inmost
 recesses of his heart; his eyes met those of the young girl and he
 could not bear their brilliancy.
 
“oh, heavens,” exclaimed monte cristo, “can my suspicions be correct?
 haydée, would it please you not to leave me?”
 
“i am young,” gently replied haydée; “i love the life you have made so
 sweet to me, and i should be sorry to die.”
 
“you mean, then, that if i leave you, haydée——”
 
“i should die; yes, my lord.”
 
“do you then love me?”
 
“oh, valentine, asks if i love him. valentine, tell him if you love
 maximilian.”
 
the count felt his heart dilate and throb; opened his arms, and
 haydée, uttering cry, sprang into them.
 
“oh, yes,” she cried, “i do love you! i love you as one loves father,
 brother, husband! i love you as my life, for you are the best, the
 noblest of created beings!”
 
50277m
 


“let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; god has sustained in my
 struggle with my enemies, and has given this reward; will not let
 end my triumph in suffering; i wished to punish myself, but has
 pardoned me. love then, haydée! who knows? perhaps your love will
 make forget all that i do not wish to remember.”
 
“what do you mean, my lord?”
 
“i mean that one word from you has enlightened more than twenty
 years of slow experience; i have but you in the world, haydée; through
 you i again take hold on life, through you i shall suffer, through you
 rejoice.”
 
“do you hear him, valentine?” exclaimed haydée; “he says that through
 will suffer—through _me_, who would yield my life for his.”
 
the count withdrew for moment. “have i discovered the truth?” he
 said; “but whether it be for recompense or punishment, i accept my
 fate. come, haydée, come!” and throwing his arm around the young girl’s
 waist, pressed the hand of valentine, and disappeared.
 
50279m
 


an hour had nearly passed, during which valentine, breathless and
 motionless, watched steadfastly over morrel. at length she felt his
 heart beat, faint breath played upon his lips, slight shudder,
 announcing the return of life, passed through the young man’s frame. at
 length his eyes opened, but they were at first fixed and
 expressionless; then sight returned, and with it feeling and grief.
 
“oh,” cried, in an accent of despair, “the count has deceived me; i
 am yet living;” and extending his hand towards the table, seized a
 knife.
 
“dearest,” exclaimed valentine, with her adorable smile, “awake, and
 look at me!” morrel uttered loud exclamation, and frantic, doubtful,
 dazzled, as though by celestial vision, fell upon his knees.
 
the next morning at daybreak, valentine and morrel were walking
 arm-in-arm on the seashore, valentine relating how monte cristo had
 appeared in her room, explained everything, revealed the crime, and,
 finally, how had saved her life by enabling her to simulate death.
 
they had found the door of the grotto opened, and gone forth; on the
 azure dome of heaven still glittered few remaining stars.
 
morrel soon perceived man standing among the rocks, apparently
 awaiting sign from them to advance, and pointed him out to valentine.
 
“ah, it is jacopo,” she said, “the captain of the yacht;” and she
 beckoned him towards them.
 
“do you wish to speak to us?” asked morrel.
 
“i have letter to give you from the count.”
 
“from the count!” murmured the two young people.
 
“yes; read it.”
 
50281m
 


morrel opened the letter, and read:
 
“my dear maximilian,
 
“there is felucca for you at anchor. jacopo will carry you to
 leghorn, where monsieur noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he
 wishes to bless before you lead her to the altar. all that is in this
 grotto, my friend, my house in the champs-Élysées, and my château at
 tréport, are the marriage gifts bestowed by edmond dantès upon the son
 of his old master, morrel. mademoiselle villefort will share them
 with you; for i entreat her to give to the poor the immense fortune
 reverting to her from her father, now madman, and her brother who
 died last september with his mother. tell the angel who will watch over
 your future destiny, morrel, to pray sometimes for man, who, like
 satan, thought himself for an instant equal to god, but who now
 acknowledges with christian humility that god alone possesses supreme
 power and infinite wisdom. perhaps those prayers may soften the remorse
 feels in his heart. as for you, morrel, this is the secret of my
 conduct towards you. there is neither happiness nor misery in the
 world; there is only the comparison of one state with another, nothing
 more. who has felt the deepest grief is best able to experience
 supreme happiness. we must have felt what it is to die, morrel, that we
 may appreciate the enjoyments of living.
 
“live, then, and be happy, beloved children of my heart, and never
 forget that until the day when god shall deign to reveal the future to
 man, all human wisdom is summed up in these two words,—‘_wait and
 hope_.’—your friend,
 
“edmond dantès, _count of monte cristo_.”
 
50282m
 


during the perusal of this letter, which informed valentine for the
 first time of the madness of her father and the death of her brother,
 she became pale, heavy sigh escaped from her bosom, and tears, not
 the less painful because they were silent, ran down her cheeks; her
 happiness cost her very dear.
 
morrel looked around uneasily.
 
“but,” said, “the count’s generosity is too overwhelming; valentine
 will be satisfied with my humble fortune. where is the count, friend?
 lead to him.”
 
jacopo pointed towards the horizon.
 
“what do you mean?” asked valentine. “where is the count?—where is
 haydée?”
 
“look!” said jacopo.
 
the eyes of both were fixed upon the spot indicated by the sailor, and
 on the blue line separating the sky from the mediterranean sea, they
 perceived large white sail.
 
“gone,” said morrel; “gone!—adieu, my friend—adieu, my father!”
 
“gone,” murmured valentine; “adieu, my sweet haydée—adieu, my sister!”
 
“who can say whether we shall ever see them again?” said morrel with
 tearful eyes.
 
“darling,” replied valentine, “has not the count just told us that all
 human wisdom is summed up in two words:
 
“‘_wait and hope_ (fac et spera)!’”
 



footnotes:
 

[1] “the wicked are great drinkers of water; as the flood proved once
 for all.”
 
[2] $2,600,000 in 1894.
 
[3] knocked on the head.
 
[4] beheaded.
 
[5] scott, of course: “the of an ill-fated sire, and the father of
 yet more unfortunate family, bore in his looks that cast of
 inauspicious melancholy by which the physiognomists of that time
 pretended to distinguish those who were predestined to violent and
 unhappy death.”—the abbot, ch. xxii.
 
[6] guillotine.
 
[7] dr. guillotin got the idea of his famous machine from witnessing an
 execution in italy.
 
[8] brucea ferruginea.
 
[9] ‘money and sanctity, each in moiety.’
 
[10] elisabeth rossan, marquise ganges, was one of the famous
 women of the court of louis xiv. where she was known as “la belle
 provençale.” she was the widow of the marquis castellane when she
 married ganges, and having the misfortune to excite the enmity of
 her new brothers-in-law, was forced by them to take poison; and they
 finished her off with pistol and dagger.—ed.
 
[11] magistrate and orator of great eloquence—chancellor of france
 under louis xv.
 
[12] jacques-louis david, famous french painter (1748-1825).
 
[13] ali pasha, “the lion,” was born at tepelini, an albanian village
 at the foot of the klissoura mountains, in 1741. by diplomacy and
 success in arms became almost supreme ruler of albania, epirus, and
 adjacent territory. having aroused the enmity of the sultan, was
 proscribed and put to death by treachery in 1822, at the age of
 eighty.—ed.
 
[14] greek militiamen in the war for independence.—ed.
 
[15] turkish pasha in command of the troops of province.—ed.
 
[16] the god of fruitfulness in grecian mythology. in crete was
 supposed to be slain in winter with the decay of vegetation and to
 revive in the spring. haydée’s learned reference is to the behavior of
 an actor in the dionysian festivals.—ed.
 
[17] the genoese conspirator.
 
[18] lake maggiore.
 
[19] in the old greek legend the atreidae, or children of atreus, were
 doomed to punishment because of the abominable crime of their father.
 the _agamemnon_ of aeschylus is based on this legend.
 
[20] the performance of the civil marriage.
 
[21] in molière’s comedy, _le misanthrope_.
 
[22] literally, “the basket,” because wedding gifts were originally
 brought in such receptacle.
 
[23] germain pillon was famous french sculptor (1535-1598). his best
 known work is “the three graces,” now in the louvre.
 
[24] frédérick lemaître—french actor (1800-1876). robert macaire is the
 hero of two favorite melodramas—“chien montargis” and “chien
 d’aubry”—and the name is applied to bold criminals as term of
 derision.
 
[25] the spahis are french cavalry reserved for service in africa.
 
[26] _savate_: an old shoe.
 
[27] guilbert pixérécourt, french dramatist (1773-1844).
 
[28] gaspard puget, the sculptor-architect, was born at marseilles in
 1615.
 
[29] the carolina—not virginia—jessamine, _gelsemium sempervirens_
 (properly speaking not jessamine at all) has yellow blossoms. the
 reference is doubt to the _wistaria frutescens_.—ed.
 
[30] the miser in molière’s comedy of _l’avare_.—ed.
 

*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the count of monte cristo ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 

