the project gutenberg ebook of wuthering heights
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: wuthering heights
 
author: emily brontë
 
release date: december 1, 1996 [ebook #768]
 most recently updated: january 18, 2022
 
language: english
 
credits: david price
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook wuthering heights ***
 



wuthering heights
 
by emily brontë
 



chapter i
 

1801—i have just returned from visit to my landlord—the solitary
 neighbour that i shall be troubled with. this is certainly beautiful
 country! in all england, i do not believe that i could have fixed on a
 situation so completely removed from the stir of society. perfect
 misanthropist’s heaven—and mr. heathcliff and i are such suitable
 pair to divide the desolation between us. capital fellow! little
 imagined how my heart warmed towards him when i beheld his black eyes
 withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as i rode up, and when his
 fingers sheltered themselves, with jealous resolution, still further
 in his waistcoat, as i announced my name.
 
“mr. heathcliff?” i said.
 
nod was the answer.
 
“mr. lockwood, your new tenant, sir. i do myself the honour of calling
 as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope that i have
 not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation
 of thrushcross grange: i heard yesterday you had had some thoughts—”
 
“thrushcross grange is my own, sir,” interrupted, wincing. “i should
 not allow any one to inconvenience me, if i could hinder it—walk in!”
 
the “walk in” was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the
 sentiment, “go to the deuce!” even the gate over which leant
 manifested sympathising movement to the words; and i think that
 circumstance determined to accept the invitation: i felt interested
 in man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.
 
when saw my horse’s breast fairly pushing the barrier, did put
 out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded up the
 causeway, calling, as we entered the court,—“joseph, take mr.
 lockwood’s horse; and bring up some wine.”
 
“here we have the whole establishment of domestics, i suppose,” was the
 reflection suggested by this compound order. “no wonder the grass grows
 up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.”
 
joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man, very old, perhaps, though hale
 and sinewy. “the lord help us!” soliloquised in an undertone of
 peevish displeasure, while relieving of my horse: looking, meantime,
 in my face so sourly that i charitably conjectured must have need of
 divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious ejaculation had no
 reference to my unexpected advent.
 
wuthering heights is the name of mr. heathcliff’s dwelling. “wuthering”
 being significant provincial adjective, descriptive of the
 atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather.
 pure, bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed:
 one may guess the power of the north wind, blowing over the edge, by
 the excessive slant of few stunted firs at the end of the house; and
 by range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if
 craving alms of the sun. happily, the architect had foresight to build
 it strong: the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and the
 corners defended with large jutting stones.
 
before passing the threshold, i paused to admire quantity of
 grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially about the
 principal door; above which, among wilderness of crumbling griffins
 and shameless little boys, i detected the date “1500,” and the name
 “hareton earnshaw.” i would have made few comments, and requested a
 short history of the place from the surly owner; but his attitude at
 the door appeared to demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure,
 and i had desire to aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting
 the penetralium.
 
one step brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
 introductory lobby or passage: they call it here “the house”
 pre-eminently. it includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but i
 believe at wuthering heights the kitchen is forced to retreat
 altogether into another quarter: at least i distinguished chatter of
 tongues, and clatter of culinary utensils, deep within; and i
 observed signs of roasting, boiling, or baking, about the huge
 fireplace; nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on
 the walls. one end, indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat
 from ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver jugs and
 tankards, towering row after row, on vast oak dresser, to the very
 roof. the latter had never been under-drawn: its entire anatomy lay
 bare to an inquiring eye, except where frame of wood laden with
 oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
 above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and couple of
 horse-pistols: and, by way of ornament, three gaudily painted canisters
 disposed along its ledge. the floor was of smooth, white stone; the
 chairs, high-backed, primitive structures, painted green: one or two
 heavy black ones lurking in the shade. in an arch under the dresser
 reposed huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by swarm of
 squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other recesses.
 
the apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as
 belonging to homely, northern farmer, with stubborn countenance,
 and stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.
 such an individual seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on
 the round table before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six
 miles among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner. but
 mr. heathcliff forms singular contrast to his abode and style of
 living. is dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and manners a
 gentleman: that is, as much gentleman as many country squire:
 rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss with his negligence,
 because has an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.
 possibly, some people might suspect him of degree of under-bred
 pride; i have sympathetic chord within that tells it is nothing of
 the sort: i know, by instinct, his reserve springs from an aversion to
 showy displays of feeling—to manifestations of mutual kindliness. he’ll
 love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it species of
 impertinence to be loved or hated again. no, i’m running on too fast: i
 bestow my own attributes over-liberally on him. mr. heathcliff may have
 entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he
 meets would-be acquaintance, to those which actuate me. let hope
 my constitution is almost peculiar: my dear mother used to say i should
 never have comfortable home; and only last summer i proved myself
 perfectly unworthy of one.
 
while enjoying month of fine weather at the sea-coast, i was thrown
 into the company of most fascinating creature: real goddess in my
 eyes, as long as she took notice of me. i “never told my love”
 vocally; still, if looks have language, the merest idiot might have
 guessed i was over head and ears: she understood at last, and looked
 return—the sweetest of all imaginable looks. and what did i do? i
 confess it with shame—shrunk icily into myself, like snail; at every
 glance retired colder and farther; till finally the poor innocent was
 led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed with confusion at her
 supposed mistake, persuaded her mamma to decamp.
 
by this curious turn of disposition i have gained the reputation of
 deliberate heartlessness; how undeserved, i alone can appreciate.
 
i took seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which
 my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence by
 attempting to caress the canine mother, who had left her nursery, and
 was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs, her lip curled up, and
 her white teeth watering for snatch. my caress provoked long,
 guttural gnarl.
 
“you’d better let the dog alone,” growled mr. heathcliff in unison,
 checking fiercer demonstrations with punch of his foot. “she’s not
 accustomed to be spoiled—not kept for pet.” then, striding to side
 door, shouted again, “joseph!”
 
joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no
 intimation of ascending; so his master dived down to him, leaving me
 _vis-à-vis_ the ruffianly bitch and pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
 who shared with her jealous guardianship over all my movements. not
 anxious to come in contact with their fangs, i sat still; but,
 imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, i unfortunately
 indulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and some turn of my
 physiognomy so irritated madam, that she suddenly broke into fury and
 leapt on my knees. i flung her back, and hastened to interpose the
 table between us. this proceeding aroused the whole hive: half-a-dozen
 four-footed fiends, of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden dens
 to the common centre. i felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects
 of assault; and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually as i
 could with the poker, i was constrained to demand, aloud, assistance
 from some of the household in re-establishing peace.
 
mr. heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with vexatious
 phlegm: i don’t think they moved one second faster than usual, though
 the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping. happily, an
 inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch; lusty dame, with
 tucked-up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the
 midst of us flourishing frying-pan: and used that weapon, and her
 tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically, and she
 only remained, heaving like after high wind, when her master
 entered on the scene.
 
“what the devil is the matter?” asked, eyeing in manner that i
 could ill endure after this inhospitable treatment.
 
“what the devil, indeed!” i muttered. “the herd of possessed swine
 could have had worse spirits in them than those animals of yours,
 sir. you might as well leave stranger with brood of tigers!”
 
“they won’t meddle with persons who touch nothing,” remarked,
 putting the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table. “the
 dogs do right to be vigilant. take glass of wine?”
 
“no, thank you.”
 
“not bitten, are you?”
 
“if i had been, i would have set my signet on the biter.” heathcliff’s
 countenance relaxed into grin.
 
“come, come,” said, “you are flurried, mr. lockwood. here, take a
 little wine. guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that i and my
 dogs, i am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them. your
 health, sir?”
 
i bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be
 foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of pack of curs; besides,
 i felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since
 his humour took that turn. he—probably swayed by prudential
 consideration of the folly of offending good tenant—relaxed little
 in the laconic style of chipping off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs,
 and introduced what supposed would be subject of interest to me,—a
 discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my present place of
 retirement. i found him very intelligent on the topics we touched; and
 before i went home, i was encouraged so far as to volunteer another
 visit to-morrow. evidently wished repetition of my intrusion. i
 shall go, notwithstanding. it is astonishing how sociable i feel myself
 compared with him.
 



chapter ii
 

yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. i had half mind to spend
 it by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to
 wuthering heights. on coming up from dinner, however, (n.b.—i dine
 between twelve and one o’clock; the housekeeper, matronly lady, taken
 as fixture along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend
 my request that i might be served at five)—on mounting the stairs with
 this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, i saw servant-girl
 on her knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an
 infernal dust as she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.
 this spectacle drove back immediately; i took my hat, and, after a
 four-miles’ walk, arrived at heathcliff’s garden-gate just in time to
 escape the first feathery flakes of snow shower.
 
on that bleak hill top the earth was hard with black frost, and the
 air made shiver through every limb. being unable to remove the
 chain, i jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered
 with straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till
 my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.
 
“wretched inmates!” i ejaculated, mentally, “you deserve perpetual
 isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality. at least,
 i would not keep my doors barred in the day-time. i don’t care—i will
 get in!” so resolved, i grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.
 vinegar-faced joseph projected his head from round window of the
 barn.
 
“what are ye for?” shouted. “t’ maister’s down i’ t’ fowld. go round
 by th’ end o’ t’ laith, if ye went to spake to him.”
 
“is there nobody inside to open the door?” i hallooed, responsively.
 
“there’s nobbut t’ missis; and shoo’ll not oppen ’t an ye mak’ yer
 flaysome dins till neeght.”
 
“why? cannot you tell her whom i am, eh, joseph?”
 
“nor-ne me! i’ll hae hend wi’t,” muttered the head, vanishing.
 
the snow began to drive thickly. i seized the handle to essay another
 trial; when young man without coat, and shouldering pitchfork,
 appeared in the yard behind. hailed to follow him, and, after
 marching through wash-house, and paved area containing coal-shed,
 pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
 apartment where i was formerly received. it glowed delightfully in the
 radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and
 near the table, laid for plentiful evening meal, i was pleased to
 observe the “missis,” an individual whose existence i had never
 previously suspected. i bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me
 take seat. she looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained
 motionless and mute.
 
“rough weather!” i remarked. “i’m afraid, mrs. heathcliff, the door
 must bear the consequence of your servants’ leisure attendance: i had
 hard work to make them hear me.”
 
she never opened her mouth. i stared—she stared also: at any rate, she
 kept her eyes on in cool, regardless manner, exceedingly
 embarrassing and disagreeable.
 
“sit down,” said the young man, gruffly. “he’ll be in soon.”
 
i obeyed; and hemmed, and called the villain juno, who deigned, at this
 second interview, to move the extreme tip of her tail, in token of
 owning my acquaintance.
 
“a beautiful animal!” i commenced again. “do you intend parting with
 the little ones, madam?”
 
“they are not mine,” said the amiable hostess, more repellingly than
 heathcliff himself could have replied.
 
“ah, your favourites are among these?” i continued, turning to an
 obscure cushion full of something like cats.
 
“a strange choice of favourites!” she observed scornfully.
 
unluckily, it was heap of dead rabbits. i hemmed once more, and drew
 closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on the wildness of the
 evening.
 
“you should not have come out,” she said, rising and reaching from the
 chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.
 
her position before was sheltered from the light; now, i had distinct
 view of her whole figure and countenance. she was slender, and
 apparently scarcely past girlhood: an admirable form, and the most
 exquisite little face that i have ever had the pleasure of beholding;
 small features, very fair; flaxen ringlets, or rather golden, hanging
 loose on her delicate neck; and eyes, had they been agreeable in
 expression, that would have been irresistible: fortunately for my
 susceptible heart, the only sentiment they evinced hovered between
 scorn and kind of desperation, singularly unnatural to be detected
 there. the canisters were almost out of her reach; i made motion to
 aid her; she turned upon as miser might turn if any one attempted
 to assist him in counting his gold.
 
“i don’t want your help,” she snapped; “i can get them for myself.”
 
“i beg your pardon!” i hastened to reply.
 
“were you asked to tea?” she demanded, tying an apron over her neat
 black frock, and standing with spoonful of the leaf poised over the
 pot.
 
“i shall be glad to have cup,” i answered.
 
“were you asked?” she repeated.
 
“no,” i said, half smiling. “you are the proper person to ask me.”
 
she flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed her chair in pet;
 her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip pushed out, like a
 child’s ready to cry.
 
meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person decidedly shabby
 upper garment, and, erecting himself before the blaze, looked down on
 from the corner of his eyes, for all the world as if there were some
 mortal feud unavenged between us. i began to doubt whether were a
 servant or not: his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
 the superiority observable in mr. and mrs. heathcliff; his thick brown
 curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers encroached bearishly
 over his cheeks, and his hands were embrowned like those of common
 labourer: still his bearing was free, almost haughty, and showed
 none of domestic’s assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
 in the absence of clear proofs of his condition, i deemed it best to
 abstain from noticing his curious conduct; and, five minutes
 afterwards, the entrance of heathcliff relieved me, in some measure,
 from my uncomfortable state.
 
“you see, sir, i am come, according to promise!” i exclaimed, assuming
 the cheerful; “and i fear i shall be weather-bound for half an hour, if
 you can afford shelter during that space.”
 
“half an hour?” said, shaking the white flakes from his clothes; “i
 wonder you should select the thick of snow-storm to ramble about in.
 do you know that you run risk of being lost in the marshes? people
 familiar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings; and i
 can tell you there is chance of change at present.”
 
“perhaps i can get guide among your lads, and might stay at the
 grange till morning—could you spare one?”
 
“no, i could not.”
 
“oh, indeed! well, then, i must trust to my own sagacity.”
 
“umph!”
 
“are you going to mak’ the tea?” demanded of the shabby coat,
 shifting his ferocious gaze from to the young lady.
 
“is _he_ to have any?” she asked, appealing to heathcliff.
 
“get it ready, will you?” was the answer, uttered so savagely that i
 started. the tone in which the words were said revealed genuine bad
 nature. i longer felt inclined to call heathcliff capital fellow.
 when the preparations were finished, invited with—“now, sir,
 bring forward your chair.” and we all, including the rustic youth, drew
 round the table: an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our
 meal.
 
i thought, if i had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make an effort
 to dispel it. they could not every day sit so grim and taciturn; and it
 was impossible, however ill-tempered they might be, that the universal
 scowl they wore was their every-day countenance.
 
“it is strange,” i began, in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea
 and receiving another—“it is strange how custom can mould our tastes
 and ideas: many could not imagine the existence of happiness in life
 of such complete exile from the world as you spend, mr. heathcliff;
 yet, i’ll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with
 your amiable lady as the presiding genius over your home and heart—”
 
“my amiable lady!” interrupted, with an almost diabolical sneer on
 his face. “where is she—my amiable lady?”
 
“mrs. heathcliff, your wife, i mean.”
 
“well, yes—oh, you would intimate that her spirit has taken the post of
 ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of wuthering heights, even
 when her body is gone. is that it?”
 
perceiving myself in blunder, i attempted to correct it. i might have
 seen there was too great disparity between the ages of the parties to
 make it likely that they were man and wife. one was about forty: a
 period of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delusion of
 being married for love by girls: that dream is reserved for the solace
 of our declining years. the other did not look seventeen.
 
then it flashed upon me—“the clown at my elbow, who is drinking his tea
 out of basin and eating his bread with unwashed hands, may be her
 husband: heathcliff junior, of course. here is the consequence of being
 buried alive: she has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer
 ignorance that better individuals existed! sad pity—i must beware how
 i cause her to regret her choice.” the last reflection may seem
 conceited; it was not. my neighbour struck as bordering on
 repulsive; i knew, through experience, that i was tolerably attractive.
 
“mrs. heathcliff is my daughter-in-law,” said heathcliff, corroborating
 my surmise. turned, as spoke, peculiar look in her direction: a
 look of hatred; unless has most perverse set of facial muscles
 that will not, like those of other people, interpret the language of
 his soul.
 
“ah, certainly—i see now: you are the favoured possessor of the
 beneficent fairy,” i remarked, turning to my neighbour.
 
this was worse than before: the youth grew crimson, and clenched his
 fist, with every appearance of meditated assault. but seemed to
 recollect himself presently, and smothered the storm in brutal curse,
 muttered on my behalf: which, however, i took care not to notice.
 
“unhappy in your conjectures, sir,” observed my host; “we neither of us
 have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead. i said
 she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.”
 
“and this young man is—”
 
“not my son, assuredly.”
 
heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold jest to
 attribute the paternity of that bear to him.
 
“my name is hareton earnshaw,” growled the other; “and i’d counsel you
 to respect it!”
 
“i’ve shown disrespect,” was my reply, laughing internally at the
 dignity with which announced himself.
 
fixed his eye on longer than i cared to return the stare, for
 fear i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity
 audible. i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant
 family circle. the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than
 neutralised, the glowing physical comforts round me; and i resolved to
 be cautious how i ventured under those rafters third time.
 
the business of eating being concluded, and one uttering word of
 sociable conversation, i approached window to examine the weather. a
 sorrowful sight i saw: dark night coming down prematurely, and sky and
 hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.
 
“i don’t think it possible for to get home now without guide,” i
 could not help exclaiming. “the roads will be buried already; and, if
 they were bare, i could scarcely distinguish foot in advance.”
 
“hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch. they’ll be
 covered if left in the fold all night: and put plank before them,”
 said heathcliff.
 
“how must i do?” i continued, with rising irritation.
 
there was reply to my question; and on looking round i saw only
 joseph bringing in pail of porridge for the dogs, and mrs. heathcliff
 leaning over the fire, diverting herself with burning bundle of
 matches which had fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the
 tea-canister to its place. the former, when had deposited his
 burden, took critical survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated
 out—“aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i’ idleness war,
 when all on ’ems goan out! bud yah’re nowt, and it’s use
 talking—yah’ll niver mend o’yer ill ways, but goa raight to t’ divil,
 like yer mother afore ye!”
 
i imagined, for moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to
 me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an
 intention of kicking him out of the door. mrs. heathcliff, however,
 checked by her answer.
 
“you scandalous old hypocrite!” she replied. “are you not afraid of
 being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil’s name? i
 warn you to refrain from provoking me, or i’ll ask your abduction as a
 special favour! stop! look here, joseph,” she continued, taking long,
 dark book from shelf; “i’ll show you how far i’ve progressed in the
 black art: i shall soon be competent to make clear house of it. the
 red cow didn’t die by chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be
 reckoned among providential visitations!”
 
“oh, wicked, wicked!” gasped the elder; “may the lord deliver us from
 evil!”
 
“no, reprobate! you are castaway—be off, or i’ll hurt you seriously!
 i’ll have you all modelled in wax and clay! and the first who passes
 the limits i fix shall—i’ll not say what shall be done to—but,
 you’ll see! go, i’m looking at you!”
 
the little witch put mock malignity into her beautiful eyes, and
 joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and
 ejaculating “wicked” as went. i thought her conduct must be prompted
 by species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, i endeavoured
 to interest her in my distress.
 
“mrs. heathcliff,” i said earnestly, “you must excuse for troubling
 you. i presume, because, with that face, i’m sure you cannot help being
 good-hearted. do point out some landmarks by which i may know my way
 home: i have more idea how to get there than you would have how to
 get to london!”
 
“take the road you came,” she answered, ensconcing herself in chair,
 with candle, and the long book open before her. “it is brief advice,
 but as sound as i can give.”
 
“then, if you hear of being discovered dead in bog or pit full
 of snow, your conscience won’t whisper that it is partly your fault?”
 
“how so? i cannot escort you. they wouldn’t let go to the end of the
 garden wall.”
 
“_you_! i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
 convenience, on such night,” i cried. “i want you to _tell_ my
 way, not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give a
 guide.”
 
“who? there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i. which would you
 have?”
 
“are there boys at the farm?”
 
“no; those are all.”
 
“then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.”
 
“that you may settle with your host. i have nothing to do with it.”
 
“i hope it will be lesson to you to make more rash journeys on
 these hills,” cried heathcliff’s stern voice from the kitchen entrance.
 “as to staying here, i don’t keep accommodations for visitors: you must
 share bed with hareton or joseph, if you do.”
 
“i can sleep on chair in this room,” i replied.
 
“no, no! stranger is stranger, be rich or poor: it will not suit
 to permit any one the range of the place while i am off guard!” said
 the unmannerly wretch.
 
with this insult my patience was at an end. i uttered an expression of
 disgust, and pushed past him into the yard, running against earnshaw in
 my haste. it was so dark that i could not see the means of exit; and,
 as i wandered round, i heard another specimen of their civil behaviour
 amongst each other. at first the young man appeared about to befriend
 me.
 
“i’ll go with him as far as the park,” said.
 
“you’ll go with him to hell!” exclaimed his master, or whatever
 relation bore. “and who is to look after the horses, eh?”
 
“a man’s life is of more consequence than one evening’s neglect of the
 horses: somebody must go,” murmured mrs. heathcliff, more kindly than i
 expected.
 
“not at your command!” retorted hareton. “if you set store on him,
 you’d better be quiet.”
 
“then i hope his ghost will haunt you; and i hope mr. heathcliff will
 never get another tenant till the grange is ruin,” she answered,
 sharply.
 
“hearken, hearken, shoo’s cursing on ’em!” muttered joseph, towards
 whom i had been steering.
 
sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of lantern,
 which i seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that i would send it
 back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.
 
“maister, maister, he’s staling t’ lanthern!” shouted the ancient,
 pursuing my retreat. “hey, gnasher! hey, dog! hey wolf, holld him,
 holld him!”
 
on opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat,
 bearing down, and extinguishing the light; while mingled guffaw
 from heathcliff and hareton put the copestone on my rage and
 humiliation. fortunately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretching
 their paws, and yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me
 alive; but they would suffer resurrection, and i was forced to lie
 till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me: then, hatless and
 trembling with wrath, i ordered the miscreants to let out—on their
 peril to keep one minute longer—with several incoherent threats of
 retaliation that, in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of
 king lear.
 
the vehemence of my agitation brought on copious bleeding at the
 nose, and still heathcliff laughed, and still i scolded. i don’t know
 what would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at
 hand rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
 entertainer. this was zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
 forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar. she thought that some
 of them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack
 her master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger
 scoundrel.
 
“well, mr. earnshaw,” she cried, “i wonder what you’ll have agait next?
 are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones? i see this house
 will never do for me—look at t’ poor lad, he’s fair choking! wisht,
 wisht; you mun’n’t go on so. come in, and i’ll cure that: there now,
 hold ye still.”
 
with these words she suddenly splashed pint of icy water down my
 neck, and pulled into the kitchen. mr. heathcliff followed, his
 accidental merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.
 
i was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled
 perforce to accept lodgings under his roof. told zillah to give a
 glass of brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while she
 condoled with on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders,
 whereby i was somewhat revived, ushered to bed.
 



chapter iii
 

while leading the way upstairs, she recommended that i should hide the
 candle, and not make noise; for her master had an odd notion about
 the chamber she would put in, and never let anybody lodge there
 willingly. i asked the reason. she did not know, she answered: she had
 only lived there year or two; and they had so many queer goings on,
 she could not begin to be curious.
 
too stupefied to be curious myself, i fastened my door and glanced
 round for the bed. the whole furniture consisted of chair, a
 clothes-press, and large oak case, with squares cut out near the top
 resembling coach windows. having approached this structure, i looked
 inside, and perceived it to be singular sort of old-fashioned couch,
 very conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of
 the family having room to himself. in fact, it formed little
 closet, and the ledge of window, which it enclosed, served as a
 table.
 
i slid back the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them
 together again, and felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff,
 and every one else.
 
the ledge, where i placed my candle, had few mildewed books piled up
 in one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.
 this writing, however, was nothing but name repeated in all kinds of
 characters, large and small—_catherine earnshaw_, here and there varied
 to _catherine heathcliff_, and then again to _catherine linton_.
 
in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window, and continued
 spelling over catherine earnshaw—heathcliff—linton, till my eyes
 closed; but they had not rested five minutes when glare of white
 letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres—the air swarmed
 with catherines; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, i
 discovered my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and
 perfuming the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.
 
i snuffed it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold and
 lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee.
 it was testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a
 fly-leaf bore the inscription—“catherine earnshaw, her book,” and a
 date some quarter of century back.
 
i shut it, and took up another and another, till i had examined all.
 catherine’s library was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it
 to have been well used, though not altogether for legitimate purpose:
 scarcely one chapter had escaped pen-and-ink commentary—at least the
 appearance of one—covering every morsel of blank that the printer had
 left. some were detached sentences; other parts took the form of a
 regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. at the top of an
 extra page (quite treasure, probably, when first lighted on) i was
 greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my friend
 joseph,—rudely, yet powerfully sketched. an immediate interest kindled
 within for the unknown catherine, and i began forthwith to decipher
 her faded hieroglyphics.
 
“an awful sunday,” commenced the paragraph beneath. “i wish my father
 were back again. hindley is detestable substitute—his conduct to
 heathcliff is atrocious—h. and i are going to rebel—we took our
 initiatory step this evening.
 
“all day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
 joseph must needs get up congregation in the garret; and, while
 hindley and his wife basked downstairs before comfortable fire—doing
 anything but reading their bibles, i’ll answer for it—heathcliff,
 myself, and the unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our
 prayer-books, and mount: we were ranged in row, on sack of corn,
 groaning and shivering, and hoping that joseph would shiver too, so
 that might give us short homily for his own sake. vain idea! the
 service lasted precisely three hours; and yet my brother had the face
 to exclaim, when saw us descending, ‘what, done already?’ on sunday
 evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we did not make much
 noise; now mere titter is sufficient to send us into corners.
 
“‘you forget you have master here,’ says the tyrant. ‘i’ll demolish
 the first who puts out of temper! i insist on perfect sobriety and
 silence. oh, boy! was that you? frances darling, pull his hair as you
 go by: i heard him snap his fingers.’ frances pulled his hair heartily,
 and then went and seated herself on her husband’s knee, and there they
 were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour—foolish
 palaver that we should be ashamed of. we made ourselves as snug as our
 means allowed in the arch of the dresser. i had just fastened our
 pinafores together, and hung them up for curtain, when in comes
 joseph, on an errand from the stables. tears down my handiwork,
 boxes my ears, and croaks:
 
“‘t’ maister nobbut just buried, and sabbath not o’ered, und t’ sound
 o’ t’ gospel still i’ yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking! shame on ye!
 sit ye down, ill childer! there’s good books eneugh if ye’ll read ’em:
 sit ye down, and think o’ yer sowls!’
 
“saying this, compelled us so to square our positions that we might
 receive from the far-off fire dull ray to show us the text of the
 lumber thrust upon us. i could not bear the employment. i took my
 dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing i
 hated good book. heathcliff kicked his to the same place. then there
 was hubbub!
 
“‘maister hindley!’ shouted our chaplain. ‘maister, coom hither! miss
 cathy’s riven th’ back off “th’ helmet o’ salvation,” un’ heathcliff’s
 pawsed his fit into t’ first part o’ “t’ brooad way to destruction!”
 it’s fair flaysome that ye let ’em go on this gait. ech! th’ owd man
 wad ha’ laced ’em properly—but he’s goan!’
 
“hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of
 us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled both into the
 back-kitchen; where, joseph asseverated, ‘owd nick’ would fetch us as
 sure as we were living: and, so comforted, we each sought separate
 nook to await his advent. i reached this book, and pot of ink from a
 shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give light, and i have got
 the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
 impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman’s
 cloak, and have scamper on the moors, under its shelter. pleasant
 suggestion—and then, if the surly old man come in, may believe his
 prophecy verified—we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we
 are here.”
 
* * * * * *
 

i suppose catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence took
 up another subject: she waxed lachrymose.
 
“how little did i dream that hindley would ever make cry so!” she
 wrote. “my head aches, till i cannot keep it on the pillow; and still i
 can’t give over. poor heathcliff! hindley calls him vagabond, and
 won’t let him sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, says, he
 and i must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the
 house if we break his orders. has been blaming our father (how dared
 he?) for treating h. too liberally; and swears will reduce him to
 his right place—”
 
* * * * * *
 

i began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wandered from
 manuscript to print. i saw red ornamented title—“seventy times seven,
 and the first of the seventy-first. pious discourse delivered by the
 reverend jabez branderham, in the chapel of gimmerden sough.” and while
 i was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess what jabez
 branderham would make of his subject, i sank back in bed, and fell
 asleep. alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper! what else
 could it be that made pass such terrible night? i don’t remember
 another that i can at all compare with it since i was capable of
 suffering.
 
i began to dream, almost before i ceased to be sensible of my locality.
 i thought it was morning; and i had set out on my way home, with joseph
 for guide. the snow lay yards deep in our road; and, as we floundered
 on, my companion wearied with constant reproaches that i had not
 brought pilgrim’s staff: telling that i could never get into the
 house without one, and boastfully flourishing heavy-headed cudgel,
 which i understood to be so denominated. for moment i considered it
 absurd that i should need such weapon to gain admittance into my own
 residence. then new idea flashed across me. i was not going there: we
 were journeying to hear the famous jabez branderham preach, from the
 text—“seventy times seven;” and either joseph, the preacher, or i had
 committed the “first of the seventy-first,” and were to be publicly
 exposed and excommunicated.
 
we came to the chapel. i have passed it really in my walks, twice or
 thrice; it lies in hollow, between two hills: an elevated hollow,
 near swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes
 of embalming on the few corpses deposited there. the roof has been kept
 whole hitherto; but as the clergyman’s stipend is only twenty pounds
 per annum, and house with two rooms, threatening speedily to
 determine into one, clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor:
 especially as it is currently reported that his flock would rather let
 him starve than increase the living by one penny from their own
 pockets. however, in my dream, jabez had full and attentive
 congregation; and preached—good god! what sermon; divided into
 _four hundred and ninety_ parts, each fully equal to an ordinary
 address from the pulpit, and each discussing separate sin! where he
 searched for them, i cannot tell. had his private manner of
 interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the brother should sin
 different sins on every occasion. they were of the most curious
 character: odd transgressions that i never imagined previously.
 
oh, how weary i grew. how i writhed, and yawned, and nodded, and
 revived! how i pinched and pricked myself, and rubbed my eyes, and
 stood up, and sat down again, and nudged joseph to inform if he
 would _ever_ have done. i was condemned to hear all out: finally, he
 reached the “_first of the seventy-first_.” at that crisis, sudden
 inspiration descended on me; i was moved to rise and denounce jabez
 branderham as the sinner of the that christian need pardon.
 
“sir,” i exclaimed, “sitting here within these four walls, at one
 stretch, i have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads
 of your discourse. seventy times seven times have i plucked up my hat
 and been about to depart—seventy times seven times have you
 preposterously forced to resume my seat. the four hundred and
 ninety-first is too much. fellow-martyrs, have at him! drag him down,
 and crush him to atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no
 more!”
 
“_thou art the man!_” cried jabez, after solemn pause, leaning over
 his cushion. “seventy times seven times didst thou gapingly contort thy
 visage—seventy times seven did i take counsel with my soul—lo, this is
 human weakness: this also may be absolved! the first of the
 seventy-first is come. brethren, execute upon him the judgment written.
 such honour have all his saints!”
 
with that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting their pilgrim’s
 staves, rushed round in body; and i, having weapon to raise in
 self-defence, commenced grappling with joseph, my nearest and most
 ferocious assailant, for his. in the confluence of the multitude,
 several clubs crossed; blows, aimed at me, fell on other sconces.
 presently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter
 rappings: every man’s hand was against his neighbour; and branderham,
 unwilling to remain idle, poured forth his zeal in shower of loud
 taps on the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at
 last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me. and what was it that had
 suggested the tremendous tumult? what had played jabez’s part in the
 row? merely the branch of fir-tree that touched my lattice as the
 blast wailed by, and rattled its dry cones against the panes! i
 listened doubtingly an instant; detected the disturber, then turned and
 dozed, and dreamt again: if possible, still more disagreeably than
 before.
 
this time, i remembered i was lying in the oak closet, and i heard
 distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow; i heard, also,
 the fir bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it to the right
 cause: but it annoyed so much, that i resolved to silence it, if
 possible; and, i thought, i rose and endeavoured to unhasp the
 casement. the hook was soldered into the staple: circumstance
 observed by when awake, but forgotten. “i must stop it,
 nevertheless!” i muttered, knocking my knuckles through the glass, and
 stretching an arm out to seize the importunate branch; instead of
 which, my fingers closed on the fingers of little, ice-cold hand!
 
the intense horror of nightmare came over me: i tried to draw back my
 arm, but the hand clung to it, and most melancholy voice sobbed,
 
“let in—let in!”
 
“who are you?” i asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.
 
“catherine linton,” it replied, shiveringly (why did i think of
 _linton_? i had read _earnshaw_ twenty times for linton)—“i’m come
 home: i’d lost my way on the moor!”
 
as it spoke, i discerned, obscurely, child’s face looking through the
 window. terror made cruel; and, finding it useless to attempt
 shaking the creature off, i pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and
 rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes:
 still it wailed, “let in!” and maintained its tenacious gripe,
 almost maddening with fear.
 
“how can i!” i said at length. “let _me_ go, if you want to let you
 in!”
 
the fingers relaxed, i snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly piled
 the books up in pyramid against it, and stopped my ears to exclude
 the lamentable prayer.
 
i seemed to keep them closed above quarter of an hour; yet, the
 instant i listened again, there was the doleful cry moaning on!
 
“begone!” i shouted. “i’ll never let you in, not if you beg for twenty
 years.”
 
“it is twenty years,” mourned the voice: “twenty years. i’ve been a
 waif for twenty years!”
 
thereat began feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved
 as if thrust forward.
 
i tried to jump up; but could not stir limb; and so yelled aloud, in
 frenzy of fright.
 
to my confusion, i discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty footsteps
 approached my chamber door; somebody pushed it open, with vigorous
 hand, and light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed.
 i sat shuddering, yet, and wiping the perspiration from my forehead:
 the intruder appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself.
 
at last, said, in half-whisper, plainly not expecting an answer,
 
“is any one here?”
 
i considered it best to confess my presence; for i knew heathcliff’s
 accents, and feared might search further, if i kept quiet.
 
with this intention, i turned and opened the panels. i shall not soon
 forget the effect my action produced.
 
heathcliff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and trousers; with a
 candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white as the wall
 behind him. the first creak of the oak startled him like an electric
 shock: the light leaped from his hold to distance of some feet, and
 his agitation was so extreme, that could hardly pick it up.
 
“it is only your guest, sir,” i called out, desirous to spare him the
 humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. “i had the misfortune to
 scream in my sleep, owing to frightful nightmare. i’m sorry i
 disturbed you.”
 
“oh, god confound you, mr. lockwood! i wish you were at the—” commenced
 my host, setting the candle on chair, because found it impossible
 to hold it steady. “and who showed you up into this room?” he
 continued, crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to
 subdue the maxillary convulsions. “who was it? i’ve good mind to turn
 them out of the house this moment!”
 
“it was your servant zillah,” i replied, flinging myself on to the
 floor, and rapidly resuming my garments. “i should not care if you did,
 mr. heathcliff; she richly deserves it. i suppose that she wanted to
 get another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense. well, it
 is—swarming with ghosts and goblins! you have reason in shutting it up,
 i assure you. one will thank you for doze in such den!”
 
“what do you mean?” asked heathcliff, “and what are you doing? lie down
 and finish out the night, since you _are_ here; but, for heaven’s sake!
 don’t repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you
 were having your throat cut!”
 
“if the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably would have
 strangled me!” i returned. “i’m not going to endure the persecutions of
 your hospitable ancestors again. was not the reverend jabez branderham
 akin to you on the mother’s side? and that minx, catherine linton, or
 earnshaw, or however she was called—she must have been a
 changeling—wicked little soul! she told she had been walking the
 earth these twenty years: just punishment for her mortal
 transgressions, i’ve doubt!”
 
scarcely were these words uttered when i recollected the association of
 heathcliff’s with catherine’s name in the book, which had completely
 slipped from my memory, till thus awakened. i blushed at my
 inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the
 offence, i hastened to add—“the truth is, sir, i passed the first part
 of the night in—” here i stopped afresh—i was about to say “perusing
 those old volumes,” then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
 written, as well as their printed, contents; so, correcting myself, i
 went on—“in spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge. a
 monotonous occupation, calculated to set asleep, like counting, or—”
 
“what _can_ you mean by talking in this way to _me!_” thundered
 heathcliff with savage vehemence. “how—how _dare_ you, under my
 roof?—god! he’s mad to speak so!” and struck his forehead with rage.
 
i did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my
 explanation; but seemed so powerfully affected that i took pity and
 proceeded with my dreams; affirming i had never heard the appellation
 of “catherine linton” before, but reading it often over produced an
 impression which personified itself when i had longer my imagination
 under control. heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the
 bed, as i spoke; finally sitting down almost concealed behind it. i
 guessed, however, by his irregular and intercepted breathing, that he
 struggled to vanquish an excess of violent emotion. not liking to show
 him that i had heard the conflict, i continued my toilette rather
 noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquised on the length of the
 night: “not three o’clock yet! i could have taken oath it had been six.
 time stagnates here: we must surely have retired to rest at eight!”
 
“always at nine in winter, and rise at four,” said my host, suppressing
 groan: and, as i fancied, by the motion of his arm’s shadow, dashing
 tear from his eyes. “mr. lockwood,” added, “you may go into my
 room: you’ll only be in the way, coming downstairs so early: and your
 childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me.”
 
“and for me, too,” i replied. “i’ll walk in the yard till daylight, and
 then i’ll be off; and you need not dread repetition of my intrusion.
 i’m now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or
 town. sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself.”
 
“delightful company!” muttered heathcliff. “take the candle, and go
 where you please. i shall join you directly. keep out of the yard,
 though, the dogs are unchained; and the house—juno mounts sentinel
 there, and—nay, you can only ramble about the steps and passages. but,
 away with you! i’ll come in two minutes!”
 
i obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the
 narrow lobbies led, i stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a
 piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly,
 his apparent sense. got on to the bed, and wrenched open the
 lattice, bursting, as pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion
 of tears. “come in! come in!” sobbed. “cathy, do come. oh, do—_once_
 more! oh! my heart’s darling! hear _this_ time, catherine, at last!”
 the spectre showed spectre’s ordinary caprice: it gave sign of
 being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even reaching my
 station, and blowing out the light.
 
there was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this
 raving, that my compassion made overlook its folly, and i drew off,
 half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at having related my
 ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that agony; though _why_ was
 beyond my comprehension. i descended cautiously to the lower regions,
 and landed in the back-kitchen, where gleam of fire, raked compactly
 together, enabled to rekindle my candle. nothing was stirring except
 brindled, grey cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted with a
 querulous mew.
 
two benches, shaped in sections of circle, nearly enclosed the
 hearth; on one of these i stretched myself, and grimalkin mounted the
 other. we were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat, and
 then it was joseph, shuffling down wooden ladder that vanished in the
 roof, through trap: the ascent to his garret, i suppose. cast a
 sinister look at the little flame which i had enticed to play between
 the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and bestowing himself in
 the vacancy, commenced the operation of stuffing three-inch pipe with
 tobacco. my presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed piece of
 impudence too shameful for remark: silently applied the tube to his
 lips, folded his arms, and puffed away. i let him enjoy the luxury
 unannoyed; and after sucking out his last wreath, and heaving a
 profound sigh, got up, and departed as solemnly as came.
 
more elastic footstep entered next; and now i opened my mouth for a
 “good-morning,” but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for
 hareton earnshaw was performing his orison _sotto voce_, in series of
 curses directed against every object touched, while rummaged a
 corner for spade or shovel to dig through the drifts. glanced over
 the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of
 exchanging civilities with as with my companion the cat. i guessed,
 by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard
 couch, made movement to follow him. noticed this, and thrust at an
 inner door with the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticulate
 sound that there was the place where i must go, if i changed my
 locality.
 
it opened into the house, where the females were already astir; zillah
 urging flakes of flame up the chimney with colossal bellows; and mrs.
 heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading book by the aid of the
 blaze. she held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her
 eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation; desisting from it only to
 chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to push away dog,
 now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face. i was
 surprised to see heathcliff there also. stood by the fire, his back
 towards me, just finishing stormy scene with poor zillah; who ever
 and anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron,
 and heave an indignant groan.
 
“and you, you worthless—” broke out as i entered, turning to his
 daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as duck, or
 sheep, but generally represented by dash—. “there you are, at your
 idle tricks again! the rest of them do earn their bread—you live on my
 charity! put your trash away, and find something to do. you shall pay
 for the plague of having you eternally in my sight—do you hear,
 damnable jade?”
 
“i’ll put my trash away, because you can make if i refuse,” answered
 the young lady, closing her book, and throwing it on chair. “but i’ll
 not do anything, though you should swear your tongue out, except what i
 please!”
 
heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to safer distance,
 obviously acquainted with its weight. having desire to be
 entertained by cat-and-dog combat, i stepped forward briskly, as if
 eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and innocent of any
 knowledge of the interrupted dispute. each had enough decorum to
 suspend further hostilities: heathcliff placed his fists, out of
 temptation, in his pockets; mrs. heathcliff curled her lip, and walked
 to seat far off, where she kept her word by playing the part of a
 statue during the remainder of my stay. that was not long. i declined
 joining their breakfast, and, at the first gleam of dawn, took an
 opportunity of escaping into the free air, now clear, and still, and
 cold as impalpable ice.
 
my landlord halloed for to stop ere i reached the bottom of the
 garden, and offered to accompany across the moor. it was well he
 did, for the whole hill-back was one billowy, white ocean; the swells
 and falls not indicating corresponding rises and depressions in the
 ground: many pits, at least, were filled to level; and entire ranges
 of mounds, the refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart which my
 yesterday’s walk left pictured in my mind. i had remarked on one side
 of the road, at intervals of six or seven yards, line of upright
 stones, continued through the whole length of the barren: these were
 erected and daubed with lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark,
 and also when fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps on
 either hand with the firmer path: but, excepting dirty dot pointing
 up here and there, all traces of their existence had vanished: and my
 companion found it necessary to warn frequently to steer to the
 right or left, when i imagined i was following, correctly, the windings
 of the road.
 
we exchanged little conversation, and halted at the entrance of
 thrushcross park, saying, i could make error there. our adieux were
 limited to hasty bow, and then i pushed forward, trusting to my own
 resources; for the porter’s lodge is untenanted as yet. the distance
 from the gate to the grange is two miles; i believe i managed to make
 it four, what with losing myself among the trees, and sinking up to the
 neck in snow: predicament which only those who have experienced it
 can appreciate. at any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the clock
 chimed twelve as i entered the house; and that gave exactly an hour for
 every mile of the usual way from wuthering heights.
 
my human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me; exclaiming,
 tumultuously, they had completely given up: everybody conjectured
 that i perished last night; and they were wondering how they must set
 about the search for my remains. i bid them be quiet, now that they saw
 returned, and, benumbed to my very heart, i dragged upstairs;
 whence, after putting on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or
 forty minutes, to restore the animal heat, i adjourned to my study,
 feeble as kitten: almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and
 smoking coffee which the servant had prepared for my refreshment.
 



chapter iv
 

what vain weather-cocks we are! i, who had determined to hold myself
 independent of all social intercourse, and thanked my stars that, at
 length, i had lighted on spot where it was next to impracticable—i,
 weak wretch, after maintaining till dusk struggle with low spirits
 and solitude, was finally compelled to strike my colours; and under
 pretence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my
 establishment, i desired mrs. dean, when she brought in supper, to sit
 down while i ate it; hoping sincerely she would prove regular gossip,
 and either rouse to animation or lull to sleep by her talk.
 
“you have lived here considerable time,” i commenced; “did you not
 say sixteen years?”
 
“eighteen, sir: i came when the mistress was married, to wait on her;
 after she died, the master retained for his housekeeper.”
 
“indeed.”
 
there ensued pause. she was not gossip, i feared; unless about her
 own affairs, and those could hardly interest me. however, having
 studied for an interval, with fist on either knee, and cloud of
 meditation over her ruddy countenance, she ejaculated—“ah, times are
 greatly changed since then!”
 
“yes,” i remarked, “you’ve seen good many alterations, i suppose?”
 
“i have: and troubles too,” she said.
 
“oh, i’ll turn the talk on my landlord’s family!” i thought to myself.
 “a good subject to start! and that pretty girl-widow, i should like to
 know her history: whether she be native of the country, or, as is
 more probable, an exotic that the surly _indigenae_ will not recognise
 for kin.” with this intention i asked mrs. dean why heathcliff let
 thrushcross grange, and preferred living in situation and residence
 so much inferior. “is not rich enough to keep the estate in good
 order?” i inquired.
 
“rich, sir!” she returned. “he has nobody knows what money, and every
 year it increases. yes, yes, he’s rich enough to live in finer house
 than this: but he’s very near—close-handed; and, if had meant to
 flit to thrushcross grange, as soon as heard of good tenant he
 could not have borne to miss the chance of getting few hundreds more.
 it is strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
 world!”
 
“he had son, it seems?”
 
“yes, had one—he is dead.”
 
“and that young lady, mrs. heathcliff, is his widow?”
 
“yes.”
 
“where did she come from originally?”
 
“why, sir, she is my late master’s daughter: catherine linton was her
 maiden name. i nursed her, poor thing! i did wish mr. heathcliff would
 remove here, and then we might have been together again.”
 
“what! catherine linton?” i exclaimed, astonished. but minute’s
 reflection convinced it was not my ghostly catherine. “then,” i
 continued, “my predecessor’s name was linton?”
 
“it was.”
 
“and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
 heathcliff? are they relations?”
 
“no; is the late mrs. linton’s nephew.”
 
“the young lady’s cousin, then?”
 
“yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother’s, the
 other on the father’s side: heathcliff married mr. linton’s sister.”
 
“i see the house at wuthering heights has ‘earnshaw’ carved over the
 front door. are they an old family?”
 
“very old, sir; and hareton is the last of them, as our miss cathy is
 of us—i mean, of the lintons. have you been to wuthering heights? i beg
 pardon for asking; but i should like to hear how she is!”
 
“mrs. heathcliff? she looked very well, and very handsome; yet, i
 think, not very happy.”
 
“oh dear, i don’t wonder! and how did you like the master?”
 
“a rough fellow, rather, mrs. dean. is not that his character?”
 
“rough as saw-edge, and hard as whinstone! the less you meddle with
 him the better.”
 
“he must have had some ups and downs in life to make him such churl.
 do you know anything of his history?”
 
“it’s cuckoo’s, sir—i know all about it: except where was born,
 and who were his parents, and how got his money at first. and
 hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock! the unfortunate
 lad is the only one in all this parish that does not guess how has
 been cheated.”
 
“well, mrs. dean, it will be charitable deed to tell something of
 my neighbours: i feel i shall not rest if i go to bed; so be good
 enough to sit and chat an hour.”
 
“oh, certainly, sir! i’ll just fetch little sewing, and then i’ll sit
 as long as you please. but you’ve caught cold: i saw you shivering, and
 you must have some gruel to drive it out.”
 
the worthy woman bustled off, and i crouched nearer the fire; my head
 felt hot, and the rest of chill: moreover, i was excited, almost to
 pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and brain. this caused to
 feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as i am still) of serious
 effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday. she returned
 presently, bringing smoking basin and basket of work; and, having
 placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to
 find so companionable.
 
* * * * *
 

before i came to live here, she commenced—waiting farther invitation
 to her story—i was almost always at wuthering heights; because my
 mother had nursed mr. hindley earnshaw, that was hareton’s father, and
 i got used to playing with the children: i ran errands too, and helped
 to make hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody
 would set to. one fine summer morning—it was the beginning of
 harvest, i remember—mr. earnshaw, the old master, came downstairs,
 dressed for journey; and, after had told joseph what was to be
 done during the day, turned to hindley, and cathy, and me—for i sat
 eating my porridge with them—and said, speaking to his son, “now, my
 bonny man, i’m going to liverpool to-day, what shall i bring you? you
 may choose what you like: only let it be little, for i shall walk there
 and back: sixty miles each way, that is long spell!” hindley named a
 fiddle, and then asked miss cathy; she was hardly six years old, but
 she could ride any horse in the stable, and she chose whip. did
 not forget me; for had kind heart, though was rather severe
 sometimes. promised to bring pocketful of apples and pears, and
 then kissed his children, said good-bye, and set off.
 
it seemed long while to us all—the three days of his absence—and
 often did little cathy ask when would be home. mrs. earnshaw
 expected him by supper-time on the third evening, and she put the meal
 off hour after hour; there were signs of his coming, however, and at
 last the children got tired of running down to the gate to look. then
 it grew dark; she would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to
 be allowed to stay up; and, just about eleven o’clock, the door-latch
 was raised quietly, and in stepped the master. threw himself into a
 chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for was
 nearly killed—he would not have such another walk for the three
 kingdoms.
 
“and at the end of it to be flighted to death!” said, opening his
 great-coat, which held bundled up in his arms. “see here, wife! i
 was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e’en take it
 as gift of god; though it’s as dark almost as if it came from the
 devil.”
 
we crowded round, and over miss cathy’s head i had peep at dirty,
 ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed,
 its face looked older than catherine’s; yet when it was set on its
 feet, it only stared round, and repeated over and over again some
 gibberish that nobody could understand. i was frightened, and mrs.
 earnshaw was ready to fling it out of doors: she did fly up, asking how
 could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had
 their own bairns to feed and fend for? what meant to do with it, and
 whether were mad? the master tried to explain the matter; but was
 really half dead with fatigue, and all that i could make out, amongst
 her scolding, was tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless, and
 as good as dumb, in the streets of liverpool, where picked it up and
 inquired for its owner. not soul knew to whom it belonged, said;
 and his money and time being both limited, thought it better to take
 it home with him at once, than run into vain expenses there: because he
 was determined would not leave it as found it. well, the
 conclusion was, that my mistress grumbled herself calm; and mr.
 earnshaw told to wash it, and give it clean things, and let it sleep
 with the children.
 
hindley and cathy contented themselves with looking and listening till
 peace was restored: then, both began searching their father’s pockets
 for the presents had promised them. the former was boy of
 fourteen, but when drew out what had been fiddle, crushed to
 morsels in the great-coat, blubbered aloud; and cathy, when she
 learned the master had lost her whip in attending on the stranger,
 showed her humour by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing;
 earning for her pains sound blow from her father, to teach her
 cleaner manners. they entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or
 even in their room; and i had more sense, so i put it on the landing
 of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow. by chance, or
 else attracted by hearing his voice, it crept to mr. earnshaw’s door,
 and there found it on quitting his chamber. inquiries were made as
 to how it got there; i was obliged to confess, and in recompense for my
 cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house.
 
this was heathcliff’s first introduction to the family. on coming back
 few days afterwards (for i did not consider my banishment perpetual),
 i found they had christened him “heathcliff”: it was the name of son
 who died in childhood, and it has served him ever since, both for
 christian and surname. miss cathy and were now very thick; but
 hindley hated him: and to say the truth i did the same; and we plagued
 and went on with him shamefully: for i wasn’t reasonable enough to feel
 my injustice, and the mistress never put in word on his behalf when
 she saw him wronged.
 
seemed sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment:
 would stand hindley’s blows without winking or shedding tear, and
 my pinches moved him only to draw in breath and open his eyes, as if
 had hurt himself by accident, and nobody was to blame. this
 endurance made old earnshaw furious, when discovered his son
 persecuting the poor fatherless child, as called him. took to
 heathcliff strangely, believing all said (for that matter, said
 precious little, and generally the truth), and petting him up far above
 cathy, who was too mischievous and wayward for favourite.
 
so, from the very beginning, bred bad feeling in the house; and at
 mrs. earnshaw’s death, which happened in less than two years after, the
 young master had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rather
 than friend, and heathcliff as usurper of his parent’s affections
 and his privileges; and grew bitter with brooding over these
 injuries. i sympathised while; but when the children fell ill of the
 measles, and i had to tend them, and take on the cares of woman at
 once, i changed my idea. heathcliff was dangerously sick; and while he
 lay at the worst would have constantly by his pillow: i suppose
 felt i did good deal for him, and hadn’t wit to guess that i
 was compelled to do it. however, i will say this, was the quietest
 child that ever nurse watched over. the difference between him and the
 others forced to be less partial. cathy and her brother harassed me
 terribly: _he_ was as uncomplaining as lamb; though hardness, not
 gentleness, made him give little trouble.
 
got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in great measure owing
 to me, and praised for my care. i was vain of his commendations, and
 softened towards the being by whose means i earned them, and thus
 hindley lost his last ally: still i couldn’t dote on heathcliff, and i
 wondered often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy;
 who never, to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of
 gratitude. was not insolent to his benefactor, was simply
 insensible; though knowing perfectly the hold had on his heart, and
 conscious had only to speak and all the house would be obliged to
 bend to his wishes. as an instance, i remember mr. earnshaw once bought
 couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
 heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when he
 discovered it, said to hindley—
 
“you must exchange horses with me: i don’t like mine; and if you won’t
 i shall tell your father of the three thrashings you’ve given this
 week, and show him my arm, which is black to the shoulder.” hindley put
 out his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears. “you’d better do it at
 once,” persisted, escaping to the porch (they were in the stable):
 “you will have to: and if i speak of these blows, you’ll get them again
 with interest.” “off, dog!” cried hindley, threatening him with an iron
 weight used for weighing potatoes and hay. “throw it,” replied,
 standing still, “and then i’ll tell how you boasted that you would turn
 out of doors as soon as died, and see whether will not turn
 you out directly.” hindley threw it, hitting him on the breast, and
 down fell, but staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and,
 had not i prevented it, would have gone just so to the master, and
 got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who
 had caused it. “take my colt, gipsy, then!” said young earnshaw. “and i
 pray that may break your neck: take him, and be damned, you beggarly
 interloper! and wheedle my father out of all has: only afterwards
 show him what you are, imp of satan.—and take that, i hope he’ll kick
 out your brains!”
 
heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own stall;
 was passing behind it, when hindley finished his speech by knocking
 him under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether his hopes
 were fulfilled, ran away as fast as could. i was surprised to
 witness how coolly the child gathered himself up, and went on with his
 intention; exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a
 bundle of to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned,
 before entered the house. i persuaded him easily to let lay the
 blame of his bruises on the horse: minded little what tale was told
 since had what wanted. complained so seldom, indeed, of such
 stirs as these, that i really thought him not vindictive: i was
 deceived completely, as you will hear.
 



chapter v
 

in the course of time mr. earnshaw began to fail. had been active
 and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly; and when was
 confined to the chimney-corner grew grievously irritable. nothing
 vexed him; and suspected slights of his authority nearly threw him into
 fits. this was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose
 upon, or domineer over, his favourite: was painfully jealous lest a
 word should be spoken amiss to him; seeming to have got into his head
 the notion that, because liked heathcliff, all hated, and longed to
 do him an ill-turn. it was disadvantage to the lad; for the kinder
 among us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his
 partiality; and that humouring was rich nourishment to the child’s
 pride and black tempers. still it became in manner necessary; twice,
 or thrice, hindley’s manifestation of scorn, while his father was near,
 roused the old man to fury: seized his stick to strike him, and
 shook with rage that could not do it.
 
at last, our curate (we had curate then who made the living answer by
 teaching the little lintons and earnshaws, and farming his bit of land
 himself) advised that the young man should be sent to college; and mr.
 earnshaw agreed, though with heavy spirit, for said—“hindley was
 nought, and would never thrive as where wandered.”
 
i hoped heartily we should have peace now. it hurt to think the
 master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed. i fancied the
 discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements; as
 would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was in his
 sinking frame. we might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for
 two people—miss cathy, and joseph, the servant: you saw him, i daresay,
 up yonder. was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest
 self-righteous pharisee that ever ransacked bible to rake the
 promises to himself and fling the curses to his neighbours. by his
 knack of sermonising and pious discoursing, contrived to make a
 great impression on mr. earnshaw; and the more feeble the master
 became, the more influence gained. was relentless in worrying him
 about his soul’s concerns, and about ruling his children rigidly. he
 encouraged him to regard hindley as reprobate; and, night after
 night, regularly grumbled out long string of tales against
 heathcliff and catherine: always minding to flatter earnshaw’s weakness
 by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.
 
certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw child take up
 before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
 in day: from the hour she came downstairs till the hour she went to
 bed, we had not minute’s security that she wouldn’t be in mischief.
 her spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always
 going—singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the
 same. wild, wicked slip she was—but she had the bonniest eye, the
 sweetest smile, and lightest foot in the parish: and, after all, i
 believe she meant harm; for when once she made you cry in good
 earnest, it seldom happened that she would not keep you company, and
 oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her. she was much too
 fond of heathcliff. the greatest punishment we could invent for her was
 to keep her separate from him: yet she got chided more than any of us
 on his account. in play, she liked exceedingly to act the little
 mistress; using her hands freely, and commanding her companions: she
 did so to me, but i would not bear slapping and ordering; and so i let
 her know.
 
now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: had
 always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
 idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
 condition than was in his prime. his peevish reproofs wakened in her
 naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we
 were all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy
 look, and her ready words; turning joseph’s religious curses into
 ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most—showing
 how her pretended insolence, which thought real, had more power over
 heathcliff than his kindness: how the boy would do _her_ bidding in
 anything, and _his_ only when it suited his own inclination. after
 behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to
 make it up at night. “nay, cathy,” the old man would say, “i cannot
 love thee, thou’rt worse than thy brother. go, say thy prayers, child,
 and ask god’s pardon. i doubt thy mother and i must rue that we ever
 reared thee!” that made her cry, at first; and then being repulsed
 continually hardened her, and she laughed if i told her to say she was
 sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.
 
but the hour came, at last, that ended mr. earnshaw’s troubles on
 earth. died quietly in his chair one october evening, seated by the
 fire-side. high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
 chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were
 all together—i, little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting,
 and joseph reading his bible near the table (for the servants generally
 sat in the house then, after their work was done). miss cathy had been
 sick, and that made her still; she leant against her father’s knee, and
 heathcliff was lying on the floor with his head in her lap. i remember
 the master, before fell into doze, stroking her bonny hair—it
 pleased him rarely to see her gentle—and saying, “why canst thou not
 always be good lass, cathy?” and she turned her face up to his, and
 laughed, and answered, “why cannot you always be good man, father?”
 but as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said
 she would sing him to sleep. she began singing very low, till his
 fingers dropped from hers, and his head sank on his breast. then i told
 her to hush, and not stir, for fear she should wake him. we all kept as
 mute as mice full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only
 joseph, having finished his chapter, got up and said that must rouse
 the master for prayers and bed. stepped forward, and called him by
 name, and touched his shoulder; but would not move: so took the
 candle and looked at him. i thought there was something wrong as set
 down the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them
 to “frame upstairs, and make little din—they might pray alone that
 evening—he had summut to do.”
 
“i shall bid father good-night first,” said catherine, putting her arms
 round his neck, before we could hinder her. the poor thing discovered
 her loss directly—she screamed out—“oh, he’s dead, heathcliff! he’s
 dead!” and they both set up heart-breaking cry.
 
i joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but joseph asked what we
 could be thinking of to roar in that way over saint in heaven. he
 told to put on my cloak and run to gimmerton for the doctor and the
 parson. i could not guess the use that either would be of, then.
 however, i went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor,
 back with me; the other said would come in the morning. leaving
 joseph to explain matters, i ran to the children’s room: their door was
 ajar, i saw they had never lain down, though it was past midnight; but
 they were calmer, and did not need to console them. the little souls
 were comforting each other with better thoughts than i could have hit
 on: parson in the world ever pictured heaven so beautifully as they
 did, in their innocent talk; and, while i sobbed and listened, i could
 not help wishing we were all there safe together.
 



chapter vi
 

mr. hindley came home to the funeral; and—a thing that amazed us, and
 set the neighbours gossiping right and left—he brought wife with him.
 what she was, and where she was born, never informed us: probably,
 she had neither money nor name to recommend her, or would scarcely
 have kept the union from his father.
 
she was not one that would have disturbed the house much on her own
 account. every object she saw, the moment she crossed the threshold,
 appeared to delight her; and every circumstance that took place about
 her: except the preparing for the burial, and the presence of the
 mourners. i thought she was half silly, from her behaviour while that
 went on: she ran into her chamber, and made come with her, though i
 should have been dressing the children: and there she sat shivering and
 clasping her hands, and asking repeatedly—“are they gone yet?” then she
 began describing with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on her
 to see black; and started, and trembled, and, at last, fell
 a-weeping—and when i asked what was the matter, answered, she didn’t
 know; but she felt so afraid of dying! i imagined her as little likely
 to die as myself. she was rather thin, but young, and
 fresh-complexioned, and her eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds. i did
 remark, to be sure, that mounting the stairs made her breathe very
 quick; that the least sudden noise set her all in quiver, and that
 she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but i knew nothing of what these
 symptoms portended, and had impulse to sympathise with her. we don’t
 in general take to foreigners here, mr. lockwood, unless they take to
 us first.
 
young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his
 absence. had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and
 dressed quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, told
 joseph and we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the
 back-kitchen, and leave the house for him. indeed, would have
 carpeted and papered small spare room for parlour; but his wife
 expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing fireplace,
 at the pewter dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space
 there was to move about in where they usually sat, that thought it
 unnecessary to her comfort, and so dropped the intention.
 
she expressed pleasure, too, at finding sister among her new
 acquaintance; and she prattled to catherine, and kissed her, and ran
 about with her, and gave her quantities of presents, at the beginning.
 her affection tired very soon, however, and when she grew peevish,
 hindley became tyrannical. few words from her, evincing dislike to
 heathcliff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy.
 drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of the
 instructions of the curate, and insisted that should labour out of
 doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any other lad on the
 farm.
 
heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because cathy
 taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the
 fields. they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the
 young master being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they
 did, so they kept clear of him. would not even have seen after their
 going to church on sundays, only joseph and the curate reprimanded his
 carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to
 order heathcliff flogging, and catherine fast from dinner or
 supper. but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the
 moors in the morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment
 grew mere thing to laugh at. the curate might set as many chapters as
 pleased for catherine to get by heart, and joseph might thrash
 heathcliff till his arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they
 were together again: at least the minute they had contrived some
 naughty plan of revenge; and many time i’ve cried to myself to watch
 them growing more reckless daily, and i not daring to speak syllable,
 for fear of losing the small power i still retained over the unfriended
 creatures. one sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished from
 the sitting-room, for making noise, or light offence of the kind;
 and when i went to call them to supper, i could discover them nowhere.
 we searched the house, above and below, and the yard and stables; they
 were invisible: and, at last, hindley in passion told us to bolt the
 doors, and swore nobody should let them in that night. the household
 went to bed; and i, too anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put
 my head out to hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in
 spite of the prohibition, should they return. in while, i
 distinguished steps coming up the road, and the light of lantern
 glimmered through the gate. i threw shawl over my head and ran to
 prevent them from waking mr. earnshaw by knocking. there was
 heathcliff, by himself: it gave start to see him alone.
 
“where is miss catherine?” i cried hurriedly. “no accident, i hope?”
 “at thrushcross grange,” answered; “and i would have been there too,
 but they had not the manners to ask to stay.” “well, you will catch
 it!” i said: “you’ll never be content till you’re sent about your
 business. what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange?”
 “let get off my wet clothes, and i’ll tell you all about it, nelly,”
 replied. i bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he
 undressed and i waited to put out the candle, continued—“cathy and i
 escaped from the wash-house to have ramble at liberty, and getting a
 glimpse of the grange lights, we thought we would just go and see
 whether the lintons passed their sunday evenings standing shivering in
 corners, while their father and mother sat eating and drinking, and
 singing and laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire. do
 you think they do? or reading sermons, and being catechised by their
 man-servant, and set to learn column of scripture names, if they
 don’t answer properly?” “probably not,” i responded. “they are good
 children, doubt, and don’t deserve the treatment you receive, for
 your bad conduct.” “don’t cant, nelly,” said: “nonsense! we ran from
 the top of the heights to the park, without stopping—catherine
 completely beaten in the race, because she was barefoot. you’ll have to
 seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow. we crept through broken
 hedge, groped our way up the path, and planted ourselves on a
 flower-plot under the drawing-room window. the light came from thence;
 they had not put up the shutters, and the curtains were only half
 closed. both of us were able to look in by standing on the basement,
 and clinging to the ledge, and we saw—ah! it was beautiful—a splendid
 place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs and tables, and
 pure white ceiling bordered by gold, shower of glass-drops hanging
 in silver chains from the centre, and shimmering with little soft
 tapers. old mr. and mrs. linton were not there; edgar and his sister
 had it entirely to themselves. shouldn’t they have been happy? we
 should have thought ourselves in heaven! and now, guess what your good
 children were doing? isabella—i believe she is eleven, year younger
 than cathy—lay screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking as
 if witches were running red-hot needles into her. edgar stood on the
 hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the table sat little
 dog, shaking its paw and yelping; which, from their mutual accusations,
 we understood they had nearly pulled in two between them. the idiots!
 that was their pleasure! to quarrel who should hold heap of warm
 hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to get it,
 refused to take it. we laughed outright at the petted things; we did
 despise them! when would you catch wishing to have what catherine
 wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
 sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i’d not
 exchange, for thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton’s
 at thrushcross grange—not if i might have the privilege of flinging
 joseph off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with
 hindley’s blood!”
 
“hush, hush!” i interrupted. “still you have not told me, heathcliff,
 how catherine is left behind?”
 
“i told you we laughed,” answered. “the lintons heard us, and with
 one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
 then cry, ‘oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma, come here. oh,
 papa, oh!’ they really did howl out something in that way. we made
 frightful noises to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off
 the ledge, because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
 better flee. i had cathy by the hand, and was urging her on, when all
 at once she fell down. ‘run, heathcliff, run!’ she whispered. ‘they
 have let the bull-dog loose, and holds me!’ the devil had seized her
 ankle, nelly: i heard his abominable snorting. she did not yell out—no!
 she would have scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns
 of mad cow. i did, though: i vociferated curses enough to annihilate
 any fiend in christendom; and i got stone and thrust it between his
 jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down his throat. beast
 of servant came up with lantern, at last, shouting—‘keep fast,
 skulker, keep fast!’ changed his note, however, when saw
 skulker’s game. the dog was throttled off; his huge, purple tongue
 hanging half foot out of his mouth, and his pendent lips streaming
 with bloody slaver. the man took cathy up; she was sick: not from fear,
 i’m certain, but from pain. carried her in; i followed, grumbling
 execrations and vengeance. ‘what prey, robert?’ hallooed linton from
 the entrance. ‘skulker has caught little girl, sir,’ replied; ‘and
 there’s lad here,’ added, making clutch at me, ‘who looks an
 out-and-outer! very like the robbers were for putting them through the
 window to open the doors to the gang after all were asleep, that they
 might murder us at their ease. hold your tongue, you foul-mouthed
 thief, you! you shall go to the gallows for this. mr. linton, sir,
 don’t lay by your gun.’ ‘no, no, robert,’ said the old fool. ‘the
 rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day: they thought to have me
 cleverly. come in; i’ll furnish them reception. there, john, fasten
 the chain. give skulker some water, jenny. to beard magistrate in his
 stronghold, and on the sabbath, too! where will their insolence stop?
 oh, my dear mary, look here! don’t be afraid, it is but boy—yet the
 villain scowls so plainly in his face; would it not be kindness to
 the country to hang him at once, before shows his nature in acts as
 well as features?’ pulled under the chandelier, and mrs. linton
 placed her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in horror. the
 cowardly children crept nearer also, isabella lisping—‘frightful thing!
 put him in the cellar, papa. he’s exactly like the of the
 fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. isn’t he, edgar?’
 
“while they examined me, cathy came round; she heard the last speech,
 and laughed. edgar linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected
 sufficient wit to recognise her. they see us at church, you know,
 though we seldom meet them elsewhere. ‘that’s miss earnshaw!’ he
 whispered to his mother, ‘and look how skulker has bitten her—how her
 foot bleeds!’
 
“‘miss earnshaw? nonsense!’ cried the dame; ‘miss earnshaw scouring the
 country with gipsy! and yet, my dear, the child is in mourning—surely
 it is—and she may be lamed for life!’
 
“‘what culpable carelessness in her brother!’ exclaimed mr. linton,
 turning from to catherine. ‘i’ve understood from shielders’” (that
 was the curate, sir) “‘that lets her grow up in absolute heathenism.
 but who is this? where did she pick up this companion? oho! i declare
 is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in his journey
 to liverpool—a little lascar, or an american or spanish castaway.’
 
“‘a wicked boy, at all events,’ remarked the old lady, ‘and quite unfit
 for decent house! did you notice his language, linton? i’m shocked
 that my children should have heard it.’
 
“i recommenced cursing—don’t be angry, nelly—and so robert was ordered
 to take off. i refused to go without cathy; dragged into the
 garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured that mr. earnshaw
 should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding march directly,
 secured the door again. the curtains were still looped up at one
 corner, and i resumed my station as spy; because, if catherine had
 wished to return, i intended shattering their great glass panes to a
 million of fragments, unless they let her out. she sat on the sofa
 quietly. mrs. linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we
 had borrowed for our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with
 her, i suppose: she was young lady, and they made distinction
 between her treatment and mine. then the woman-servant brought basin
 of warm water, and washed her feet; and mr. linton mixed tumbler of
 negus, and isabella emptied plateful of cakes into her lap, and edgar
 stood gaping at distance. afterwards, they dried and combed her
 beautiful hair, and gave her pair of enormous slippers, and wheeled
 her to the fire; and i left her, as merry as she could be, dividing her
 food between the little dog and skulker, whose nose she pinched as he
 ate; and kindling spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the
 lintons—a dim reflection from her own enchanting face. i saw they were
 full of stupid admiration; she is so immeasurably superior to them—to
 everybody on earth, is she not, nelly?”
 
“there will more come of this business than you reckon on,” i answered,
 covering him up and extinguishing the light. “you are incurable,
 heathcliff; and mr. hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
 won’t.” my words came truer than i desired. the luckless adventure
 made earnshaw furious. and then mr. linton, to mend matters, paid us a
 visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such lecture
 on the road guided his family, that was stirred to look about
 him, in earnest. heathcliff received flogging, but was told that
 the first word spoke to miss catherine should ensure dismissal;
 and mrs. earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint
 when she returned home; employing art, not force: with force she would
 have found it impossible.
 



chapter vii
 

cathy stayed at thrushcross grange five weeks: till christmas. by that
 time her ankle was thoroughly cured, and her manners much improved. the
 mistress visited her often in the interval, and commenced her plan of
 reform by trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and
 flattery, which she took readily; so that, instead of wild, hatless
 little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all
 breathless, there lighted from handsome black pony very dignified
 person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover of feathered
 beaver, and long cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with
 both hands that she might sail in. hindley lifted her from her horse,
 exclaiming delightedly, “why, cathy, you are quite beauty! i should
 scarcely have known you: you look like lady now. isabella linton is
 not to be compared with her, is she, frances?” “isabella has not her
 natural advantages,” replied his wife: “but she must mind and not grow
 wild again here. ellen, help miss catherine off with her things—stay,
 dear, you will disarrange your curls—let untie your hat.”
 
i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath grand plaid silk
 frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes
 sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she
 dared hardly touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid
 garments. she kissed gently: i was all flour making the christmas
 cake, and it would not have done to give hug; and then she looked
 round for heathcliff. mr. and mrs. earnshaw watched anxiously their
 meeting; thinking it would enable them to judge, in some measure, what
 grounds they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.
 
heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. if were careless, and
 uncared for, before catherine’s absence, had been ten times more so
 since. nobody but i even did him the kindness to call him dirty boy,
 and bid him wash himself, once week; and children of his age seldom
 have natural pleasure in soap and water. therefore, not to mention
 his clothes, which had seen three months’ service in mire and dust, and
 his thick uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally
 beclouded. might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a
 bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of rough-headed
 counterpart of himself, as expected. “is heathcliff not here?” she
 demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully
 whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.
 
“heathcliff, you may come forward,” cried mr. hindley, enjoying his
 discomfiture, and gratified to see what forbidding young blackguard
 would be compelled to present himself. “you may come and wish miss
 catherine welcome, like the other servants.”
 
cathy, catching glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to
 embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the
 second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into laugh,
 exclaiming, “why, how very black and cross you look! and how—how funny
 and grim! but that’s because i’m used to edgar and isabella linton.
 well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?”
 
she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw
 double gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.
 
“shake hands, heathcliff,” said mr. earnshaw, condescendingly; “once in
 way, that is permitted.”
 
“i shall not,” replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; “i shall
 not stand to be laughed at. i shall not bear it!”
 
and would have broken from the circle, but miss cathy seized him
 again.
 
“i did not mean to laugh at you,” she said; “i could not hinder myself:
 heathcliff, shake hands at least! what are you sulky for? it was only
 that you looked odd. if you wash your face and brush your hair, it will
 be all right: but you are so dirty!”
 
she gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her own, and
 also at her dress; which she feared had gained embellishment from
 its contact with his.
 
“you needn’t have touched me!” answered, following her eye and
 snatching away his hand. “i shall be as dirty as i please: and i like
 to be dirty, and i will be dirty.”
 
with that dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of
 the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of catherine;
 who could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an
 exhibition of bad temper.
 
after playing lady’s-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
 oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
 befitting christmas-eve, i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
 singing carols, all alone; regardless of joseph’s affirmations that he
 considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs. had
 retired to private prayer in his chamber, and mr. and mrs. earnshaw
 were engaging missy’s attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to
 present to the little lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.
 they had invited them to spend the morrow at wuthering heights, and the
 invitation had been accepted, on one condition: mrs. linton begged that
 her darlings might be kept carefully apart from that “naughty swearing
 boy.”
 
under these circumstances i remained solitary. i smelt the rich scent
 of the heating spices; and admired the shining kitchen utensils, the
 polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs ranged on tray ready
 to be filled with mulled ale for supper; and above all, the speckless
 purity of my particular care—the scoured and well-swept floor. i gave
 due inward applause to every object, and then i remembered how old
 earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied, and call cant lass,
 and slip shilling into my hand as christmas-box; and from that i
 went on to think of his fondness for heathcliff, and his dread lest he
 should suffer neglect after death had removed him: and that naturally
 led to consider the poor lad’s situation now, and from singing i
 changed my mind to crying. it struck soon, however, there would be
 more sense in endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding
 tears over them: i got up and walked into the court to seek him. was
 not far; i found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the
 stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.
 
“make haste, heathcliff!” i said, “the kitchen is so comfortable; and
 joseph is upstairs: make haste, and let dress you smart before miss
 cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth
 to yourselves, and have long chatter till bedtime.”
 
proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.
 
“come—are you coming?” i continued. “there’s little cake for each of
 you, nearly enough; and you’ll need half-an-hour’s donning.”
 
i waited five minutes, but getting answer left him. catherine supped
 with her brother and sister-in-law: joseph and i joined at an
 unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on
 the other. his cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the
 fairies. managed to continue work till nine o’clock, and then
 marched dumb and dour to his chamber. cathy sat up late, having world
 of things to order for the reception of her new friends: she came into
 the kitchen once to speak to her old one; but was gone, and she only
 stayed to ask what was the matter with him, and then went back. in the
 morning rose early; and, as it was holiday, carried his ill-humour
 on to the moors; not re-appearing till the family were departed for
 church. fasting and reflection seemed to have brought him to better
 spirit. hung about for while, and having screwed up his
 courage, exclaimed abruptly—“nelly, make decent, i’m going to be
 good.”
 
“high time, heathcliff,” i said; “you _have_ grieved catherine: she’s
 sorry she ever came home, i daresay! it looks as if you envied her,
 because she is more thought of than you.”
 
the notion of _envying_ catherine was incomprehensible to him, but the
 notion of grieving her understood clearly enough.
 
“did she say she was grieved?” inquired, looking very serious.
 
“she cried when i told her you were off again this morning.”
 
“well, _i_ cried last night,” returned, “and i had more reason to
 cry than she.”
 
“yes: you had the reason of going to bed with proud heart and an
 empty stomach,” said i. “proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves.
 but, if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind,
 when she comes in. you must go up and offer to kiss her, and say—you
 know best what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought
 her converted into stranger by her grand dress. and now, though i
 have dinner to get ready, i’ll steal time to arrange you so that edgar
 linton shall look quite doll beside you: and that does. you are
 younger, and yet, i’ll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad
 across the shoulders; you could knock him down in twinkling; don’t
 you feel that you could?”
 
heathcliff’s face brightened moment; then it was overcast afresh, and
 sighed.
 
“but, nelly, if i knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn’t make him
 less handsome or more so. i wish i had light hair and fair skin,
 and was dressed and behaved as well, and had chance of being as rich
 as will be!”
 
“and cried for mamma at every turn,” i added, “and trembled if a
 country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat at home all day for a
 shower of rain. oh, heathcliff, you are showing poor spirit! come to
 the glass, and i’ll let you see what you should wish. do you mark those
 two lines between your eyes; and those thick brows, that, instead of
 rising arched, sink in the middle; and that couple of black fiends, so
 deeply buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting
 under them, like devil’s spies? wish and learn to smooth away the surly
 wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to
 confident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always
 seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. don’t get the
 expression of vicious cur that appears to know the kicks it gets are
 its desert, and yet hates all the world, as well as the kicker, for
 what it suffers.”
 
“in other words, i must wish for edgar linton’s great blue eyes and
 even forehead,” replied. “i do—and that won’t help to them.”
 
“a good heart will help you to bonny face, my lad,” i continued, “if
 you were regular black; and bad one will turn the bonniest into
 something worse than ugly. and now that we’ve done washing, and
 combing, and sulking—tell whether you don’t think yourself rather
 handsome? i’ll tell you, i do. you’re fit for prince in disguise. who
 knows but your father was emperor of china, and your mother an indian
 queen, each of them able to buy up, with one week’s income, wuthering
 heights and thrushcross grange together? and you were kidnapped by
 wicked sailors and brought to england. were i in your place, i would
 frame high notions of my birth; and the thoughts of what i was should
 give courage and dignity to support the oppressions of little
 farmer!”
 
so i chattered on; and heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to
 look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted
 by rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court. ran
 to the window and i to the door, just in time to behold the two lintons
 descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the
 earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in
 winter. catherine took hand of each of the children, and brought them
 into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour
 into their white faces.
 
i urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and he
 willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as opened the
 door leading from the kitchen on one side, hindley opened it on the
 other. they met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean and
 cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to mrs. linton, shoved
 him back with sudden thrust, and angrily bade joseph “keep the fellow
 out of the room—send him into the garret till dinner is over. he’ll be
 cramming his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone
 with them minute.”
 
“nay, sir,” i could not avoid answering, “he’ll touch nothing, not he:
 and i suppose must have his share of the dainties as well as we.”
 
“he shall have his share of my hand, if i catch him downstairs till
 dark,” cried hindley. “begone, you vagabond! what! you are attempting
 the coxcomb, are you? wait till i get hold of those elegant locks—see
 if i won’t pull them bit longer!”
 
“they are long enough already,” observed master linton, peeping from
 the doorway; “i wonder they don’t make his head ache. it’s like a
 colt’s mane over his eyes!”
 
ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but
 heathcliff’s violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance
 of impertinence from one whom seemed to hate, even then, as rival.
 seized tureen of hot apple sauce, the first thing that came under
 his gripe, and dashed it full against the speaker’s face and neck; who
 instantly commenced lament that brought isabella and catherine
 hurrying to the place. mr. earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly
 and conveyed him to his chamber; where, doubtless, administered a
 rough remedy to cool the fit of passion, for appeared red and
 breathless. i got the dish-cloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed
 edgar’s nose and mouth, affirming it served him right for meddling. his
 sister began weeping to go home, and cathy stood by confounded,
 blushing for all.
 
“you should not have spoken to him!” she expostulated with master
 linton. “he was in bad temper, and now you’ve spoilt your visit; and
 he’ll be flogged: i hate him to be flogged! i can’t eat my dinner. why
 did you speak to him, edgar?”
 
“i didn’t,” sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and finishing the
 remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-handkerchief. “i
 promised mamma that i wouldn’t say one word to him, and i didn’t.”
 
“well, don’t cry,” replied catherine, contemptuously; “you’re not
 killed. don’t make more mischief; my brother is coming: be quiet! hush,
 isabella! has anybody hurt _you?_”
 
“there, there, children—to your seats!” cried hindley, bustling in.
 “that brute of lad has warmed nicely. next time, master edgar,
 take the law into your own fists—it will give you an appetite!”
 
the little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant
 feast. they were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no
 real harm had befallen them. mr. earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls,
 and the mistress made them merry with lively talk. i waited behind her
 chair, and was pained to behold catherine, with dry eyes and an
 indifferent air, commence cutting up the wing of goose before her.
 “an unfeeling child,” i thought to myself; “how lightly she dismisses
 her old playmate’s troubles. i could not have imagined her to be so
 selfish.” she lifted mouthful to her lips: then she set it down
 again: her cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. she slipped
 her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her
 emotion. i did not call her unfeeling long; for i perceived she was in
 purgatory throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of
 getting by herself, or paying visit to heathcliff, who had been
 locked up by the master: as i discovered, on endeavouring to introduce
 to him private mess of victuals.
 
in the evening we had dance. cathy begged that might be liberated
 then, as isabella linton had partner: her entreaties were vain, and
 i was appointed to supply the deficiency. we got rid of all gloom in
 the excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the
 arrival of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: trumpet, a
 trombone, clarionets, bassoons, french horns, and bass viol, besides
 singers. they go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
 contributions every christmas, and we esteemed it first-rate treat to
 hear them. after the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
 and glees. mrs. earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.
 
catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of
 the steps, and she went up in the dark: i followed. they shut the house
 door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. she
 made stay at the stairs’-head, but mounted farther, to the garret
 where heathcliff was confined, and called him. stubbornly declined
 answering for while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to
 hold communion with her through the boards. i let the poor things
 converse unmolested, till i supposed the songs were going to cease, and
 the singers to get some refreshment: then i clambered up the ladder to
 warn her. instead of finding her outside, i heard her voice within. the
 little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the roof,
 into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost difficulty i
 could coax her out again. when she did come, heathcliff came with her,
 and she insisted that i should take him into the kitchen, as my
 fellow-servant had gone to neighbour’s, to be removed from the sound
 of our “devil’s psalmody,” as it pleased him to call it. i told them i
 intended by means to encourage their tricks: but as the prisoner had
 never broken his fast since yesterday’s dinner, i would wink at his
 cheating mr. hindley that once. went down: i set him stool by the
 fire, and offered him quantity of good things: but was sick and
 could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away. he
 leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands, and
 remained rapt in dumb meditation. on my inquiring the subject of his
 thoughts, answered gravely—“i’m trying to settle how i shall pay
 hindley back. i don’t care how long i wait, if i can only do it at
 last. i hope will not die before i do!”
 
“for shame, heathcliff!” said i. “it is for god to punish wicked
 people; we should learn to forgive.”
 
“no, god won’t have the satisfaction that i shall,” returned. “i
 only wish i knew the best way! let alone, and i’ll plan it out:
 while i’m thinking of that i don’t feel pain.”
 
but, mr. lockwood, i forget these tales cannot divert you. i’m annoyed
 how i should dream of chattering on at such rate; and your gruel
 cold, and you nodding for bed! i could have told heathcliff’s history,
 all that you need hear, in half dozen words.
 
* * * * *
 

thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded to lay
 aside her sewing; but i felt incapable of moving from the hearth, and i
 was very far from nodding. “sit still, mrs. dean,” i cried; “do sit
 still another half-hour. you’ve done just right to tell the story
 leisurely. that is the method i like; and you must finish it in the
 same style. i am interested in every character you have mentioned, more
 or less.”
 
“the clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir.”
 
“no matter—i’m not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours. one or
 two is early enough for person who lies till ten.”
 
“you shouldn’t lie till ten. there’s the very prime of the morning gone
 long before that time. person who has not done one-half his day’s
 work by ten o’clock, runs chance of leaving the other half undone.”
 
“nevertheless, mrs. dean, resume your chair; because to-morrow i intend
 lengthening the night till afternoon. i prognosticate for myself an
 obstinate cold, at least.”
 
“i hope not, sir. well, you must allow to leap over some three
 years; during that space mrs. earnshaw—”
 
“no, no, i’ll allow nothing of the sort! are you acquainted with the
 mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and the cat licking
 its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the operation so
 intently that puss’s neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of
 temper?”
 
“a terribly lazy mood, i should say.”
 
“on the contrary, tiresomely active one. it is mine, at present; and,
 therefore, continue minutely. i perceive that people in these regions
 acquire over people in towns the value that spider in dungeon does
 over spider in cottage, to their various occupants; and yet the
 deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the
 looker-on. they _do_ live more in earnest, more in themselves, and less
 in surface, change, and frivolous external things. i could fancy love
 for life here almost possible; and i was fixed unbeliever in any love
 of year’s standing. one state resembles setting hungry man down to
 single dish, on which may concentrate his entire appetite and do
 it justice; the other, introducing him to table laid out by french
 cooks: can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole; but
 each part is mere atom in his regard and remembrance.”
 
“oh! here we are the same as anywhere else, when you get to know us,”
 observed mrs. dean, somewhat puzzled at my speech.
 
“excuse me,” i responded; “you, my good friend, are striking evidence
 against that assertion. excepting few provincialisms of slight
 consequence, you have marks of the manners which i am habituated to
 consider as peculiar to your class. i am sure you have thought great
 deal more than the generality of servants think. you have been
 compelled to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions
 for frittering your life away in silly trifles.”
 
mrs. dean laughed.
 
“i certainly esteem myself steady, reasonable kind of body,” she
 said; “not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of
 faces, and one series of actions, from year’s end to year’s end; but i
 have undergone sharp discipline, which has taught wisdom; and then,
 i have read more than you would fancy, mr. lockwood. you could not open
 book in this library that i have not looked into, and got something
 out of also: unless it be that range of greek and latin, and that of
 french; and those i know one from another: it is as much as you can
 expect of poor man’s daughter. however, if i am to follow my story in
 true gossip’s fashion, i had better go on; and instead of leaping three
 years, i will be content to pass to the next summer—the summer of 1778,
 that is nearly twenty-three years ago.”
 



chapter viii
 

on the morning of fine june day my first bonny little nursling, and
 the last of the ancient earnshaw stock, was born. we were busy with the
 in far-away field, when the girl that usually brought our
 breakfasts came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the
 lane, calling as she ran.
 
“oh, such grand bairn!” she panted out. “the finest lad that ever
 breathed! but the doctor says missis must go: says she’s been in a
 consumption these many months. i heard him tell mr. hindley: and now
 she has nothing to keep her, and she’ll be dead before winter. you must
 come home directly. you’re to nurse it, nelly: to feed it with sugar
 and milk, and take care of it day and night. i wish i were you, because
 it will be all yours when there is missis!”
 
“but is she very ill?” i asked, flinging down my rake and tying my
 bonnet.
 
“i guess she is; yet she looks bravely,” replied the girl, “and she
 talks as if she thought of living to see it grow man. she’s out of
 her head for joy, it’s such beauty! if i were her i’m certain i
 should not die: i should get better at the bare sight of it, in spite
 of kenneth. i was fairly mad at him. dame archer brought the cherub
 down to master, in the house, and his face just began to light up, when
 the old croaker steps forward, and says he—‘earnshaw, it’s blessing
 your wife has been spared to leave you this son. when she came, i felt
 convinced we shouldn’t keep her long; and now, i must tell you, the
 winter will probably finish her. don’t take on, and fret about it too
 much: it can’t be helped. and besides, you should have known better
 than to choose such rush of lass!’”
 
“and what did the master answer?” i inquired.
 
“i think swore: but i didn’t mind him, i was straining to see the
 bairn,” and she began again to describe it rapturously. i, as zealous
 as herself, hurried eagerly home to admire, on my part; though i was
 very sad for hindley’s sake. had room in his heart only for two
 idols—his wife and himself: doted on both, and adored one, and i
 couldn’t conceive how would bear the loss.
 
when we got to wuthering heights, there stood at the front door;
 and, as i passed in, i asked, “how was the baby?”
 
“nearly ready to run about, nell!” replied, putting on cheerful
 smile.
 
“and the mistress?” i ventured to inquire; “the doctor says she’s—”
 
“damn the doctor!” interrupted, reddening. “frances is quite right:
 she’ll be perfectly well by this time next week. are you going
 upstairs? will you tell her that i’ll come, if she’ll promise not to
 talk. i left her because she would not hold her tongue; and she
 must—tell her mr. kenneth says she must be quiet.”
 
i delivered this message to mrs. earnshaw; she seemed in flighty
 spirits, and replied merrily, “i hardly spoke word, ellen, and there
 has gone out twice, crying. well, say i promise i won’t speak: but
 that does not bind not to laugh at him!”
 
poor soul! till within week of her death that gay heart never failed
 her; and her husband persisted doggedly, nay, furiously, in affirming
 her health improved every day. when kenneth warned him that his
 medicines were useless at that stage of the malady, and needn’t put
 him to further expense by attending her, retorted, “i know you need
 not—she’s well—she does not want any more attendance from you! she
 never was in consumption. it was fever; and it is gone: her pulse
 is as slow as mine now, and her cheek as cool.”
 
told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe him; but one
 night, while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of saying she thought
 she should be able to get up to-morrow, fit of coughing took her—a
 very slight one—he raised her in his arms; she put her two hands about
 his neck, her face changed, and she was dead.
 
as the girl had anticipated, the child hareton fell wholly into my
 hands. mr. earnshaw, provided saw him healthy and never heard him
 cry, was contented, as far as regarded him. for himself, grew
 desperate: his sorrow was of that kind that will not lament. neither
 wept nor prayed; cursed and defied: execrated god and man, and gave
 himself up to reckless dissipation. the servants could not bear his
 tyrannical and evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that
 would stay. i had not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you
 know, i had been his foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more
 readily than stranger would. joseph remained to hector over tenants
 and labourers; and because it was his vocation to be where had
 plenty of wickedness to reprove.
 
the master’s bad ways and bad companions formed pretty example for
 catherine and heathcliff. his treatment of the latter was enough to
 make fiend of saint. and, truly, it appeared as if the lad _were_
 possessed of something diabolical at that period. delighted to
 witness hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily
 more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity. i could not half tell
 what an infernal house we had. the curate dropped calling, and nobody
 decent came near us, at last; unless edgar linton’s visits to miss
 cathy might be an exception. at fifteen she was the queen of the
 country-side; she had peer; and she did turn out haughty,
 headstrong creature! i own i did not like her, after infancy was past;
 and i vexed her frequently by trying to bring down her arrogance: she
 never took an aversion to me, though. she had wondrous constancy to
 old attachments: even heathcliff kept his hold on her affections
 unalterably; and young linton, with all his superiority, found it
 difficult to make an equally deep impression. was my late master:
 that is his portrait over the fireplace. it used to hang on one side,
 and his wife’s on the other; but hers has been removed, or else you
 might see something of what she was. can you make that out?
 
mrs. dean raised the candle, and i discerned soft-featured face,
 exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights, but more pensive
 and amiable in expression. it formed sweet picture. the long light
 hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious;
 the figure almost too graceful. i did not marvel how catherine earnshaw
 could forget her first friend for such an individual. i marvelled much
 how he, with mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea
 of catherine earnshaw.
 
“a very agreeable portrait,” i observed to the house-keeper. “is it
 like?”
 
“yes,” she answered; “but looked better when was animated; that
 is his everyday countenance: wanted spirit in general.”
 
catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the lintons since her
 five-weeks’ residence among them; and as she had temptation to show
 her rough side in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of
 being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy, she imposed
 unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality;
 gained the admiration of isabella, and the heart and soul of her
 brother: acquisitions that flattered her from the first—for she was
 full of ambition—and led her to adopt double character without
 exactly intending to deceive any one. in the place where she heard
 heathcliff termed “vulgar young ruffian,” and “worse than brute,”
 she took care not to act like him; but at home she had small
 inclination to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and
 restrain an unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor
 praise.
 
mr. edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly. he
 had terror of earnshaw’s reputation, and shrunk from encountering
 him; and yet was always received with our best attempts at civility:
 the master himself avoided offending him, knowing why came; and if
 could not be gracious, kept out of the way. i rather think his
 appearance there was distasteful to catherine; she was not artful,
 never played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two
 friends meeting at all; for when heathcliff expressed contempt of
 linton in his presence, she could not half coincide, as she did in his
 absence; and when linton evinced disgust and antipathy to heathcliff,
 she dared not treat his sentiments with indifference, as if
 depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely any consequence to her.
 i’ve had many laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles, which
 she vainly strove to hide from my mockery. that sounds ill-natured: but
 she was so proud, it became really impossible to pity her distresses,
 till she should be chastened into more humility. she did bring herself,
 finally, to confess, and to confide in me: there was not soul else
 that she might fashion into an adviser.
 
mr. hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and heathcliff presumed
 to give himself holiday on the strength of it. had reached the age
 of sixteen then, i think, and without having bad features, or being
 deficient in intellect, contrived to convey an impression of inward
 and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains traces of.
 in the first place, had by that time lost the benefit of his early
 education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
 extinguished any curiosity once possessed in pursuit of knowledge,
 and any love for books or learning. his childhood’s sense of
 superiority, instilled into him by the favours of old mr. earnshaw, was
 faded away. struggled long to keep up an equality with catherine in
 her studies, and yielded with poignant though silent regret: but he
 yielded completely; and there was prevailing on him to take step
 in the way of moving upward, when found must, necessarily, sink
 beneath his former level. then personal appearance sympathised with
 mental deterioration: acquired slouching gait and ignoble look;
 his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into an almost
 idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and took grim pleasure,
 apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of his few
 acquaintance.
 
catherine and were constant companions still at his seasons of
 respite from labour; but had ceased to express his fondness for her
 in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion from her girlish caresses,
 as if conscious there could be gratification in lavishing such marks
 of affection on him. on the before-named occasion came into the
 house to announce his intention of doing nothing, while i was assisting
 miss cathy to arrange her dress: she had not reckoned on his taking it
 into his head to be idle; and imagining she would have the whole place
 to herself, she managed, by some means, to inform mr. edgar of her
 brother’s absence, and was then preparing to receive him.
 
“cathy, are you busy this afternoon?” asked heathcliff. “are you going
 anywhere?”
 
“no, it is raining,” she answered.
 
“why have you that silk frock on, then?” said. “nobody coming here,
 i hope?”
 
“not that i know of,” stammered miss: “but you should be in the field
 now, heathcliff. it is an hour past dinner time; i thought you were
 gone.”
 
“hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,” observed
 the boy. “i’ll not work any more to-day: i’ll stay with you.”
 
“oh, but joseph will tell,” she suggested; “you’d better go!”
 
“joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags; it will
 take him till dark, and he’ll never know.”
 
so saying, lounged to the fire, and sat down. catherine reflected
 an instant, with knitted brows—she found it needful to smooth the way
 for an intrusion. “isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this
 afternoon,” she said, at the conclusion of minute’s silence. “as it
 rains, i hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run
 the risk of being scolded for good.”
 
“order ellen to say you are engaged, cathy,” persisted; “don’t turn
 out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours! i’m on the point,
 sometimes, of complaining that they—but i’ll not—”
 
“that they what?” cried catherine, gazing at him with troubled
 countenance. “oh, nelly!” she added petulantly, jerking her head away
 from my hands, “you’ve combed my hair quite out of curl! that’s enough;
 let alone. what are you on the point of complaining about,
 heathcliff?”
 
“nothing—only look at the almanack on that wall;” pointed to a
 framed sheet hanging near the window, and continued, “the crosses are
 for the evenings you have spent with the lintons, the dots for those
 spent with me. do you see? i’ve marked every day.”
 
“yes—very foolish: as if i took notice!” replied catherine, in a
 peevish tone. “and where is the sense of that?”
 
“to show that i _do_ take notice,” said heathcliff.
 
“and should i always be sitting with you?” she demanded, growing more
 irritated. “what good do i get? what do you talk about? you might be
 dumb, or baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you
 do, either!”
 
“you never told before that i talked too little, or that you
 disliked my company, cathy!” exclaimed heathcliff, in much agitation.
 
“it’s company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing,” she
 muttered.
 
her companion rose up, but hadn’t time to express his feelings
 further, for horse’s feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked
 gently, young linton entered, his face brilliant with delight at the
 unexpected summons had received. doubtless catherine marked the
 difference between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
 the contrast resembled what you see in exchanging bleak, hilly, coal
 country for beautiful fertile valley; and his voice and greeting were
 as opposite as his aspect. had sweet, low manner of speaking, and
 pronounced his words as you do: that’s less gruff than we talk here,
 and softer.
 
“i’m not come too soon, am i?” said, casting look at me: i had
 begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at the far end in the
 dresser.
 
“no,” answered catherine. “what are you doing there, nelly?”
 
“my work, miss,” i replied. (mr. hindley had given directions to
 make third party in any private visits linton chose to pay.)
 
she stepped behind and whispered crossly, “take yourself and your
 dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don’t commence
 scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!”
 
“it’s good opportunity, now that master is away,” i answered aloud:
 “he hates to be fidgeting over these things in his presence. i’m
 sure mr. edgar will excuse me.”
 
“i hate you to be fidgeting in _my_ presence,” exclaimed the young lady
 imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak: she had failed to
 recover her equanimity since the little dispute with heathcliff.
 
“i’m sorry for it, miss catherine,” was my response; and i proceeded
 assiduously with my occupation.
 
she, supposing edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth from my
 hand, and pinched me, with prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the
 arm. i’ve said i did not love her, and rather relished mortifying her
 vanity now and then: besides, she hurt extremely; so i started up
 from my knees, and screamed out, “oh, miss, that’s nasty trick! you
 have right to nip me, and i’m not going to bear it.”
 
“i didn’t touch you, you lying creature!” cried she, her fingers
 tingling to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage. she never had
 power to conceal her passion, it always set her whole complexion in a
 blaze.
 
“what’s that, then?” i retorted, showing decided purple witness to
 refute her.
 
she stamped her foot, wavered moment, and then, irresistibly impelled
 by the naughty spirit within her, slapped on the cheek: stinging
 blow that filled both eyes with water.
 
“catherine, love! catherine!” interposed linton, greatly shocked at the
 double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol had committed.
 
“leave the room, ellen!” she repeated, trembling all over.
 
little hareton, who followed everywhere, and was sitting near on
 the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying himself, and sobbed out
 complaints against “wicked aunt cathy,” which drew her fury on to his
 unlucky head: she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor
 child waxed livid, and edgar thoughtlessly laid hold of her hands to
 deliver him. in an instant one was wrung free, and the astonished young
 man felt it applied over his own ear in way that could not be
 mistaken for jest. drew back in consternation. i lifted hareton in
 my arms, and walked off to the kitchen with him, leaving the door of
 communication open, for i was curious to watch how they would settle
 their disagreement. the insulted visitor moved to the spot where had
 laid his hat, pale and with quivering lip.
 
“that’s right!” i said to myself. “take warning and begone! it’s a
 kindness to let you have glimpse of her genuine disposition.”
 
“where are you going?” demanded catherine, advancing to the door.
 
swerved aside, and attempted to pass.
 
“you must not go!” she exclaimed, energetically.
 
“i must and shall!” replied in subdued voice.
 
“no,” she persisted, grasping the handle; “not yet, edgar linton: sit
 down; you shall not leave in that temper. i should be miserable all
 night, and i won’t be miserable for you!”
 
“can i stay after you have struck me?” asked linton.
 
catherine was mute.
 
“you’ve made afraid and ashamed of you,” continued; “i’ll not
 come here again!”
 
her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle.
 
“and you told deliberate untruth!” said.
 
“i didn’t!” she cried, recovering her speech; “i did nothing
 deliberately. well, go, if you please—get away! and now i’ll cry—i’ll
 cry myself sick!”
 
she dropped down on her knees by chair, and set to weeping in serious
 earnest. edgar persevered in his resolution as far as the court; there
 lingered. i resolved to encourage him.
 
“miss is dreadfully wayward, sir,” i called out. “as bad as any marred
 child: you’d better be riding home, or else she will be sick, only to
 grieve us.”
 
the soft thing looked askance through the window: possessed the
 power to depart as much as cat possesses the power to leave mouse
 half killed, or bird half eaten. ah, i thought, there will be no
 saving him: he’s doomed, and flies to his fate! and so it was: he
 turned abruptly, hastened into the house again, shut the door behind
 him; and when i went in while after to inform them that earnshaw had
 come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears
 (his ordinary frame of mind in that condition), i saw the quarrel had
 merely effected closer intimacy—had broken the outworks of youthful
 timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and
 confess themselves lovers.
 
intelligence of mr. hindley’s arrival drove linton speedily to his
 horse, and catherine to her chamber. i went to hide little hareton, and
 to take the shot out of the master’s fowling-piece, which was fond
 of playing with in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the lives of
 any who provoked, or even attracted his notice too much; and i had hit
 upon the plan of removing it, that might do less mischief if did
 go the length of firing the gun.
 



chapter ix
 

entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear; and caught in the
 act of stowing his away in the kitchen cupboard. hareton was
 impressed with wholesome terror of encountering either his wild
 beast’s fondness or his madman’s rage; for in one ran chance of
 being squeezed and kissed to death, and in the other of being flung
 into the fire, or dashed against the wall; and the poor thing remained
 perfectly quiet wherever i chose to put him.
 
“there, i’ve found it out at last!” cried hindley, pulling back by
 the skin of my neck, like dog. “by heaven and hell, you’ve sworn
 between you to murder that child! i know how it is, now, that is
 always out of my way. but, with the help of satan, i shall make you
 swallow the carving-knife, nelly! you needn’t laugh; for i’ve just
 crammed kenneth, head-downmost, in the black-horse marsh; and two is
 the same as one—and i want to kill some of you: i shall have rest
 till i do!”
 
“but i don’t like the carving-knife, mr. hindley,” i answered; “it has
 been cutting red herrings. i’d rather be shot, if you please.”
 
“you’d rather be damned!” said; “and so you shall. law in england
 can hinder man from keeping his house decent, and mine’s abominable!
 open your mouth.”
 
held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point between my teeth:
 but, for my part, i was never much afraid of his vagaries. i spat out,
 and affirmed it tasted detestably—i would not take it on any account.
 
“oh!” said he, releasing me, “i see that hideous little villain is not
 hareton: i beg your pardon, nell. if it be, deserves flaying alive
 for not running to welcome me, and for screaming as if i were goblin.
 unnatural cub, come hither! i’ll teach thee to impose on a
 good-hearted, deluded father. now, don’t you think the lad would be
 handsomer cropped? it makes dog fiercer, and i love something
 fierce—get scissors—something fierce and trim! besides, it’s
 infernal affectation—devilish conceit it is, to cherish our ears—we’re
 asses enough without them. hush, child, hush! well then, it is my
 darling! wisht, dry thy eyes—there’s joy; kiss me. what! it won’t?
 kiss me, hareton! damn thee, kiss me! by god, as if i would rear such a
 monster! as sure as i’m living, i’ll break the brat’s neck.”
 
poor hareton was squalling and kicking in his father’s arms with all
 his might, and redoubled his yells when carried him upstairs and
 lifted him over the banister. i cried out that would frighten the
 child into fits, and ran to rescue him. as i reached them, hindley
 leant forward on the rails to listen to noise below; almost
 forgetting what had in his hands. “who is that?” asked, hearing
 some one approaching the stairs’-foot. i leant forward also, for the
 purpose of signing to heathcliff, whose step i recognised, not to come
 further; and, at the instant when my eye quitted hareton, gave a
 sudden spring, delivered himself from the careless grasp that held him,
 and fell.
 
there was scarcely time to experience thrill of horror before we saw
 that the little wretch was safe. heathcliff arrived underneath just at
 the critical moment; by natural impulse arrested his descent, and
 setting him on his feet, looked up to discover the author of the
 accident. miser who has parted with lucky lottery ticket for five
 shillings, and finds next day has lost in the bargain five thousand
 pounds, could not show blanker countenance than did on beholding
 the figure of mr. earnshaw above. it expressed, plainer than words
 could do, the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument
 of thwarting his own revenge. had it been dark, i daresay would have
 tried to remedy the mistake by smashing hareton’s skull on the steps;
 but, we witnessed his salvation; and i was presently below with my
 precious charge pressed to my heart. hindley descended more leisurely,
 sobered and abashed.
 
“it is your fault, ellen,” said; “you should have kept him out of
 sight: you should have taken him from me! is injured anywhere?”
 
“injured!” i cried angrily; “if is not killed, he’ll be an idiot!
 oh! i wonder his mother does not rise from her grave to see how you use
 him. you’re worse than heathen—treating your own flesh and blood in
 that manner!”
 
attempted to touch the child, who, on finding himself with me,
 sobbed off his terror directly. at the first finger his father laid on
 him, however, shrieked again louder than before, and struggled as if
 would go into convulsions.
 
“you shall not meddle with him!” i continued. “he hates you—they all
 hate you—that’s the truth! happy family you have; and pretty state
 you’re come to!”
 
“i shall come to prettier, yet, nelly,” laughed the misguided man,
 recovering his hardness. “at present, convey yourself and him away. and
 hark you, heathcliff! clear you too quite from my reach and hearing. i
 wouldn’t murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, i set the house on fire:
 but that’s as my fancy goes.”
 
while saying this took pint bottle of brandy from the dresser, and
 poured some into tumbler.
 
“nay, don’t!” i entreated. “mr. hindley, do take warning. have mercy on
 this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for yourself!”
 
“any one will do better for him than i shall,” answered.
 
“have mercy on your own soul!” i said, endeavouring to snatch the glass
 from his hand.
 
“not i! on the contrary, i shall have great pleasure in sending it to
 perdition to punish its maker,” exclaimed the blasphemer. “here’s to
 its hearty damnation!”
 
drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go; terminating his
 command with sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or
 remember.
 
“it’s pity cannot kill himself with drink,” observed heathcliff,
 muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut. “he’s doing
 his very utmost; but his constitution defies him. mr. kenneth says he
 would wager his mare that he’ll outlive any man on this side gimmerton,
 and go to the grave hoary sinner; unless some happy chance out of the
 common course befall him.”
 
i went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to sleep.
 heathcliff, as i thought, walked through to the barn. it turned out
 afterwards that only got as far as the other side the settle, when
 flung himself on bench by the wall, removed from the fire, and
 remained silent.
 
i was rocking hareton on my knee, and humming song that began,—
 
it was far in the night, and the bairnies grat,
 the mither beneath the mools heard that,
 

when miss cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her room, put her
 head in, and whispered,—“are you alone, nelly?”
 
“yes, miss,” i replied.
 
she entered and approached the hearth. i, supposing she was going to
 say something, looked up. the expression of her face seemed disturbed
 and anxious. her lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and
 she drew breath; but it escaped in sigh instead of sentence. i
 resumed my song; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.
 
“where’s heathcliff?” she said, interrupting me.
 
“about his work in the stable,” was my answer.
 
did not contradict me; perhaps had fallen into doze. there
 followed another long pause, during which i perceived drop or two
 trickle from catherine’s cheek to the flags. is she sorry for her
 shameful conduct?—i asked myself. that will be novelty: but she may
 come to the point as she will—i sha’n’t help her! no, she felt small
 trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.
 
“oh, dear!” she cried at last. “i’m very unhappy!”
 
“a pity,” observed i. “you’re hard to please; so many friends and so
 few cares, and can’t make yourself content!”
 
“nelly, will you keep secret for me?” she pursued, kneeling down by
 me, and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look
 which turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the
 world to indulge it.
 
“is it worth keeping?” i inquired, less sulkily.
 
“yes, and it worries me, and i must let it out! i want to know what i
 should do. to-day, edgar linton has asked to marry him, and i’ve
 given him an answer. now, before i tell you whether it was consent or
 denial, you tell which it ought to have been.”
 
“really, miss catherine, how can i know?” i replied. “to be sure,
 considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this
 afternoon, i might say it would be wise to refuse him: since asked
 you after that, must either be hopelessly stupid or venturesome
 fool.”
 
“if you talk so, i won’t tell you any more,” she returned, peevishly
 rising to her feet. “i accepted him, nelly. be quick, and say whether i
 was wrong!”
 
“you accepted him! then what good is it discussing the matter? you have
 pledged your word, and cannot retract.”
 
“but say whether i should have done so—do!” she exclaimed in an
 irritated tone; chafing her hands together, and frowning.
 
“there are many things to be considered before that question can be
 answered properly,” i said, sententiously. “first and foremost, do you
 love mr. edgar?”
 
“who can help it? of course i do,” she answered.
 
then i put her through the following catechism: for girl of
 twenty-two it was not injudicious.
 
“why do you love him, miss cathy?”
 
“nonsense, i do—that’s sufficient.”
 
“by means; you must say why?”
 
“well, because is handsome, and pleasant to be with.”
 
“bad!” was my commentary.
 
“and because is young and cheerful.”
 
“bad, still.”
 
“and because loves me.”
 
“indifferent, coming there.”
 
“and will be rich, and i shall like to be the greatest woman of the
 neighbourhood, and i shall be proud of having such husband.”
 
“worst of all. and now, say how you love him?”
 
“as everybody loves—you’re silly, nelly.”
 
“not at all—answer.”
 
“i love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head, and
 everything touches, and every word says. i love all his looks,
 and all his actions, and him entirely and altogether. there now!”
 
“and why?”
 
“nay; you are making jest of it: it is exceedingly ill-natured! it’s
 jest to me!” said the young lady, scowling, and turning her face to
 the fire.
 
“i’m very far from jesting, miss catherine,” i replied. “you love mr.
 edgar because is handsome, and young, and cheerful, and rich, and
 loves you. the last, however, goes for nothing: you would love him
 without that, probably; and with it you wouldn’t, unless possessed
 the four former attractions.”
 
“no, to be sure not: i should only pity him—hate him, perhaps, if he
 were ugly, and clown.”
 
“but there are several other handsome, rich young men in the world:
 handsomer, possibly, and richer than is. what should hinder you from
 loving them?”
 
“if there be any, they are out of my way: i’ve seen none like edgar.”
 
“you may see some; and won’t always be handsome, and young, and may
 not always be rich.”
 
“he is now; and i have only to do with the present. i wish you would
 speak rationally.”
 
“well, that settles it: if you have only to do with the present, marry
 mr. linton.”
 
“i don’t want your permission for that—i _shall_ marry him: and yet you
 have not told whether i’m right.”
 
“perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present. and
 now, let us hear what you are unhappy about. your brother will be
 pleased; the old lady and gentleman will not object, i think; you will
 escape from disorderly, comfortless home into wealthy, respectable
 one; and you love edgar, and edgar loves you. all seems smooth and
 easy: where is the obstacle?”
 
“_here_! and _here_!” replied catherine, striking one hand on her
 forehead, and the other on her breast: “in whichever place the soul
 lives. in my soul and in my heart, i’m convinced i’m wrong!”
 
“that’s very strange! i cannot make it out.”
 
“it’s my secret. but if you will not mock at me, i’ll explain it: i
 can’t do it distinctly; but i’ll give you feeling of how i feel.”
 
she seated herself by again: her countenance grew sadder and graver,
 and her clasped hands trembled.
 
“nelly, do you never dream queer dreams?” she said, suddenly, after
 some minutes’ reflection.
 
“yes, now and then,” i answered.
 
“and so do i. i’ve dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me
 ever after, and changed my ideas: they’ve gone through and through me,
 like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind. and this is
 one: i’m going to tell it—but take care not to smile at any part of
 it.”
 
“oh! don’t, miss catherine!” i cried. “we’re dismal enough without
 conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us. come, come, be merry and
 like yourself! look at little hareton! _he’s_ dreaming nothing dreary.
 how sweetly smiles in his sleep!”
 
“yes; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude! you remember
 him, i daresay, when was just such another as that chubby thing:
 nearly as young and innocent. however, nelly, i shall oblige you to
 listen: it’s not long; and i’ve power to be merry to-night.”
 
“i won’t hear it, i won’t hear it!” i repeated, hastily.
 
i was superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and catherine had
 an unusual gloom in her aspect, that made dread something from which
 i might shape prophecy, and foresee fearful catastrophe. she was
 vexed, but she did not proceed. apparently taking up another subject,
 she recommenced in short time.
 
“if i were in heaven, nelly, i should be extremely miserable.”
 
“because you are not fit to go there,” i answered. “all sinners would
 be miserable in heaven.”
 
“but it is not for that. i dreamt once that i was there.”
 
“i tell you i won’t hearken to your dreams, miss catherine! i’ll go to
 bed,” i interrupted again.
 
she laughed, and held down; for i made motion to leave my chair.
 
“this is nothing,” cried she: “i was only going to say that heaven did
 not seem to be my home; and i broke my heart with weeping to come back
 to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung out into the
 middle of the heath on the top of wuthering heights; where i woke
 sobbing for joy. that will do to explain my secret, as well as the
 other. i’ve more business to marry edgar linton than i have to be in
 heaven; and if the wicked man in there had not brought heathcliff so
 low, i shouldn’t have thought of it. it would degrade to marry
 heathcliff now; so shall never know how i love him: and that, not
 because he’s handsome, nelly, but because he’s more myself than i am.
 whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same; and linton’s
 is as different as moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.”
 
ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff’s presence.
 having noticed slight movement, i turned my head, and saw him rise
 from the bench, and steal out noiselessly. had listened till he
 heard catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he
 stayed to hear further. my companion, sitting on the ground, was
 prevented by the back of the settle from remarking his presence or
 departure; but i started, and bade her hush!
 
“why?” she asked, gazing nervously round.
 
“joseph is here,” i answered, catching opportunely the roll of his
 cartwheels up the road; “and heathcliff will come in with him. i’m not
 sure whether were not at the door this moment.”
 
“oh, couldn’t overhear at the door!” said she. “give hareton,
 while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask to sup with you.
 i want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that
 heathcliff has notion of these things. has not, has he? does
 not know what being in love is!”
 
“i see reason that should not know, as well as you,” i returned;
 “and if _you_ are his choice, he’ll be the most unfortunate creature
 that ever was born! as soon as you become mrs. linton, loses friend,
 and love, and all! have you considered how you’ll bear the separation,
 and how he’ll bear to be quite deserted in the world? because, miss
 catherine—”
 
“he quite deserted! we separated!” she exclaimed, with an accent of
 indignation. “who is to separate us, pray? they’ll meet the fate of
 milo! not as long as i live, ellen: for mortal creature. every
 linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before i could
 consent to forsake heathcliff. oh, that’s not what i intend—that’s not
 what i mean! i shouldn’t be mrs. linton were such price demanded!
 he’ll be as much to as has been all his lifetime. edgar must
 shake off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least. will, when he
 learns my true feelings towards him. nelly, i see now you think a
 selfish wretch; but did it never strike you that if heathcliff and i
 married, we should be beggars? whereas, if i marry linton i can aid
 heathcliff to rise, and place him out of my brother’s power.”
 
“with your husband’s money, miss catherine?” i asked. “you’ll find him
 not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though i’m hardly judge, i
 think that’s the worst motive you’ve given yet for being the wife of
 young linton.”
 
“it is not,” retorted she; “it is the best! the others were the
 satisfaction of my whims: and for edgar’s sake, too, to satisfy him.
 this is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings
 to edgar and myself. i cannot express it; but surely you and everybody
 have notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond
 you. what were the use of my creation, if i were entirely contained
 here? my great miseries in this world have been heathcliff’s miseries,
 and i watched and felt each from the beginning: my great thought in
 living is himself. if all else perished, and _he_ remained, _i_ should
 still continue to be; and if all else remained, and were
 annihilated, the universe would turn to mighty stranger: i should not
 seem part of it. my love for linton is like the foliage in the woods:
 time will change it, i’m well aware, as winter changes the trees. my
 love for heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath: source of
 little visible delight, but necessary. nelly, i _am_ heathcliff! he’s
 always, always in my mind: not as pleasure, any more than i am always
 pleasure to myself, but as my own being. so don’t talk of our
 separation again: it is impracticable; and—”
 
she paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown; but i jerked it
 forcibly away. i was out of patience with her folly!
 
“if i can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,” i said, “it only goes
 to convince that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
 marrying; or else that you are wicked, unprincipled girl. but trouble
 with more secrets: i’ll not promise to keep them.”
 
“you’ll keep that?” she asked, eagerly.
 
“no, i’ll not promise,” i repeated.
 
she was about to insist, when the entrance of joseph finished our
 conversation; and catherine removed her seat to corner, and nursed
 hareton, while i made the supper. after it was cooked, my
 fellow-servant and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr.
 hindley; and we didn’t settle it till all was nearly cold. then we came
 to the agreement that we would let him ask, if wanted any; for we
 feared particularly to go into his presence when had been some time
 alone.
 
“and how isn’t that nowt comed in fro’ th’ field, be this time? what is
 about? girt idle seeght!” demanded the old man, looking round for
 heathcliff.
 
“i’ll call him,” i replied. “he’s in the barn, i’ve doubt.”
 
i went and called, but got answer. on returning, i whispered to
 catherine that had heard good part of what she said, i was sure;
 and told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her
 brother’s conduct regarding him. she jumped up in fine fright, flung
 hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not
 taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk
 would have affected him. she was absent such while that joseph
 proposed we should wait longer. cunningly conjectured they were
 staying away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing. they
 were “ill eneugh for ony fahl manners,” affirmed. and on their
 behalf added that night special prayer to the usual
 quarter-of-an-hour’s supplication before meat, and would have tacked
 another to the end of the grace, had not his young mistress broken in
 upon him with hurried command that must run down the road, and,
 wherever heathcliff had rambled, find and make him re-enter directly!
 
“i want to speak to him, and i _must_, before i go upstairs,” she said.
 “and the gate is open: is somewhere out of hearing; for would not
 reply, though i shouted at the top of the fold as loud as i could.”
 
joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to
 suffer contradiction; and at last placed his hat on his head, and
 walked grumbling forth. meantime, catherine paced up and down the
 floor, exclaiming—“i wonder where is—i wonder where _can_ be!
 what did i say, nelly? i’ve forgotten. was vexed at my bad humour
 this afternoon? dear! tell what i’ve said to grieve him? i do wish
 he’d come. i do wish would!”
 
“what noise for nothing!” i cried, though rather uneasy myself. “what
 trifle scares you! it’s surely great cause of alarm that
 heathcliff should take moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie
 too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft. i’ll engage he’s lurking
 there. see if i don’t ferret him out!”
 
i departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and
 joseph’s quest ended in the same.
 
“yon lad gets war und war!” observed on re-entering. “he’s left th’
 gate at t’ full swing, and miss’s pony has trodden dahn two rigs o’
 corn, and plottered through, raight o’er into t’ meadow! hahsomdiver,
 t’ maister ’ull play t’ devil to-morn, and he’ll do weel. he’s patience
 itsseln wi’ sich careless, offald craters—patience itsseln is! bud
 he’ll not be soa allus—yah’s see, all on ye! yah mun’n’t drive him out
 of his heead for nowt!”
 
“have you found heathcliff, you ass?” interrupted catherine. “have you
 been looking for him, as i ordered?”
 
“i sud more likker look for th’ horse,” replied. “it ’ud be to more
 sense. bud i can look for norther horse nur man of neeght loike
 this—as black as t’ chimbley! und heathcliff’s noan t’ chap to coom at
 _my_ whistle—happen he’ll be less hard o’ hearing wi’ _ye_!”
 
it _was_ very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined
 to thunder, and i said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain
 would be certain to bring him home without further trouble. however,
 catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity. she kept wandering
 to and fro, from the gate to the door, in state of agitation which
 permitted repose; and at length took up permanent situation on one
 side of the wall, near the road: where, heedless of my expostulations
 and the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash
 around her, she remained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and
 then crying outright. she beat hareton, or any child, at good
 passionate fit of crying.
 
about midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the
 heights in full fury. there was violent wind, as well as thunder, and
 either one or the other split tree off at the corner of the building:
 huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down portion of the
 east chimney-stack, sending clatter of stones and soot into the
 kitchen-fire. we thought bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and
 joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the lord to remember the
 patriarchs noah and lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous,
 though smote the ungodly. i felt some sentiment that it must be a
 judgment on us also. the jonah, in my mind, was mr. earnshaw; and i
 shook the handle of his den that i might ascertain if were yet
 living. replied audibly enough, in fashion which made my companion
 vociferate, more clamorously than before, that wide distinction might
 be drawn between saints like himself and sinners like his master. but
 the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed;
 excepting cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in
 refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawlless to
 catch as much water as she could with her hair and clothes. she came in
 and lay down on the settle, all soaked as she was, turning her face to
 the back, and putting her hands before it.
 
“well, miss!” i exclaimed, touching her shoulder; “you are not bent on
 getting your death, are you? do you know what o’clock it is? half-past
 twelve. come, come to bed! there’s use waiting any longer on that
 foolish boy: he’ll be gone to gimmerton, and he’ll stay there now. he
 guesses we shouldn’t wait for him till this late hour: at least, he
 guesses that only mr. hindley would be up; and he’d rather avoid having
 the door opened by the master.”
 
“nay, nay, he’s noan at gimmerton,” said joseph. “i’s niver wonder but
 he’s at t’ bothom of bog-hoile. this visitation worn’t for nowt, and
 i wod hev’ ye to look out, miss—yah muh be t’ next. thank hivin for
 all! all warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked out
 fro’ th’ rubbidge! yah knaw whet t’ scripture ses.” and began
 quoting several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we
 might find them.
 
i, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet
 things, left him preaching and her shivering, and betook myself to bed
 with little hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping
 round him. i heard joseph read on while afterwards; then i
 distinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then i dropped asleep.
 
coming down somewhat later than usual, i saw, by the sunbeams piercing
 the chinks of the shutters, miss catherine still seated near the
 fireplace. the house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its
 unclosed windows; hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen
 hearth, haggard and drowsy.
 
“what ails you, cathy?” was saying when i entered: “you look as
 dismal as drowned whelp. why are you so damp and pale, child?”
 
“i’ve been wet,” she answered reluctantly, “and i’m cold, that’s all.”
 
“oh, she is naughty!” i cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
 sober. “she got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there
 she has sat the night through, and i couldn’t prevail on her to stir.”
 
mr. earnshaw stared at us in surprise. “the night through,” he
 repeated. “what kept her up? not fear of the thunder, surely? that was
 over hours since.”
 
neither of us wished to mention heathcliff’s absence, as long as we
 could conceal it; so i replied, i didn’t know how she took it into her
 head to sit up; and she said nothing. the morning was fresh and cool; i
 threw back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents
 from the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, “ellen, shut the
 window. i’m starving!” and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to
 the almost extinguished embers.
 
“she’s ill,” said hindley, taking her wrist; “i suppose that’s the
 reason she would not go to bed. damn it! i don’t want to be troubled
 with more sickness here. what took you into the rain?”
 
“running after t’ lads, as usuald!” croaked joseph, catching an
 opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue. “if i war
 yah, maister, i’d just slam t’ boards i’ their faces all on ’em, gentle
 and simple! never day ut yah’re off, but yon cat o’ linton comes
 sneaking hither; and miss nelly, shoo’s fine lass! shoo sits watching
 for ye i’ t’ kitchen; and as yah’re in at one door, he’s out at
 t’other; and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side! it’s
 bonny behaviour, lurking amang t’ fields, after twelve o’ t’ night, wi’
 that fahl, flaysome divil of gipsy, heathcliff! they think _i’m_
 blind; but i’m noan: nowt ut t’ soart!—i seed young linton boath coming
 and going, and i seed _yah_” (directing his discourse to me), “yah
 gooid fur nowt, slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th’ house, t’
 minute yah heard t’ maister’s horse-fit clatter up t’ road.”
 
“silence, eavesdropper!” cried catherine; “none of your insolence
 before me! edgar linton came yesterday by chance, hindley; and it was
 _i_ who told him to be off: because i knew you would not like to have
 met him as you were.”
 
“you lie, cathy, doubt,” answered her brother, “and you are a
 confounded simpleton! but never mind linton at present: tell me, were
 you not with heathcliff last night? speak the truth, now. you need not
 be afraid of harming him: though i hate him as much as ever, did me
 good turn short time since that will make my conscience tender of
 breaking his neck. to prevent it, i shall send him about his business
 this very morning; and after he’s gone, i’d advise you all to look
 sharp: i shall only have the more humour for you.”
 
“i never saw heathcliff last night,” answered catherine, beginning to
 sob bitterly: “and if you do turn him out of doors, i’ll go with him.
 but, perhaps, you’ll never have an opportunity: perhaps, he’s gone.”
 here she burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her
 words were inarticulate.
 
hindley lavished on her torrent of scornful abuse, and bade her get
 to her room immediately, or she shouldn’t cry for nothing! i obliged
 her to obey; and i shall never forget what scene she acted when we
 reached her chamber: it terrified me. i thought she was going mad, and
 i begged joseph to run for the doctor. it proved the commencement of
 delirium: mr. kenneth, as soon as saw her, pronounced her
 dangerously ill; she had fever. bled her, and told to let
 her live on whey and water-gruel, and take care she did not throw
 herself downstairs or out of the window; and then left: for had
 enough to do in the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary
 distance between cottage and cottage.
 
though i cannot say i made gentle nurse, and joseph and the master
 were better, and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong
 as patient could be, she weathered it through. old mrs. linton paid
 us several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded
 and ordered us all; and when catherine was convalescent, she insisted
 on conveying her to thrushcross grange: for which deliverance we were
 very grateful. but the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness:
 she and her husband both took the fever, and died within few days of
 each other.
 
our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and
 haughtier than ever. heathcliff had never been heard of since the
 evening of the thunder-storm; and, one day, i had the misfortune, when
 she had provoked exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance
 on her: where indeed it belonged, as she well knew. from that period,
 for several months, she ceased to hold any communication with me, save
 in the relation of mere servant. joseph fell under ban also: he
 _would_ speak his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a
 little girl; and she esteemed herself woman, and our mistress, and
 thought that her recent illness gave her claim to be treated with
 consideration. then the doctor had said that she would not bear
 crossing much; she ought to have her own way; and it was nothing less
 than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to stand up and
 contradict her. from mr. earnshaw and his companions she kept aloof;
 and tutored by kenneth, and serious threats of fit that often
 attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she pleased to
 demand, and generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper. was
 rather _too_ indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from affection,
 but from pride: wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the
 family by an alliance with the lintons, and as long as she let him
 alone she might trample on us like slaves, for aught cared! edgar
 linton, as multitudes have been before and will be after him, was
 infatuated: and believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he
 led her to gimmerton chapel, three years subsequent to his father’s
 death.
 
much against my inclination, i was persuaded to leave wuthering heights
 and accompany her here. little hareton was nearly five years old, and i
 had just begun to teach him his letters. we made sad parting; but
 catherine’s tears were more powerful than ours. when i refused to go,
 and when she found her entreaties did not move me, she went lamenting
 to her husband and brother. the former offered munificent wages; the
 latter ordered to pack up: wanted women in the house, said,
 now that there was mistress; and as to hareton, the curate should
 take him in hand, by-and-by. and so i had but one choice left: to do as
 i was ordered. i told the master got rid of all decent people only
 to run to ruin little faster; i kissed hareton, said good-by; and
 since then has been stranger: and it’s very queer to think it, but
 i’ve doubt has completely forgotten all about ellen dean, and
 that was ever more than all the world to her and she to him!
 
* * * * *
 

at this point of the housekeeper’s story she chanced to glance towards
 the time-piece over the chimney; and was in amazement on seeing the
 minute-hand measure half-past one. she would not hear of staying a
 second longer: in truth, i felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of
 her narrative myself. and now that she is vanished to her rest, and i
 have meditated for another hour or two, i shall summon courage to go
 also, in spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.
 



chapter x
 

charming introduction to hermit’s life! four weeks’ torture,
 tossing, and sickness! oh, these bleak winds and bitter northern skies,
 and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons! and oh, this
 dearth of the human physiognomy! and, worse than all, the terrible
 intimation of kenneth that i need not expect to be out of doors till
 spring!
 
mr. heathcliff has just honoured with call. about seven days ago
 sent brace of grouse—the last of the season. scoundrel! is
 not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine; and that i had a
 great mind to tell him. but, alas! how could i offend man who was
 charitable enough to sit at my bedside good hour, and talk on some
 other subject than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches? this is
 quite an easy interval. i am too weak to read; yet i feel as if i could
 enjoy something interesting. why not have up mrs. dean to finish her
 tale? i can recollect its chief incidents, as far as she had gone. yes:
 i remember her hero had run off, and never been heard of for three
 years; and the heroine was married. i’ll ring: she’ll be delighted to
 find capable of talking cheerfully. mrs. dean came.
 
“it wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine,” she commenced.
 
“away, away with it!” i replied; “i desire to have—”
 
“the doctor says you must drop the powders.”
 
“with all my heart! don’t interrupt me. come and take your seat here.
 keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials. draw your knitting
 out of your pocket—that will do—now continue the history of mr.
 heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day. did finish
 his education on the continent, and come back gentleman? or did he
 get sizar’s place at college, or escape to america, and earn honours
 by drawing blood from his foster-country? or make fortune more
 promptly on the english highways?”
 
“he may have done little in all these vocations, mr. lockwood; but i
 couldn’t give my word for any. i stated before that i didn’t know how
 gained his money; neither am i aware of the means took to raise
 his mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with
 your leave, i’ll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse
 and not weary you. are you feeling better this morning?”
 
“much.”
 
“that’s good news.”
 
* * * * *
 

i got miss catherine and myself to thrushcross grange; and, to my
 agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinitely better than i dared to
 expect. she seemed almost over-fond of mr. linton; and even to his
 sister she showed plenty of affection. they were both very attentive to
 her comfort, certainly. it was not the thorn bending to the
 honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. there were no
 mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who
 _can_ be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither
 opposition nor indifference? i observed that mr. edgar had a
 deep-rooted fear of ruffling her humour. concealed it from her; but
 if ever heard answer sharply, or saw any other servant grow
 cloudy at some imperious order of hers, would show his trouble by a
 frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account. many a
 time spoke sternly to about my pertness; and averred that the stab
 of knife could not inflict worse pang than suffered at seeing
 his lady vexed. not to grieve kind master, i learned to be less
 touchy; and, for the space of half year, the gunpowder lay as
 harmless as sand, because fire came near to explode it. catherine
 had seasons of gloom and silence now and then: they were respected with
 sympathising silence by her husband, who ascribed them to an alteration
 in her constitution, produced by her perilous illness; as she was never
 subject to depression of spirits before. the return of sunshine was
 welcomed by answering sunshine from him. i believe i may assert that
 they were really in possession of deep and growing happiness.
 
it ended. well, we _must_ be for ourselves in the long run; the mild
 and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineering; and it
 ended when circumstances caused each to feel that the one’s interest
 was not the chief consideration in the other’s thoughts. on mellow
 evening in september, i was coming from the garden with heavy basket
 of apples which i had been gathering. it had got dusk, and the moon
 looked over the high wall of the court, causing undefined shadows to
 lurk in the corners of the numerous projecting portions of the
 building. i set my burden on the house-steps by the kitchen-door, and
 lingered to rest, and drew in few more breaths of the soft, sweet
 air; my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when i
 heard voice behind say,—“nelly, is that you?”
 
it was deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was something in
 the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar. i
 turned about to discover who spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut,
 and i had seen nobody on approaching the steps. something stirred in
 the porch; and, moving nearer, i distinguished tall man dressed in
 dark clothes, with dark face and hair. leant against the side, and
 held his fingers on the latch as if intending to open for himself. “who
 can it be?” i thought. “mr. earnshaw? oh, no! the voice has no
 resemblance to his.”
 
“i have waited here an hour,” resumed, while i continued staring;
 “and the whole of that time all round has been as still as death. i
 dared not enter. you do not know me? look, i’m not stranger!”
 
ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered
 with black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and
 singular. i remembered the eyes.
 
“what!” i cried, uncertain whether to regard him as worldly visitor,
 and i raised my hands in amazement. “what! you come back? is it really
 you? is it?”
 
“yes, heathcliff,” replied, glancing from up to the windows,
 which reflected score of glittering moons, but showed lights from
 within. “are they at home? where is she? nelly, you are not glad! you
 needn’t be so disturbed. is she here? speak! i want to have one word
 with her—your mistress. go, and say some person from gimmerton desires
 to see her.”
 
“how will she take it?” i exclaimed. “what will she do? the surprise
 bewilders me—it will put her out of her head! and you _are_ heathcliff!
 but altered! nay, there’s comprehending it. have you been for a
 soldier?”
 
“go and carry my message,” interrupted, impatiently. “i’m in hell
 till you do!”
 
lifted the latch, and i entered; but when i got to the parlour where
 mr. and mrs. linton were, i could not persuade myself to proceed. at
 length i resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the
 candles lighted, and i opened the door.
 
they sat together in window whose lattice lay back against the wall,
 and displayed, beyond the garden trees, and the wild green park, the
 valley of gimmerton, with long line of mist winding nearly to its top
 (for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticed, the
 sough that runs from the marshes joins beck which follows the bend of
 the glen). wuthering heights rose above this silvery vapour; but our
 old house was invisible; it rather dips down on the other side. both
 the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked
 wondrously peaceful. i shrank reluctantly from performing my errand;
 and was actually going away leaving it unsaid, after having put my
 question about the candles, when sense of my folly compelled to
 return, and mutter, “a person from gimmerton wishes to see you ma’am.”
 
“what does want?” asked mrs. linton.
 
“i did not question him,” i answered.
 
“well, close the curtains, nelly,” she said; “and bring up tea. i’ll be
 back again directly.”
 
she quitted the apartment; mr. edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.
 
“some one mistress does not expect,” i replied. “that heathcliff—you
 recollect him, sir—who used to live at mr. earnshaw’s.”
 
“what! the gipsy—the ploughboy?” cried. “why did you not say so to
 catherine?”
 
“hush! you must not call him by those names, master,” i said. “she’d be
 sadly grieved to hear you. she was nearly heartbroken when ran off.
 i guess his return will make jubilee to her.”
 
mr. linton walked to window on the other side of the room that
 overlooked the court. unfastened it, and leant out. i suppose they
 were below, for exclaimed quickly: “don’t stand there, love! bring
 the person in, if it be anyone particular.” ere long, i heard the click
 of the latch, and catherine flew upstairs, breathless and wild; too
 excited to show gladness: indeed, by her face, you would rather have
 surmised an awful calamity.
 
“oh, edgar, edgar!” she panted, flinging her arms round his neck. “oh,
 edgar darling! heathcliff’s come back—he is!” and she tightened her
 embrace to squeeze.
 
“well, well,” cried her husband, crossly, “don’t strangle for that!
 never struck as such marvellous treasure. there is need to
 be frantic!”
 
“i know you didn’t like him,” she answered, repressing little the
 intensity of her delight. “yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
 shall i tell him to come up?”
 
“here,” said, “into the parlour?”
 
“where else?” she asked.
 
looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as more suitable place for
 him. mrs. linton eyed him with droll expression—half angry, half
 laughing at his fastidiousness.
 
“no,” she added, after while; “i cannot sit in the kitchen. set two
 tables here, ellen: one for your master and miss isabella, being
 gentry; the other for heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.
 will that please you, dear? or must i have fire lighted elsewhere? if
 so, give directions. i’ll run down and secure my guest. i’m afraid the
 joy is too great to be real!”
 
she was about to dart off again; but edgar arrested her.
 
“_you_ bid him step up,” said, addressing me; “and, catherine, try
 to be glad, without being absurd. the whole household need not witness
 the sight of your welcoming runaway servant as brother.”
 
i descended, and found heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
 anticipating an invitation to enter. followed my guidance without
 waste of words, and i ushered him into the presence of the master and
 mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking. but the
 lady’s glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the
 door: she sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to linton;
 and then she seized linton’s reluctant fingers and crushed them into
 his. now, fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, i was amazed,
 more than ever, to behold the transformation of heathcliff. had
 grown tall, athletic, well-formed man; beside whom my master seemed
 quite slender and youth-like. his upright carriage suggested the idea
 of his having been in the army. his countenance was much older in
 expression and decision of feature than mr. linton’s; it looked
 intelligent, and retained marks of former degradation. a
 half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and eyes full
 of black fire, but it was subdued; and his manner was even dignified:
 quite divested of roughness, though too stern for grace. my master’s
 surprise equalled or exceeded mine: remained for minute at loss
 how to address the ploughboy, as had called him. heathcliff dropped
 his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till chose to
 speak.
 
“sit down, sir,” said, at length. “mrs. linton, recalling old times,
 would have give you cordial reception; and, of course, i am
 gratified when anything occurs to please her.”
 
“and i also,” answered heathcliff, “especially if it be anything in
 which i have part. i shall stay an hour or two willingly.”
 
took seat opposite catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if
 she feared would vanish were she to remove it. did not raise his
 to her often: quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed
 back, each time more confidently, the undisguised delight drank from
 hers. they were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer
 embarrassment. not so mr. edgar: grew pale with pure annoyance: a
 feeling that reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across
 the rug, seized heathcliff’s hands again, and laughed like one beside
 herself.
 
“i shall think it dream to-morrow!” she cried. “i shall not be able
 to believe that i have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.
 and yet, cruel heathcliff! you don’t deserve this welcome. to be absent
 and silent for three years, and never to think of me!”
 
“a little more than you have thought of me,” murmured. “i heard of
 your marriage, cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard
 below, i meditated this plan—just to have one glimpse of your face, a
 stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle
 my score with hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
 myself. your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of
 meeting with another aspect next time! nay, you’ll not drive off
 again. you were really sorry for me, were you? well, there was cause.
 i’ve fought through bitter life since i last heard your voice; and
 you must forgive me, for i struggled only for you!”
 
“catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the
 table,” interrupted linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and
 due measure of politeness. “mr. heathcliff will have long walk,
 wherever may lodge to-night; and i’m thirsty.”
 
she took her post before the urn; and miss isabella came, summoned by
 the bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, i left the room.
 the meal hardly endured ten minutes. catherine’s cup was never filled:
 she could neither eat nor drink. edgar had made slop in his saucer,
 and scarcely swallowed mouthful. their guest did not protract his
 stay that evening above an hour longer. i asked, as departed, if he
 went to gimmerton?
 
“no, to wuthering heights,” answered: “mr. earnshaw invited me, when
 i called this morning.”
 
mr. earnshaw invited _him_! and _he_ called on mr. earnshaw! i pondered
 this sentence painfully, after was gone. is turning out bit of
 hypocrite, and coming into the country to work mischief under a
 cloak? i mused: i had presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he
 had better have remained away.
 
about the middle of the night, i was wakened from my first nap by mrs.
 linton gliding into my chamber, taking seat on my bedside, and
 pulling by the hair to rouse me.
 
“i cannot rest, ellen,” she said, by way of apology. “and i want some
 living creature to keep company in my happiness! edgar is sulky,
 because i’m glad of thing that does not interest him: refuses to
 open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches; and he
 affirmed i was cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when was so
 sick and sleepy. always contrives to be sick at the least cross! i
 gave few sentences of commendation to heathcliff, and he, either for
 headache or pang of envy, began to cry: so i got up and left him.”
 
“what use is it praising heathcliff to him?” i answered. “as lads they
 had an aversion to each other, and heathcliff would hate just as much
 to hear him praised: it’s human nature. let mr. linton alone about him,
 unless you would like an open quarrel between them.”
 
“but does it not show great weakness?” pursued she. “i’m not envious: i
 never feel hurt at the brightness of isabella’s yellow hair and the
 whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance, and the fondness all the
 family exhibit for her. even you, nelly, if we have dispute
 sometimes, you back isabella at once; and i yield like foolish
 mother: i call her darling, and flatter her into good temper. it
 pleases her brother to see us cordial, and that pleases me. but they
 are very much alike: they are spoiled children, and fancy the world was
 made for their accommodation; and though i humour both, i think smart
 chastisement might improve them all the same.”
 
“you’re mistaken, mrs. linton,” said i. “they humour you: i know what
 there would be to do if they did not. you can well afford to indulge
 their passing whims as long as their business is to anticipate all your
 desires. you may, however, fall out, at last, over something of equal
 consequence to both sides; and then those you term weak are very
 capable of being as obstinate as you.”
 
“and then we shall fight to the death, sha’n’t we, nelly?” she
 returned, laughing. “no! i tell you, i have such faith in linton’s
 love, that i believe i might kill him, and wouldn’t wish to
 retaliate.”
 
i advised her to value him the more for his affection.
 
“i do,” she answered, “but needn’t resort to whining for trifles. it
 is childish; and, instead of melting into tears because i said that
 heathcliff was now worthy of anyone’s regard, and it would honour the
 first gentleman in the country to be his friend, ought to have said
 it for me, and been delighted from sympathy. must get accustomed to
 him, and may as well like him: considering how heathcliff has reason
 to object to him, i’m sure behaved excellently!”
 
“what do you think of his going to wuthering heights?” i inquired. “he
 is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite christian: offering
 the right hand of fellowship to his enemies all around!”
 
“he explained it,” she replied. “i wonder as much as you. said he
 called to gather information concerning from you, supposing you
 resided there still; and joseph told hindley, who came out and fell to
 questioning him of what had been doing, and how had been living;
 and finally, desired him to walk in. there were some persons sitting at
 cards; heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him, and,
 finding him plentifully supplied, requested that would come again
 in the evening: to which consented. hindley is too reckless to
 select his acquaintance prudently: doesn’t trouble himself to
 reflect on the causes might have for mistrusting one whom has
 basely injured. but heathcliff affirms his principal reason for
 resuming connection with his ancient persecutor is wish to install
 himself in quarters at walking distance from the grange, and an
 attachment to the house where we lived together; and likewise hope
 that i shall have more opportunities of seeing him there than i could
 have if settled in gimmerton. means to offer liberal payment for
 permission to lodge at the heights; and doubtless my brother’s
 covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms: was always greedy;
 though what grasps with one hand flings away with the other.”
 
“it’s nice place for young man to fix his dwelling in!” said i.
 “have you fear of the consequences, mrs. linton?”
 
“none for my friend,” she replied: “his strong head will keep him from
 danger; little for hindley: but can’t be made morally worse than
 is; and i stand between him and bodily harm. the event of this
 evening has reconciled to god and humanity! i had risen in angry
 rebellion against providence. oh, i’ve endured very, very bitter
 misery, nelly! if that creature knew how bitter, he’d be ashamed to
 cloud its removal with idle petulance. it was kindness for him which
 induced to bear it alone: had i expressed the agony i frequently
 felt, would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently
 as i. however, it’s over, and i’ll take revenge on his folly; i can
 afford to suffer anything hereafter! should the meanest thing alive
 slap on the cheek, i’d not only turn the other, but i’d ask pardon
 for provoking it; and, as proof, i’ll go make my peace with edgar
 instantly. good-night! i’m an angel!”
 
in this self-complacent conviction she departed; and the success of her
 fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: mr. linton had not only
 abjured his peevishness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by
 catherine’s exuberance of vivacity), but ventured objection to
 her taking isabella with her to wuthering heights in the afternoon; and
 she rewarded him with such summer of sweetness and affection in
 return as made the house paradise for several days; both master and
 servants profiting from the perpetual sunshine.
 
heathcliff—mr. heathcliff i should say in future—used the liberty of
 visiting at thrushcross grange cautiously, at first: seemed
 estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion. catherine, also,
 deemed it judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in
 receiving him; and gradually established his right to be expected.
 retained great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was
 remarkable; and that served to repress all startling demonstrations of
 feeling. my master’s uneasiness experienced lull, and further
 circumstances diverted it into another channel for space.
 
his new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of
 isabella linton evincing sudden and irresistible attraction towards
 the tolerated guest. she was at that time charming young lady of
 eighteen; infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen
 feelings, and keen temper, too, if irritated. her brother, who loved
 her tenderly, was appalled at this fantastic preference. leaving aside
 the degradation of an alliance with nameless man, and the possible
 fact that his property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such
 one’s power, had sense to comprehend heathcliff’s disposition: to
 know that, though his exterior was altered, his mind was unchangeable
 and unchanged. and dreaded that mind: it revolted him: shrank
 forebodingly from the idea of committing isabella to its keeping. he
 would have recoiled still more had been aware that her attachment
 rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it awakened reciprocation
 of sentiment; for the minute discovered its existence laid the
 blame on heathcliff’s deliberate designing.
 
we had all remarked, during some time, that miss linton fretted and
 pined over something. she grew cross and wearisome; snapping at and
 teasing catherine continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting her
 limited patience. we excused her, to certain extent, on the plea of
 ill-health: she was dwindling and fading before our eyes. but one day,
 when she had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast,
 complaining that the servants did not do what she told them; that the
 mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house, and edgar
 neglected her; that she had caught cold with the doors being left
 open, and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to vex her, with a
 hundred yet more frivolous accusations, mrs. linton peremptorily
 insisted that she should get to bed; and, having scolded her heartily,
 threatened to send for the doctor. mention of kenneth caused her to
 exclaim, instantly, that her health was perfect, and it was only
 catherine’s harshness which made her unhappy.
 
“how can you say i am harsh, you naughty fondling?” cried the mistress,
 amazed at the unreasonable assertion. “you are surely losing your
 reason. when have i been harsh, tell me?”
 
“yesterday,” sobbed isabella, “and now!”
 
“yesterday!” said her sister-in-law. “on what occasion?”
 
“in our walk along the moor: you told to ramble where i pleased,
 while you sauntered on with mr. heathcliff!”
 
“and that’s your notion of harshness?” said catherine, laughing. “it
 was hint that your company was superfluous; we didn’t care whether
 you kept with us or not; i merely thought heathcliff’s talk would have
 nothing entertaining for your ears.”
 
“oh, no,” wept the young lady; “you wished away, because you knew i
 liked to be there!”
 
“is she sane?” asked mrs. linton, appealing to me. “i’ll repeat our
 conversation, word for word, isabella; and you point out any charm it
 could have had for you.”
 
“i don’t mind the conversation,” she answered: “i wanted to be with—”
 
“well?” said catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete the
 sentence.
 
“with him: and i won’t be always sent off!” she continued, kindling up.
 “you are dog in the manger, cathy, and desire one to be loved but
 yourself!”
 
“you are an impertinent little monkey!” exclaimed mrs. linton, in
 surprise. “but i’ll not believe this idiocy! it is impossible that you
 can covet the admiration of heathcliff—that you consider him an
 agreeable person! i hope i have misunderstood you, isabella?”
 
“no, you have not,” said the infatuated girl. “i love him more than
 ever you loved edgar, and might love me, if you would let him!”
 
“i wouldn’t be you for kingdom, then!” catherine declared,
 emphatically: and she seemed to speak sincerely. “nelly, help to
 convince her of her madness. tell her what heathcliff is: an
 unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid
 wilderness of furze and whinstone. i’d as soon put that little canary
 into the park on winter’s day, as recommend you to bestow your heart
 on him! it is deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and nothing
 else, which makes that dream enter your head. pray, don’t imagine that
 conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath stern
 exterior! he’s not rough diamond—a pearl-containing oyster of a
 rustic: he’s fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. i never say to him, ‘let
 this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to
 harm them;’ i say, ‘let them alone, because _i_ should hate them to be
 wronged:’ and he’d crush you like sparrow’s egg, isabella, if he
 found you troublesome charge. i know couldn’t love linton; and
 yet he’d be quite capable of marrying your fortune and expectations:
 avarice is growing with him besetting sin. there’s my picture: and
 i’m his friend—so much so, that had thought seriously to catch you,
 i should, perhaps, have held my tongue, and let you fall into his
 trap.”
 
miss linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.
 
“for shame! for shame!” she repeated, angrily. “you are worse than
 twenty foes, you poisonous friend!”
 
“ah! you won’t believe me, then?” said catherine. “you think i speak
 from wicked selfishness?”
 
“i’m certain you do,” retorted isabella; “and i shudder at you!”
 
“good!” cried the other. “try for yourself, if that be your spirit: i
 have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence.”—
 
“and i must suffer for her egotism!” she sobbed, as mrs. linton left
 the room. “all, all is against me: she has blighted my single
 consolation. but she uttered falsehoods, didn’t she? mr. heathcliff is
 not fiend: has an honourable soul, and true one, or how could he
 remember her?”
 
“banish him from your thoughts, miss,” i said. “he’s bird of bad
 omen: mate for you. mrs. linton spoke strongly, and yet i can’t
 contradict her. she is better acquainted with his heart than i, or any
 one besides; and she never would represent him as worse than is.
 honest people don’t hide their deeds. how has been living? how has
 got rich? why is staying at wuthering heights, the house of man
 whom abhors? they say mr. earnshaw is worse and worse since came.
 they sit up all night together continually, and hindley has been
 borrowing money on his land, and does nothing but play and drink: i
 heard only week ago—it was joseph who told me—i met him at gimmerton:
 ‘nelly,’ said, ‘we’s hae crowner’s ’quest enow, at ahr folks’. one
 on ’em ’s a’most getten his finger cut off wi’ hauding t’ other fro’
 stickin’ hisseln loike cawlf. that’s maister, yah knaw, ’at ’s soa
 up o’ going tuh t’ grand ’sizes. he’s noan feared o’ t’ bench o’
 judges, norther paul, nur peter, nur john, nur matthew, nor noan on
 ’em, not he! fair likes—he langs to set his brazened face agean ’em!
 and yon bonny lad heathcliff, yah mind, he’s rare ’un. can girn a
 laugh as well ’s onybody at raight divil’s jest. does niver say
 nowt of his fine living amang us, when goes to t’ grange? this is t’
 way on ’t:—up at sun-down: dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
 can’le-light till next day at noon: then, t’ fooil gangs banning un
 raving to his cham’er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i’ thur
 lugs fur varry shame; un’ the knave, why can caint his brass, un’
 ate, un’ sleep, un’ off to his neighbour’s to gossip wi’ t’ wife. i’
 course, tells dame catherine how her fathur’s goold runs into his
 pocket, and her fathur’s gallops down t’ broad road, while flees
 afore to oppen t’ pikes!’ now, miss linton, joseph is an old rascal,
 but liar; and, if his account of heathcliff’s conduct be true, you
 would never think of desiring such husband, would you?”
 
“you are leagued with the rest, ellen!” she replied. “i’ll not listen
 to your slanders. what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
 that there is happiness in the world!”
 
whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or
 persevered in nursing it perpetually, i cannot say: she had little time
 to reflect. the day after, there was justice-meeting at the next
 town; my master was obliged to attend; and mr. heathcliff, aware of his
 absence, called rather earlier than usual. catherine and isabella were
 sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter
 alarmed at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she had made of
 her secret feelings in transient fit of passion; the former, on
 mature consideration, really offended with her companion; and, if she
 laughed again at her pertness, inclined to make it laughing matter
 to _her_. she did laugh as she saw heathcliff pass the window. i was
 sweeping the hearth, and i noticed mischievous smile on her lips.
 isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or book, remained till the
 door opened; and it was too late to attempt an escape, which she would
 gladly have done had it been practicable.
 
“come in, that’s right!” exclaimed the mistress, gaily, pulling chair
 to the fire. “here are two people sadly in need of third to thaw the
 ice between them; and you are the very one we should both of us choose.
 heathcliff, i’m proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you
 more than myself. i expect you to feel flattered. nay, it’s not nelly;
 don’t look at her! my poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart
 by mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. it lies in
 your own power to be edgar’s brother! no, no, isabella, you sha’n’t run
 off,” she continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the
 confounded girl, who had risen indignantly. “we were quarrelling like
 cats about you, heathcliff; and i was fairly beaten in protestations of
 devotion and admiration: and, moreover, i was informed that if i would
 but have the manners to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself
 to be, would shoot shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever,
 and send my image into eternal oblivion!”
 
“catherine!” said isabella, calling up her dignity, and disdaining to
 struggle from the tight grasp that held her, “i’d thank you to adhere
 to the truth and not slander me, even in joke! mr. heathcliff, be kind
 enough to bid this friend of yours release me: she forgets that you and
 i are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses her is painful to me
 beyond expression.”
 
as the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked thoroughly
 indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him, she turned
 and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor.
 
“by means!” cried mrs. linton in answer. “i won’t be named dog in
 the manger again. you _shall_ stay: now then! heathcliff, why don’t you
 evince satisfaction at my pleasant news? isabella swears that the love
 edgar has for is nothing to that she entertains for you. i’m sure
 she made some speech of the kind; did she not, ellen? and she has
 fasted ever since the day before yesterday’s walk, from sorrow and rage
 that i despatched her out of your society under the idea of its being
 unacceptable.”
 
“i think you belie her,” said heathcliff, twisting his chair to face
 them. “she wishes to be out of my society now, at any rate!”
 
and stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a
 strange repulsive animal: centipede from the indies, for instance,
 which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it
 raises. the poor thing couldn’t bear that; she grew white and red in
 rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, bent the strength
 of her small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of catherine; and
 perceiving that as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another
 closed down, and she could not remove the whole together, she began to
 make use of her nails; and their sharpness presently ornamented the
 detainer’s with crescents of red.
 
“there’s tigress!” exclaimed mrs. linton, setting her free, and
 shaking her hand with pain. “begone, for god’s sake, and hide your
 vixen face! how foolish to reveal those talons to _him_. can’t you
 fancy the conclusions he’ll draw? look, heathcliff! they are
 instruments that will do execution—you must beware of your eyes.”
 
“i’d wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me,” he
 answered, brutally, when the door had closed after her. “but what did
 you mean by teasing the creature in that manner, cathy? you were not
 speaking the truth, were you?”
 
“i assure you i was,” she returned. “she has been dying for your sake
 several weeks, and raving about you this morning, and pouring forth a
 deluge of abuse, because i represented your failings in plain light,
 for the purpose of mitigating her adoration. but don’t notice it
 further: i wished to punish her sauciness, that’s all. i like her too
 well, my dear heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour her
 up.”
 
“and i like her too ill to attempt it,” said he, “except in very
 ghoulish fashion. you’d hear of odd things if i lived alone with that
 mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white
 the colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day
 or two: they detestably resemble linton’s.”
 
“delectably!” observed catherine. “they are dove’s eyes—angel’s!”
 
“she’s her brother’s heir, is she not?” asked, after brief
 silence.
 
“i should be sorry to think so,” returned his companion. “half dozen
 nephews shall erase her title, please heaven! abstract your mind from
 the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour’s
 goods; remember _this_ neighbour’s goods are mine.”
 
“if they were _mine_, they would be none the less that,” said
 heathcliff; “but though isabella linton may be silly, she is scarcely
 mad; and, in short, we’ll dismiss the matter, as you advise.”
 
from their tongues they did dismiss it; and catherine, probably, from
 her thoughts. the other, i felt certain, recalled it often in the
 course of the evening. i saw him smile to himself—grin rather—and lapse
 into ominous musing whenever mrs. linton had occasion to be absent from
 the apartment.
 
i determined to watch his movements. my heart invariably cleaved to the
 master’s, in preference to catherine’s side: with reason i imagined,
 for was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she—she could not be
 called the _opposite_, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide
 latitude, that i had little faith in her principles, and still less
 sympathy for her feelings. i wanted something to happen which might
 have the effect of freeing both wuthering heights and the grange of mr.
 heathcliff, quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent. his
 visits were continual nightmare to me; and, i suspected, to my master
 also. his abode at the heights was an oppression past explaining. i
 felt that god had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked
 wanderings, and an evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting
 his time to spring and destroy.
 



chapter xi
 

sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, i’ve got up in
 sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the
 farm. i’ve persuaded my conscience that it was duty to warn him how
 people talked regarding his ways; and then i’ve recollected his
 confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting him, have flinched
 from re-entering the dismal house, doubting if i could bear to be taken
 at my word.
 
one time i passed the old gate, going out of my way, on journey to
 gimmerton. it was about the period that my narrative has reached: a
 bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road hard and dry. i
 came to stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your
 left hand; rough sand-pillar, with the letters w. h. cut on its north
 side, on the east, g., and on the south-west, t. g. it serves as a
 guide-post to the grange, the heights, and village. the sun shone
 yellow on its grey head, reminding of summer; and i cannot say why,
 but all at once gush of child’s sensations flowed into my heart.
 hindley and i held it favourite spot twenty years before. i gazed
 long at the weather-worn block; and, stooping down, perceived hole
 near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which we were
 fond of storing there with more perishable things; and, as fresh as
 reality, it appeared that i beheld my early playmate seated on the
 withered turf: his dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand
 scooping out the earth with piece of slate. “poor hindley!” i
 exclaimed, involuntarily. i started: my bodily eye was cheated into a
 momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight
 into mine! it vanished in twinkling; but immediately i felt an
 irresistible yearning to be at the heights. superstition urged to
 comply with this impulse: supposing should be dead! i thought—or
 should die soon!—supposing it were sign of death! the nearer i got to
 the house the more agitated i grew; and on catching sight of it i
 trembled in every limb. the apparition had outstripped me: it stood
 looking through the gate. that was my first idea on observing an
 elf-locked, brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the
 bars. further reflection suggested this must be hareton, _my_ hareton,
 not altered greatly since i left him, ten months since.
 
“god bless thee, darling!” i cried, forgetting instantaneously my
 foolish fears. “hareton, it’s nelly! nelly, thy nurse.”
 
retreated out of arm’s length, and picked up large flint.
 
“i am come to see thy father, hareton,” i added, guessing from the
 action that nelly, if she lived in his memory at all, was not
 recognised as one with me.
 
raised his missile to hurl it; i commenced soothing speech, but
 could not stay his hand: the stone struck my bonnet; and then ensued,
 from the stammering lips of the little fellow, string of curses,
 which, whether comprehended them or not, were delivered with
 practised emphasis, and distorted his baby features into shocking
 expression of malignity. you may be certain this grieved more than
 angered me. fit to cry, i took an orange from my pocket, and offered it
 to propitiate him. hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold; as
 if fancied i only intended to tempt and disappoint him. i showed
 another, keeping it out of his reach.
 
“who has taught you those fine words, my bairn?” i inquired. “the
 curate?”
 
“damn the curate, and thee! gie that,” replied.
 
“tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it,” said i.
 “who’s your master?”
 
“devil daddy,” was his answer.
 
“and what do you learn from daddy?” i continued.
 
jumped at the fruit; i raised it higher. “what does teach you?” i
 asked.
 
“naught,” said he, “but to keep out of his gait. daddy cannot bide me,
 because i swear at him.”
 
“ah! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?” i observed.
 
“ay—nay,” drawled.
 
“who, then?”
 
“heathcliff.”
 
“i asked if liked mr. heathcliff.”
 
“ay!” answered again.
 
desiring to have his reasons for liking him, i could only gather the
 sentences—“i known’t: pays dad back what gies to me—he curses
 daddy for cursing me. says i mun do as i will.”
 
“and the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?” i pursued.
 
“no, i was told the curate should have his —— teeth dashed down his ——
 throat, if stepped over the threshold—heathcliff had promised that!”
 
i put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that woman
 called nelly dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate. he
 went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of hindley,
 heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and i turned directly and ran
 down the road as hard as ever i could race, making halt till i
 gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if i had raised a
 goblin. this is not much connected with miss isabella’s affair: except
 that it urged to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and
 doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the
 grange: even though i should wake domestic storm, by thwarting mrs.
 linton’s pleasure.
 
the next time heathcliff came my young lady chanced to be feeding some
 pigeons in the court. she had never spoken word to her sister-in-law
 for three days; but she had likewise dropped her fretful complaining,
 and we found it great comfort. heathcliff had not the habit of
 bestowing single unnecessary civility on miss linton, i knew. now, as
 soon as beheld her, his first precaution was to take sweeping
 survey of the house-front. i was standing by the kitchen-window, but i
 drew out of sight. then stepped across the pavement to her, and said
 something: she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to
 prevent it, laid his hand on her arm. she averted her face: he
 apparently put some question which she had mind to answer. there was
 another rapid glance at the house, and supposing himself unseen, the
 scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her.
 
“judas! traitor!” i ejaculated. “you are hypocrite, too, are you? a
 deliberate deceiver.”
 
“who is, nelly?” said catherine’s voice at my elbow: i had been
 over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.
 
“your worthless friend!” i answered, warmly: “the sneaking rascal
 yonder. ah, has caught glimpse of us—he is coming in! i wonder
 will have the heart to find plausible excuse for making love to
 miss, when told you hated her?”
 
mrs. linton saw isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden;
 and minute after, heathcliff opened the door. i couldn’t withhold
 giving some loose to my indignation; but catherine angrily insisted on
 silence, and threatened to order out of the kitchen, if i dared to
 be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.
 
“to hear you, people might think you were the mistress!” she cried.
 “you want setting down in your right place! heathcliff, what are you
 about, raising this stir? i said you must let isabella alone!—i beg you
 will, unless you are tired of being received here, and wish linton to
 draw the bolts against you!”
 
“god forbid that should try!” answered the black villain. i detested
 him just then. “god keep him meek and patient! every day i grow madder
 after sending him to heaven!”
 
“hush!” said catherine, shutting the inner door. “don’t vex me. why
 have you disregarded my request? did she come across you on purpose?”
 
“what is it to you?” growled. “i have right to kiss her, if she
 chooses; and you have right to object. i am not _your_ husband:
 _you_ needn’t be jealous of me!”
 
“i’m not jealous of you,” replied the mistress; “i’m jealous for you.
 clear your face: you sha’n’t scowl at me! if you like isabella, you
 shall marry her. but do you like her? tell the truth, heathcliff!
 there, you won’t answer. i’m certain you don’t.”
 
“and would mr. linton approve of his sister marrying that man?” i
 inquired.
 
“mr. linton should approve,” returned my lady, decisively.
 
“he might spare himself the trouble,” said heathcliff: “i could do as
 well without his approbation. and as to you, catherine, i have mind
 to speak few words now, while we are at it. i want you to be aware
 that i _know_ you have treated infernally—infernally! do you hear?
 and if you flatter yourself that i don’t perceive it, you are fool;
 and if you think i can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot:
 and if you fancy i’ll suffer unrevenged, i’ll convince you of the
 contrary, in very little while! meantime, thank you for telling me
 your sister-in-law’s secret: i swear i’ll make the most of it. and
 stand you aside!”
 
“what new phase of his character is this?” exclaimed mrs. linton, in
 amazement. “i’ve treated you infernally—and you’ll take your revenge!
 how will you take it, ungrateful brute? how have i treated you
 infernally?”
 
“i seek revenge on you,” replied heathcliff, less vehemently.
 “that’s not the plan. the tyrant grinds down his slaves and they don’t
 turn against him; they crush those beneath them. you are welcome to
 torture to death for your amusement, only allow to amuse myself a
 little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are
 able. having levelled my palace, don’t erect hovel and complacently
 admire your own charity in giving that for home. if i imagined you
 really wished to marry isabel, i’d cut my throat!”
 
“oh, the evil is that i am _not_ jealous, is it?” cried catherine.
 “well, i won’t repeat my offer of wife: it is as bad as offering
 satan lost soul. your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery. you
 prove it. edgar is restored from the ill-temper gave way to at your
 coming; i begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us
 at peace, appear resolved on exciting quarrel. quarrel with edgar, if
 you please, heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you’ll hit on exactly
 the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.”
 
the conversation ceased. mrs. linton sat down by the fire, flushed and
 gloomy. the spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could
 neither lay nor control it. stood on the hearth with folded arms,
 brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position i left them to seek
 the master, who was wondering what kept catherine below so long.
 
“ellen,” said he, when i entered, “have you seen your mistress?”
 
“yes; she’s in the kitchen, sir,” i answered. “she’s sadly put out by
 mr. heathcliff’s behaviour: and, indeed, i do think it’s time to
 arrange his visits on another footing. there’s harm in being too soft,
 and now it’s come to this—.” and i related the scene in the court, and,
 as near as i dared, the whole subsequent dispute. i fancied it could
 not be very prejudicial to mrs. linton; unless she made it so
 afterwards, by assuming the defensive for her guest. edgar linton had
 difficulty in hearing to the close. his first words revealed that he
 did not clear his wife of blame.
 
“this is insufferable!” exclaimed. “it is disgraceful that she
 should own him for friend, and force his company on me! call two
 men out of the hall, ellen. catherine shall linger longer to argue
 with the low ruffian—i have humoured her enough.”
 
descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
 followed by me, to the kitchen. its occupants had recommenced their
 angry discussion: mrs. linton, at least, was scolding with renewed
 vigour; heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat
 cowed by her violent rating apparently. saw the master first, and
 made hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed,
 abruptly, on discovering the reason of his intimation.
 
“how is this?” said linton, addressing her; “what notion of propriety
 must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to
 you by that blackguard? i suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you
 think nothing of it: you are habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps,
 imagine i can get used to it too!”
 
“have you been listening at the door, edgar?” asked the mistress, in a
 tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband, implying both
 carelessness and contempt of his irritation. heathcliff, who had raised
 his eyes at the former speech, gave sneering laugh at the latter; on
 purpose, it seemed, to draw mr. linton’s attention to him. he
 succeeded; but edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high
 flights of passion.
 
“i’ve been so far forbearing with you, sir,” said quietly; “not that
 i was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but i felt you
 were only partly responsible for that; and catherine wishing to keep up
 your acquaintance, i acquiesced—foolishly. your presence is moral
 poison that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to
 prevent worse consequences, i shall deny you hereafter admission into
 this house, and give notice now that i require your instant departure.
 three minutes’ delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.”
 
heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye
 full of derision.
 
“cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like bull!” said. “it is in
 danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. by god! mr. linton,
 i’m mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!”
 
my master glanced towards the passage, and signed to fetch the men:
 had intention of hazarding personal encounter. i obeyed the
 hint; but mrs. linton, suspecting something, followed; and when i
 attempted to call them, she pulled back, slammed the door to, and
 locked it.
 
“fair means!” she said, in answer to her husband’s look of angry
 surprise. “if you have not courage to attack him, make an apology, or
 allow yourself to be beaten. it will correct you of feigning more
 valour than you possess. no, i’ll swallow the key before you shall get
 it! i’m delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each! after constant
 indulgence of one’s weak nature, and the other’s bad one, i earn for
 thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity! edgar, i
 was defending you and yours; and i wish heathcliff may flog you sick,
 for daring to think an evil thought of me!”
 
it did not need the medium of flogging to produce that effect on the
 master. tried to wrest the key from catherine’s grasp, and for
 safety she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon mr.
 edgar was taken with nervous trembling, and his countenance grew
 deadly pale. for his life could not avert that excess of emotion:
 mingled anguish and humiliation overcame him completely. leant on
 the back of chair, and covered his face.
 
“oh, heavens! in old days this would win you knighthood!” exclaimed
 mrs. linton. “we are vanquished! we are vanquished! heathcliff would as
 soon lift finger at you as the king would march his army against a
 colony of mice. cheer up! you sha’n’t be hurt! your type is not lamb,
 it’s sucking leveret.”
 
“i wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, cathy!” said her friend. “i
 compliment you on your taste. and that is the slavering, shivering
 thing you preferred to me! i would not strike him with my fist, but i’d
 kick him with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction. is he
 weeping, or is going to faint for fear?”
 
the fellow approached and gave the chair on which linton rested push.
 he’d better have kept his distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and
 struck him full on the throat blow that would have levelled a
 slighter man. it took his breath for minute; and while choked, mr.
 linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to
 the front entrance.
 
“there! you’ve done with coming here,” cried catherine. “get away, now;
 he’ll return with brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants. if he
 did overhear us, of course he’d never forgive you. you’ve played an
 ill turn, heathcliff! but go—make haste! i’d rather see edgar at bay
 than you.”
 
“do you suppose i’m going with that blow burning in my gullet?” he
 thundered. “by hell, no! i’ll crush his ribs in like rotten hazel-nut
 before i cross the threshold! if i don’t floor him now, i shall murder
 him some time; so, as you value his existence, let get at him!”
 
“he is not coming,” i interposed, framing bit of lie. “there’s the
 coachman and the two gardeners; you’ll surely not wait to be thrust
 into the road by them! each has bludgeon; and master will, very
 likely, be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil
 his orders.”
 
the gardeners and coachman _were_ there: but linton was with them. they
 had already entered the court. heathcliff, on the second thoughts,
 resolved to avoid struggle against three underlings: seized the
 poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape as
 they tramped in.
 
mrs. linton, who was very much excited, bade accompany her upstairs.
 she did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and i was
 anxious to keep her in ignorance.
 
“i’m nearly distracted, nelly!” she exclaimed, throwing herself on the
 sofa. “a thousand smiths’ hammers are beating in my head! tell isabella
 to shun me; this uproar is owing to her; and should she or any one else
 aggravate my anger at present, i shall get wild. and, nelly, say to
 edgar, if you see him again to-night, that i’m in danger of being
 seriously ill. i wish it may prove true. has startled and distressed
 shockingly! i want to frighten him. besides, might come and begin
 string of abuse or complainings; i’m certain i should recriminate,
 and god knows where we should end! will you do so, my good nelly? you
 are aware that i am way blamable in this matter. what possessed him
 to turn listener? heathcliff’s talk was outrageous, after you left us;
 but i could soon have diverted him from isabella, and the rest meant
 nothing. now all is dashed wrong; by the fool’s craving to hear evil of
 self, that haunts some people like demon! had edgar never gathered
 our conversation, would never have been the worse for it. really,
 when opened on in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after i
 had scolded heathcliff till i was hoarse for _him;_ i did not care
 hardly what they did to each other; especially as i felt that, however
 the scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how
 long! well, if i cannot keep heathcliff for my friend—if edgar will be
 mean and jealous, i’ll try to break their hearts by breaking my own.
 that will be prompt way of finishing all, when i am pushed to
 extremity! but it’s deed to be reserved for forlorn hope; i’d not
 take linton by surprise with it. to this point has been discreet in
 dreading to provoke me; you must represent the peril of quitting that
 policy, and remind him of my passionate temper, verging, when kindled,
 on frenzy. i wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that
 countenance, and look rather more anxious about me.”
 
the stolidity with which i received these instructions was, doubt,
 rather exasperating: for they were delivered in perfect sincerity; but
 i believed person who could plan the turning of her fits of passion
 to account, beforehand, might, by exerting her will, manage to control
 herself tolerably, even while under their influence; and i did not wish
 to “frighten” her husband, as she said, and multiply his annoyances for
 the purpose of serving her selfishness. therefore i said nothing when i
 met the master coming towards the parlour; but i took the liberty of
 turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel
 together. began to speak first.
 
“remain where you are, catherine,” said; without any anger in his
 voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. “i shall not stay. i am
 neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but i wish just to learn
 whether, after this evening’s events, you intend to continue your
 intimacy with—”
 
“oh, for mercy’s sake,” interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot,
 “for mercy’s sake, let us hear more of it now! your cold blood
 cannot be worked into fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but
 mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance.”
 
“to get rid of me, answer my question,” persevered mr. linton. “you
 _must_ answer it; and that violence does not alarm me. i have found
 that you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please. will you give up
 heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me? it is impossible for you
 to be _my_ friend and _his_ at the same time; and i absolutely
 _require_ to know which you choose.”
 
“i require to be let alone!” exclaimed catherine, furiously. “i demand
 it! don’t you see i can scarcely stand? edgar, you—you leave me!”
 
she rang the bell till it broke with twang; i entered leisurely. it
 was enough to try the temper of saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
 there she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa, and
 grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy she would crash them to
 splinters! mr. linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and
 fear. told to fetch some water. she had breath for speaking. i
 brought glass full; and as she would not drink, i sprinkled it on her
 face. in few seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up
 her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the
 aspect of death. linton looked terrified.
 
“there is nothing in the world the matter,” i whispered. i did not want
 him to yield, though i could not help being afraid in my heart.
 
“she has blood on her lips!” said, shuddering.
 
“never mind!” i answered, tartly. and i told him how she had resolved,
 previous to his coming, on exhibiting fit of frenzy. i incautiously
 gave the account aloud, and she heard me; for she started up—her hair
 flying over her shoulders, her eyes flashing, the muscles of her neck
 and arms standing out preternaturally. i made up my mind for broken
 bones, at least; but she only glared about her for an instant, and then
 rushed from the room. the master directed to follow; i did, to her
 chamber-door: she hindered from going further by securing it against
 me.
 
as she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, i went to
 ask whether she would have some carried up. “no!” she replied,
 peremptorily. the same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and
 again on the morrow after, and received the same answer. mr. linton, on
 his part, spent his time in the library, and did not inquire concerning
 his wife’s occupations. isabella and had had an hour’s interview,
 during which tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper
 horror for heathcliff’s advances: but could make nothing of her
 evasive replies, and was obliged to close the examination
 unsatisfactorily; adding, however, solemn warning, that if she were
 so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all
 bonds of relationship between herself and him.
 



chapter xii
 

while miss linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and
 almost always in tears; and her brother shut himself up among books
 that never opened—wearying, i guessed, with continual vague
 expectation that catherine, repenting her conduct, would come of her
 own accord to ask pardon, and seek reconciliation—and _she_ fasted
 pertinaciously, under the idea, probably, that at every meal edgar was
 ready to choke for her absence, and pride alone held him from running
 to cast himself at her feet; i went about my household duties,
 convinced that the grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and
 that lodged in my body. i wasted condolences on miss, nor any
 expostulations on my mistress; nor did i pay much attention to the
 sighs of my master, who yearned to hear his lady’s name, since might
 not hear her voice. i determined they should come about as they pleased
 for me; and though it was tiresomely slow process, i began to rejoice
 at length in faint dawn of its progress: as i thought at first.
 
mrs. linton, on the third day, unbarred her door, and having finished
 the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired renewed supply, and a
 basin of gruel, for she believed she was dying. that i set down as a
 speech meant for edgar’s ears; i believed such thing, so i kept it
 to myself and brought her some tea and dry toast. she ate and drank
 eagerly, and sank back on her pillow again, clenching her hands and
 groaning. “oh, i will die,” she exclaimed, “since one cares anything
 about me. i wish i had not taken that.” then good while after i heard
 her murmur, “no, i’ll not die—he’d be glad—he does not love at
 all—he would never miss me!”
 
“did you want anything, ma’am?” i inquired, still preserving my
 external composure, in spite of her ghastly countenance and strange,
 exaggerated manner.
 
“what is that apathetic being doing?” she demanded, pushing the thick
 entangled locks from her wasted face. “has fallen into lethargy,
 or is dead?”
 
“neither,” replied i; “if you mean mr. linton. he’s tolerably well, i
 think, though his studies occupy him rather more than they ought: is
 continually among his books, since has other society.”
 
i should not have spoken so if i had known her true condition, but i
 could not get rid of the notion that she acted part of her disorder.
 
“among his books!” she cried, confounded. “and i dying! i on the brink
 of the grave! my god! does know how i’m altered?” continued she,
 staring at her reflection in mirror hanging against the opposite
 wall. “is that catherine linton? imagines in pet—in play,
 perhaps. cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest? nelly, if
 it be not too late, as soon as i learn how feels, i’ll choose
 between these two: either to starve at once—that would be punishment
 unless had heart—or to recover, and leave the country. are you
 speaking the truth about him now? take care. is actually so utterly
 indifferent for my life?”
 
“why, ma’am,” i answered, “the master has idea of your being
 deranged; and of course does not fear that you will let yourself die
 of hunger.”
 
“you think not? cannot you tell him i will?” she returned. “persuade
 him! speak of your own mind: say you are certain i will!”
 
“no, you forget, mrs. linton,” i suggested, “that you have eaten some
 food with relish this evening, and to-morrow you will perceive its
 good effects.”
 
“if i were only sure it would kill him,” she interrupted, “i’d kill
 myself directly! these three awful nights i’ve never closed my lids—and
 oh, i’ve been tormented! i’ve been haunted, nelly! but i begin to fancy
 you don’t like me. how strange! i thought, though everybody hated and
 despised each other, they could not avoid loving me. and they have all
 turned to enemies in few hours. _they_ have, i’m positive; the people
 _here_. how dreary to meet death, surrounded by their cold faces!
 isabella, terrified and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be
 so dreadful to watch catherine go. and edgar standing solemnly by to
 see it over; then offering prayers of thanks to god for restoring peace
 to his house, and going back to his _books_! what in the name of all
 that feels has to do with _books_, when i am dying?”
 
she could not bear the notion which i had put into her head of mr.
 linton’s philosophical resignation. tossing about, she increased her
 feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the pillow with her teeth;
 then raising herself up all burning, desired that i would open the
 window. we were in the middle of winter, the wind blew strong from the
 north-east, and i objected. both the expressions flitting over her
 face, and the changes of her moods, began to alarm terribly; and
 brought to my recollection her former illness, and the doctor’s
 injunction that she should not be crossed. minute previously she was
 violent; now, supported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey
 her, she seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers from
 the rents she had just made, and ranging them on the sheet according to
 their different species: her mind had strayed to other associations.
 
“that’s turkey’s,” she murmured to herself; “and this is wild
 duck’s; and this is pigeon’s. ah, they put pigeons’ feathers in the
 pillows—no wonder i couldn’t die! let take care to throw it on the
 floor when i lie down. and here is moor-cock’s; and this—i should
 know it among thousand—it’s lapwing’s. bonny bird; wheeling over
 our heads in the middle of the moor. it wanted to get to its nest, for
 the clouds had touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. this
 feather was picked up from the heath, the bird was not shot: we saw its
 nest in the winter, full of little skeletons. heathcliff set trap
 over it, and the old ones dared not come. i made him promise he’d never
 shoot lapwing after that, and didn’t. yes, here are more! did he
 shoot my lapwings, nelly? are they red, any of them? let look.”
 
“give over with that baby-work!” i interrupted, dragging the pillow
 away, and turning the holes towards the mattress, for she was removing
 its contents by handfuls. “lie down and shut your eyes: you’re
 wandering. there’s mess! the down is flying about like snow.”
 
i went here and there collecting it.
 
“i see in you, nelly,” she continued dreamily, “an aged woman: you have
 grey hair and bent shoulders. this bed is the fairy cave under
 penistone crags, and you are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers;
 pretending, while i am near, that they are only locks of wool. that’s
 what you’ll come to fifty years hence: i know you are not so now. i’m
 not wandering: you’re mistaken, or else i should believe you really
 _were_ that withered hag, and i should think i _was_ under penistone
 crags; and i’m conscious it’s night, and there are two candles on the
 table making the black press shine like jet.”
 
“the black press? where is that?” i asked. “you are talking in your
 sleep!”
 
“it’s against the wall, as it always is,” she replied. “it _does_
 appear odd—i see face in it!”
 
“there’s press in the room, and never was,” said i, resuming my
 seat, and looping up the curtain that i might watch her.
 
“don’t _you_ see that face?” she inquired, gazing earnestly at the
 mirror.
 
and say what i could, i was incapable of making her comprehend it to be
 her own; so i rose and covered it with shawl.
 
“it’s behind there still!” she pursued, anxiously. “and it stirred. who
 is it? i hope it will not come out when you are gone! oh! nelly, the
 room is haunted! i’m afraid of being alone!”
 
i took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed; for succession of
 shudders convulsed her frame, and she _would_ keep straining her gaze
 towards the glass.
 
“there’s nobody here!” i insisted. “it was _yourself_, mrs. linton: you
 knew it while since.”
 
“myself!” she gasped, “and the clock is striking twelve! it’s true,
 then! that’s dreadful!”
 
her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her eyes. i
 attempted to steal to the door with an intention of calling her
 husband; but i was summoned back by piercing shriek—the shawl had
 dropped from the frame.
 
“why, what _is_ the matter?” cried i. “who is coward now? wake up! that
 is the glass—the mirror, mrs. linton; and you see yourself in it, and
 there am i too by your side.”
 
trembling and bewildered, she held fast, but the horror gradually
 passed from her countenance; its paleness gave place to glow of
 shame.
 
“oh, dear! i thought i was at home,” she sighed. “i thought i was lying
 in my chamber at wuthering heights. because i’m weak, my brain got
 confused, and i screamed unconsciously. don’t say anything; but stay
 with me. i dread sleeping: my dreams appal me.”
 
“a sound sleep would do you good, ma’am,” i answered: “and i hope this
 suffering will prevent your trying starving again.”
 
“oh, if i were but in my own bed in the old house!” she went on
 bitterly, wringing her hands. “and that wind sounding in the firs by
 the lattice. do let feel it—it comes straight down the moor—do let
 have one breath!”
 
to pacify her i held the casement ajar few seconds. cold blast
 rushed through; i closed it, and returned to my post. she lay still
 now, her face bathed in tears. exhaustion of body had entirely subdued
 her spirit: our fiery catherine was better than wailing child.
 
“how long is it since i shut myself in here?” she asked, suddenly
 reviving.
 
“it was monday evening,” i replied, “and this is thursday night, or
 rather friday morning, at present.”
 
“what! of the same week?” she exclaimed. “only that brief time?”
 
“long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,”
 observed i.
 
“well, it seems weary number of hours,” she muttered doubtfully: “it
 must be more. i remember being in the parlour after they had
 quarrelled, and edgar being cruelly provoking, and running into this
 room desperate. as soon as ever i had barred the door, utter blackness
 overwhelmed me, and i fell on the floor. i couldn’t explain to edgar
 how certain i felt of having fit, or going raging mad, if he
 persisted in teasing me! i had command of tongue, or brain, and he
 did not guess my agony, perhaps: it barely left sense to try to
 escape from him and his voice. before i recovered sufficiently to see
 and hear, it began to be dawn, and, nelly, i’ll tell you what i
 thought, and what has kept recurring and recurring till i feared for my
 reason. i thought as i lay there, with my head against that table leg,
 and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window, that i was
 enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home; and my heart ached with some
 great grief which, just waking, i could not recollect. i pondered, and
 worried myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the
 whole last seven years of my life grew blank! i did not recall that
 they had been at all. i was child; my father was just buried, and my
 misery arose from the separation that hindley had ordered between me
 and heathcliff. i was laid alone, for the first time; and, rousing from
 dismal doze after night of weeping, i lifted my hand to push the
 panels aside: it struck the table-top! i swept it along the carpet, and
 then memory burst in: my late anguish was swallowed in paroxysm of
 despair. i cannot say why i felt so wildly wretched: it must have been
 temporary derangement; for there is scarcely cause. but, supposing at
 twelve years old i had been wrenched from the heights, and every early
 association, and my all in all, as heathcliff was at that time, and
 been converted at stroke into mrs. linton, the lady of thrushcross
 grange, and the wife of stranger: an exile, and outcast, thenceforth,
 from what had been my world. you may fancy glimpse of the abyss where
 i grovelled! shake your head as you will, nelly, _you_ have helped to
 unsettle me! you should have spoken to edgar, indeed you should, and
 compelled him to leave quiet! oh, i’m burning! i wish i were out of
 doors! i wish i were girl again, half savage and hardy, and free; and
 laughing at injuries, not maddening under them! why am i so changed?
 why does my blood rush into hell of tumult at few words? i’m sure i
 should be myself were i once among the heather on those hills. open the
 window again wide: fasten it open! quick, why don’t you move?”
 
“because i won’t give you your death of cold,” i answered.
 
“you won’t give chance of life, you mean,” she said sullenly.
 “however, i’m not helpless yet; i’ll open it myself.”
 
and sliding from the bed before i could hinder her, she crossed the
 room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and bent out, careless
 of the frosty air that cut about her shoulders as keen as knife. i
 entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire. but i soon
 found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she _was_ delirious,
 i became convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings). there was no
 moon, and everything beneath lay in misty darkness: not light gleamed
 from any house, far or near; all had been extinguished long ago: and
 those at wuthering heights were never visible—still she asserted she
 caught their shining.
 
“look!” she cried eagerly, “that’s my room with the candle in it, and
 the trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in joseph’s
 garret. joseph sits up late, doesn’t he? he’s waiting till i come home
 that may lock the gate. well, he’ll wait while yet. it’s rough
 journey, and sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by gimmerton
 kirk to go that journey! we’ve braved its ghosts often together, and
 dared each other to stand among the graves and ask them to come. but,
 heathcliff, if i dare you now, will you venture? if you do, i’ll keep
 you. i’ll not lie there by myself: they may bury twelve feet deep,
 and throw the church down over me, but i won’t rest till you are with
 me. i never will!”
 
she paused, and resumed with strange smile. “he’s considering—he’d
 rather i’d come to him! find way, then! not through that kirkyard.
 you are slow! be content, you always followed me!”
 
perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, i was planning how i
 could reach something to wrap about her, without quitting my hold of
 herself (for i could not trust her alone by the gaping lattice), when,
 to my consternation, i heard the rattle of the door-handle, and mr.
 linton entered. had only then come from the library; and, in passing
 through the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted by
 curiosity, or fear, to examine what it signified, at that late hour.
 
“oh, sir!” i cried, checking the exclamation risen to his lips at the
 sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber. “my poor
 mistress is ill, and she quite masters me: i cannot manage her at all;
 pray, come and persuade her to go to bed. forget your anger, for she’s
 hard to guide any way but her own.”
 
“catherine ill?” said, hastening to us. “shut the window, ellen!
 catherine! why—”
 
was silent. the haggardness of mrs. linton’s appearance smote him
 speechless, and could only glance from her to in horrified
 astonishment.
 
“she’s been fretting here,” i continued, “and eating scarcely anything,
 and never complaining: she would admit none of us till this evening,
 and so we couldn’t inform you of her state, as we were not aware of it
 ourselves; but it is nothing.”
 
i felt i uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master frowned. “it is
 nothing, is it, ellen dean?” said sternly. “you shall account more
 clearly for keeping ignorant of this!” and took his wife in his
 arms, and looked at her with anguish.
 
at first she gave him glance of recognition: was invisible to her
 abstracted gaze. the delirium was not fixed, however; having weaned her
 eyes from contemplating the outer darkness, by degrees she centred her
 attention on him, and discovered who it was that held her.
 
“ah! you are come, are you, edgar linton?” she said, with angry
 animation. “you are one of those things that are ever found when least
 wanted, and when you are wanted, never! i suppose we shall have plenty
 of lamentations now—i see we shall—but they can’t keep from my
 narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where i’m bound before spring
 is over! there it is: not among the lintons, mind, under the
 chapel-roof, but in the open air, with head-stone; and you may please
 yourself whether you go to them or come to me!”
 
“catherine, what have you done?” commenced the master. “am i nothing to
 you any more? do you love that wretch heath—”
 
“hush!” cried mrs. linton. “hush, this moment! you mention that name
 and i end the matter instantly by spring from the window! what you
 touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that hill-top
 before you lay hands on again. i don’t want you, edgar: i’m past
 wanting you. return to your books. i’m glad you possess consolation,
 for all you had in is gone.”
 
“her mind wanders, sir,” i interposed. “she has been talking nonsense
 the whole evening; but let her have quiet, and proper attendance, and
 she’ll rally. hereafter, we must be cautious how we vex her.”
 
“i desire further advice from you,” answered mr. linton. “you knew
 your mistress’s nature, and you encouraged to harass her. and not to
 give one hint of how she has been these three days! it was
 heartless! months of sickness could not cause such change!”
 
i began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for
 another’s wicked waywardness. “i knew mrs. linton’s nature to be
 headstrong and domineering,” cried i: “but i didn’t know that you
 wished to foster her fierce temper! i didn’t know that, to humour her,
 i should wink at mr. heathcliff. i performed the duty of faithful
 servant in telling you, and i have got faithful servant’s wages!
 well, it will teach to be careful next time. next time you may
 gather intelligence for yourself!”
 
“the next time you bring tale to you shall quit my service, ellen
 dean,” replied.
 
“you’d rather hear nothing about it, i suppose, then, mr. linton?” said
 i. “heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to miss, and to
 drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison
 the mistress against you?”
 
confused as catherine was, her wits were alert at applying our
 conversation.
 
“ah! nelly has played traitor,” she exclaimed, passionately. “nelly is
 my hidden enemy. you witch! so you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us! let me
 go, and i’ll make her rue! i’ll make her howl recantation!”
 
maniac’s fury kindled under her brows; she struggled desperately to
 disengage herself from linton’s arms. i felt inclination to tarry
 the event; and, resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibility,
 i quitted the chamber.
 
in passing the garden to reach the road, at place where bridle hook
 is driven into the wall, i saw something white moved irregularly,
 evidently by another agent than the wind. notwithstanding my hurry, i
 stayed to examine it, lest ever after i should have the conviction
 impressed on my imagination that it was creature of the other world.
 my surprise and perplexity were great on discovering, by touch more
 than vision, miss isabella’s springer, fanny, suspended by a
 handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp. i quickly released the
 animal, and lifted it into the garden. i had seen it follow its
 mistress upstairs when she went to bed; and wondered much how it could
 have got out there, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
 while untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to that i
 repeatedly caught the beat of horses’ feet galloping at some distance;
 but there were such number of things to occupy my reflections that i
 hardly gave the circumstance thought: though it was strange sound,
 in that place, at two o’clock in the morning.
 
mr. kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to see a
 patient in the village as i came up the street; and my account of
 catherine linton’s malady induced him to accompany back immediately.
 was plain rough man; and made scruple to speak his doubts of
 her surviving this second attack; unless she were more submissive to
 his directions than she had shown herself before.
 
“nelly dean,” said he, “i can’t help fancying there’s an extra cause
 for this. what has there been to do at the grange? we’ve odd reports up
 here. stout, hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a
 trifle; and that sort of people should not either. it’s hard work
 bringing them through fevers, and such things. how did it begin?”
 
“the master will inform you,” i answered; “but you are acquainted with
 the earnshaws’ violent dispositions, and mrs. linton caps them all. i
 may say this; it commenced in quarrel. she was struck during a
 tempest of passion with kind of fit. that’s her account, at least:
 for she flew off in the height of it, and locked herself up.
 afterwards, she refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and
 remains in half dream; knowing those about her, but having her mind
 filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions.”
 
“mr. linton will be sorry?” observed kenneth, interrogatively.
 
“sorry? he’ll break his heart should anything happen!” i replied.
 “don’t alarm him more than necessary.”
 
“well, i told him to beware,” said my companion; “and must bide the
 consequences of neglecting my warning! hasn’t been intimate with mr.
 heathcliff lately?”
 
“heathcliff frequently visits at the grange,” answered i, “though more
 on the strength of the mistress having known him when boy, than
 because the master likes his company. at present he’s discharged from
 the trouble of calling; owing to some presumptuous aspirations after
 miss linton which manifested. i hardly think he’ll be taken in
 again.”
 
“and does miss linton turn cold shoulder on him?” was the doctor’s
 next question.
 
“i’m not in her confidence,” returned i, reluctant to continue the
 subject.
 
“no, she’s sly one,” remarked, shaking his head. “she keeps her
 own counsel! but she’s real little fool. i have it from good
 authority that last night (and pretty night it was!) she and
 heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back of your house
 above two hours; and pressed her not to go in again, but just mount
 his horse and away with him! my informant said she could only put him
 off by pledging her word of honour to be prepared on their first
 meeting after that: when it was to be didn’t hear; but you urge mr.
 linton to look sharp!”
 
this news filled with fresh fears; i outstripped kenneth, and ran
 most of the way back. the little dog was yelping in the garden yet. i
 spared minute to open the gate for it, but instead of going to the
 house door, it coursed up and down snuffing the grass, and would have
 escaped to the road, had i not seized it and conveyed it in with me. on
 ascending to isabella’s room, my suspicions were confirmed: it was
 empty. had i been few hours sooner mrs. linton’s illness might have
 arrested her rash step. but what could be done now? there was bare
 possibility of overtaking them if pursued instantly. _i_ could not
 pursue them, however; and i dared not rouse the family, and fill the
 place with confusion; still less unfold the business to my master,
 absorbed as was in his present calamity, and having heart to
 spare for second grief! i saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue,
 and suffer matters to take their course; and kenneth being arrived, i
 went with badly composed countenance to announce him. catherine lay
 in troubled sleep: her husband had succeeded in soothing the excess
 of frenzy; now hung over her pillow, watching every shade and every
 change of her painfully expressive features.
 
the doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hopefully to him
 of its having favourable termination, if we could only preserve
 around her perfect and constant tranquillity. to me, signified the
 threatening danger was not so much death, as permanent alienation of
 intellect.
 
i did not close my eyes that night, nor did mr. linton: indeed, we
 never went to bed; and the servants were all up long before the usual
 hour, moving through the house with stealthy tread, and exchanging
 whispers as they encountered each other in their vocations. every one
 was active but miss isabella; and they began to remark how sound she
 slept: her brother, too, asked if she had risen, and seemed impatient
 for her presence, and hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her
 sister-in-law. i trembled lest should send to call her; but i was
 spared the pain of being the first proclaimant of her flight. one of
 the maids, thoughtless girl, who had been on an early errand to
 gimmerton, came panting upstairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the
 chamber, crying: “oh, dear, dear! what mun we have next? master,
 master, our young lady—”
 
“hold your noise!” cried i hastily, enraged at her clamorous manner.
 
“speak lower, mary—what is the matter?” said mr. linton. “what ails
 your young lady?”
 
“she’s gone, she’s gone! yon’ heathcliff’s run off wi’ her!” gasped the
 girl.
 
“that is not true!” exclaimed linton, rising in agitation. “it cannot
 be: how has the idea entered your head? ellen dean, go and seek her. it
 is incredible: it cannot be.”
 
as spoke took the servant to the door, and then repeated his
 demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.
 
“why, i met on the road lad that fetches milk here,” she stammered,
 “and asked whether we weren’t in trouble at the grange. i thought he
 meant for missis’s sickness, so i answered, yes. then says he, ‘there’s
 somebody gone after ’em, i guess?’ i stared. saw i knew nought about
 it, and told how gentleman and lady had stopped to have horse’s
 shoe fastened at blacksmith’s shop, two miles out of gimmerton, not
 very long after midnight! and how the blacksmith’s lass had got up to
 spy who they were: she knew them both directly. and she noticed the
 man—heathcliff it was, she felt certain: nob’dy could mistake him,
 besides—put sovereign in her father’s hand for payment. the lady had
 cloak about her face; but having desired sup of water, while she
 drank it fell back, and she saw her very plain. heathcliff held both
 bridles as they rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and
 went as fast as the rough roads would let them. the lass said nothing
 to her father, but she told it all over gimmerton this morning.”
 
i ran and peeped, for form’s sake, into isabella’s room; confirming,
 when i returned, the servant’s statement. mr. linton had resumed his
 seat by the bed; on my re-entrance, raised his eyes, read the
 meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped them without giving an order,
 or uttering word.
 
“are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing her back,” i
 inquired. “how should we do?”
 
“she went of her own accord,” answered the master; “she had right to
 go if she pleased. trouble more about her. hereafter she is only
 my sister in name: not because i disown her, but because she has
 disowned me.”
 
and that was all said on the subject: did not make single inquiry
 further, or mention her in any way, except directing to send what
 property she had in the house to her fresh home, wherever it was, when
 i knew it.
 



chapter xiii
 

for two months the fugitives remained absent; in those two months, mrs.
 linton encountered and conquered the worst shock of what was
 denominated brain fever. mother could have nursed an only child
 more devotedly than edgar tended her. day and night was watching,
 and patiently enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a
 shaken reason could inflict; and, though kenneth remarked that what he
 saved from the grave would only recompense his care by forming the
 source of constant future anxiety—in fact, that his health and strength
 were being sacrificed to preserve mere ruin of humanity—he knew no
 limits in gratitude and joy when catherine’s life was declared out of
 danger; and hour after hour would sit beside her, tracing the
 gradual return to bodily health, and flattering his too sanguine hopes
 with the illusion that her mind would settle back to its right balance
 also, and she would soon be entirely her former self.
 
the first time she left her chamber was at the commencement of the
 following march. mr. linton had put on her pillow, in the morning, a
 handful of golden crocuses; her eye, long stranger to any gleam of
 pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone delighted as she gathered
 them eagerly together.
 
“these are the earliest flowers at the heights,” she exclaimed. “they
 remind of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and nearly melted
 snow. edgar, is there not south wind, and is not the snow almost
 gone?”
 
“the snow is quite gone down here, darling,” replied her husband; “and
 i only see two white spots on the whole range of moors: the sky is
 blue, and the larks are singing, and the becks and brooks are all brim
 full. catherine, last spring at this time, i was longing to have you
 under this roof; now, i wish you were mile or two up those hills: the
 air blows so sweetly, i feel that it would cure you.”
 
“i shall never be there but once more,” said the invalid; “and then
 you’ll leave me, and i shall remain for ever. next spring you’ll long
 again to have under this roof, and you’ll look back and think you
 were happy to-day.”
 
linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer her by
 the fondest words; but, vaguely regarding the flowers, she let the
 tears collect on her lashes and stream down her cheeks unheeding. we
 knew she was really better, and, therefore, decided that long
 confinement to single place produced much of this despondency, and it
 might be partially removed by change of scene. the master told to
 light fire in the many-weeks’ deserted parlour, and to set an
 easy-chair in the sunshine by the window; and then brought her down,
 and she sat long while enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected,
 revived by the objects round her: which, though familiar, were free
 from the dreary associations investing her hated sick chamber. by
 evening she seemed greatly exhausted; yet arguments could persuade
 her to return to that apartment, and i had to arrange the parlour sofa
 for her bed, till another room could be prepared. to obviate the
 fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs, we fitted up this, where
 you lie at present—on the same floor with the parlour; and she was soon
 strong enough to move from one to the other, leaning on edgar’s arm.
 ah, i thought myself, she might recover, so waited on as she was. and
 there was double cause to desire it, for on her existence depended that
 of another: we cherished the hope that in little while mr. linton’s
 heart would be gladdened, and his lands secured from stranger’s
 gripe, by the birth of an heir.
 
i should mention that isabella sent to her brother, some six weeks from
 her departure, short note, announcing her marriage with heathcliff.
 it appeared dry and cold; but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil
 an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind remembrance and
 reconciliation, if her proceeding had offended him: asserting that she
 could not help it then, and being done, she had now power to repeal
 it. linton did not reply to this, i believe; and, in fortnight more,
 i got long letter, which i considered odd, coming from the pen of a
 bride just out of the honeymoon. i’ll read it: for i keep it yet. any
 relic of the dead is precious, if they were valued living.
 
* * * * *
 

dear ellen, it begins,—i came last night to wuthering heights, and
 heard, for the first time, that catherine has been, and is yet, very
 ill. i must not write to her, i suppose, and my brother is either too
 angry or too distressed to answer what i sent him. still, i must write
 to somebody, and the only choice left is you.
 
inform edgar that i’d give the world to see his face again—that my
 heart returned to thrushcross grange in twenty-four hours after i left
 it, and is there at this moment, full of warm feelings for him, and
 catherine! _i can’t follow it though_—(these words are underlined)—they
 need not expect me, and they may draw what conclusions they please;
 taking care, however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or
 deficient affection.
 
the remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. i want to ask you
 two questions: the first is,—how did you contrive to preserve the
 common sympathies of human nature when you resided here? i cannot
 recognise any sentiment which those around share with me.
 
the second question i have great interest in; it is this—is mr.
 heathcliff man? if so, is mad? and if not, is devil? i
 sha’n’t tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but i beseech you to
 explain, if you can, what i have married: that is, when you call to see
 me; and you must call, ellen, very soon. don’t write, but come, and
 bring something from edgar.
 
now, you shall hear how i have been received in my new home, as i am
 led to imagine the heights will be. it is to amuse myself that i dwell
 on such subjects as the lack of external comforts: they never occupy my
 thoughts, except at the moment when i miss them. i should laugh and
 dance for joy, if i found their absence was the total of my miseries,
 and the rest was an unnatural dream!
 
the sun set behind the grange as we turned on to the moors; by that, i
 judged it to be six o’clock; and my companion halted half an hour, to
 inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as
 well as could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard
 of the farmhouse, and your old fellow-servant, joseph, issued out to
 receive us by the light of dip candle. did it with courtesy that
 redounded to his credit. his first act was to elevate his torch to a
 level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn
 away. then took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
 reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived
 in an ancient castle.
 
heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and i entered the kitchen—a dingy,
 untidy hole; i daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it
 was in your charge. by the fire stood ruffianly child, strong in limb
 and dirty in garb, with look of catherine in his eyes and about his
 mouth.
 
“this is edgar’s legal nephew,” i reflected—“mine in manner; i must
 shake hands, and—yes—i must kiss him. it is right to establish good
 understanding at the beginning.”
 
i approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said—“how do you
 do, my dear?”
 
replied in jargon i did not comprehend.
 
“shall you and i be friends, hareton?” was my next essay at
 conversation.
 
an oath, and threat to set throttler on if i did not “frame off”
 rewarded my perseverance.
 
“hey, throttler, lad!” whispered the little wretch, rousing half-bred
 bull-dog from its lair in corner. “now, wilt thou be ganging?” he
 asked authoritatively.
 
love for my life urged compliance; i stepped over the threshold to
 wait till the others should enter. mr. heathcliff was nowhere visible;
 and joseph, whom i followed to the stables, and requested to accompany
 in, after staring and muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and
 replied—“mim! mim! mim! did iver christian body hear aught like it?
 mincing un’ munching! how can i tell whet ye say?”
 
“i say, i wish you to come with into the house!” i cried, thinking
 him deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
 
“none o’ me! i getten summut else to do,” answered, and continued
 his work; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and surveying my dress and
 countenance (the former great deal too fine, but the latter, i’m
 sure, as sad as could desire) with sovereign contempt.
 
i walked round the yard, and through wicket, to another door, at
 which i took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant
 might show himself. after short suspense, it was opened by tall,
 gaunt man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his
 features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders;
 and _his_ eyes, too, were like ghostly catherine’s with all their
 beauty annihilated.
 
“what’s your business here?” demanded, grimly. “who are you?”
 
“my name _was_ isabella linton,” i replied. “you’ve seen before,
 sir. i’m lately married to mr. heathcliff, and has brought here—i
 suppose by your permission.”
 
“is come back, then?” asked the hermit, glaring like hungry wolf.
 
“yes—we came just now,” i said; “but left by the kitchen door;
 and when i would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the
 place, and frightened off by the help of bull-dog.”
 
“it’s well the hellish villain has kept his word!” growled my future
 host, searching the darkness beyond in expectation of discovering
 heathcliff; and then indulged in soliloquy of execrations, and
 threats of what would have done had the “fiend” deceived him.
 
i repented having tried this second entrance, and was almost inclined
 to slip away before finished cursing, but ere i could execute that
 intention, ordered in, and shut and re-fastened the door. there
 was great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apartment,
 whose floor had grown uniform grey; and the once brilliant
 pewter-dishes, which used to attract my gaze when i was girl, partook
 of similar obscurity, created by tarnish and dust. i inquired whether
 i might call the maid, and be conducted to bedroom! mr. earnshaw
 vouchsafed answer. walked up and down, with his hands in his
 pockets, apparently quite forgetting my presence; and his abstraction
 was evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropical, that i
 shrank from disturbing him again.
 
you’ll not be surprised, ellen, at my feeling particularly cheerless,
 seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
 remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
 the only people i loved on earth; and there might as well be the
 atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: i could not overpass
 them! i questioned with myself—where must i turn for comfort? and—mind
 you don’t tell edgar, or catherine—above every sorrow beside, this rose
 pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally
 against heathcliff! i had sought shelter at wuthering heights, almost
 gladly, because i was secured by that arrangement from living alone
 with him; but knew the people we were coming amongst, and did not
 fear their intermeddling.
 
i sat and thought doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
 still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and
 perfectly silent, unless groan or bitter ejaculation forced itself
 out at intervals. i listened to detect woman’s voice in the house,
 and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations,
 which, at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping. i
 was not aware how openly i grieved, till earnshaw halted opposite, in
 his measured walk, and gave stare of newly-awakened surprise.
 taking advantage of his recovered attention, i exclaimed—“i’m tired
 with my journey, and i want to go to bed! where is the maid-servant?
 direct to her, as she won’t come to me!”
 
“we have none,” answered; “you must wait on yourself!”
 
“where must i sleep, then?” i sobbed; i was beyond regarding
 self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.
 
“joseph will show you heathcliff’s chamber,” said he; “open that
 door—he’s in there.”
 
i was going to obey, but suddenly arrested me, and added in the
 strangest tone—“be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
 bolt—don’t omit it!”
 
“well!” i said. “but why, mr. earnshaw?” i did not relish the notion of
 deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff.
 
“look here!” replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
 curiously-constructed pistol, having double-edged spring knife
 attached to the barrel. “that’s great tempter to desperate man, is
 it not? i cannot resist going up with this every night, and trying his
 door. if once i find it open he’s done for; i do it invariably, even
 though the minute before i have been recalling hundred reasons that
 should make refrain: it is some devil that urges to thwart my own
 schemes by killing him. you fight against that devil for love as long
 as you may; when the time comes, not all the angels in heaven shall
 save him!”
 
i surveyed the weapon inquisitively. hideous notion struck me: how
 powerful i should be possessing such an instrument! i took it from his
 hand, and touched the blade. looked astonished at the expression my
 face assumed during brief second: it was not horror, it was
 covetousness. snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife,
 and returned it to its concealment.
 
“i don’t care if you tell him,” said he. “put him on his guard, and
 watch for him. you know the terms we are on, i see: his danger does not
 shock you.”
 
“what has heathcliff done to you?” i asked. “in what has wronged
 you, to warrant this appalling hatred? wouldn’t it be wiser to bid him
 quit the house?”
 
“no!” thundered earnshaw; “should offer to leave me, he’s dead
 man: persuade him to attempt it, and you are murderess! am i to lose
 _all_, without chance of retrieval? is hareton to be beggar? oh,
 damnation! i _will_ have it back; and i’ll have _his_ gold too; and
 then his blood; and hell shall have his soul! it will be ten times
 blacker with that guest than ever it was before!”
 
you’ve acquainted me, ellen, with your old master’s habits. is
 clearly on the verge of madness: was so last night at least. i
 shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant’s ill-bred
 moroseness as comparatively agreeable. now recommenced his moody
 walk, and i raised the latch, and escaped into the kitchen. joseph was
 bending over the fire, peering into large pan that swung above it;
 and wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by. the contents
 of the pan began to boil, and turned to plunge his hand into the
 bowl; i conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper,
 and, being hungry, i resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out
 sharply, “_i’ll_ make the porridge!” i removed the vessel out of his
 reach, and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit. “mr.
 earnshaw,” i continued, “directs to wait on myself: i will. i’m not
 going to act the lady among you, for fear i should starve.”
 
“gooid lord!” muttered, sitting down, and stroking his ribbed
 stockings from the knee to the ankle. “if there’s to be fresh
 ortherings—just when i getten used to two maisters, if i mun hev’ a
 _mistress_ set o’er my heead, it’s like time to be flitting. i niver
 _did_ think to see t’ day that i mud lave th’ owld place—but i doubt
 it’s nigh at hand!”
 
this lamentation drew notice from me: i went briskly to work,
 sighing to remember period when it would have been all merry fun; but
 compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance. it racked to recall
 past happiness and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its
 apparition, the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the
 handfuls of meal fell into the water. joseph beheld my style of cookery
 with growing indignation.
 
“thear!” ejaculated. “hareton, thou willn’t sup thy porridge
 to-neeght; they’ll be naught but lumps as big as my neive. thear,
 agean! i’d fling in bowl un’ all, if i wer ye! there, pale t’ guilp
 off, un’ then ye’ll hae done wi’t. bang, bang. it’s mercy t’ bothom
 isn’t deaved out!”
 
it _was_ rather rough mess, i own, when poured into the basins; four
 had been provided, and gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from
 the dairy, which hareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling
 from the expansive lip. i expostulated, and desired that should have
 his in mug; affirming that i could not taste the liquid treated so
 dirtily. the old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety;
 assuring me, repeatedly, that “the barn was every bit as good” as i,
 “and every bit as wollsome,” and wondering how i could fashion to be so
 conceited. meanwhile, the infant ruffian continued sucking; and
 glowered up at defyingly, as slavered into the jug.
 
“i shall have my supper in another room,” i said. “have you place
 you call parlour?”
 
“_parlour_!” echoed, sneeringly, “_parlour_! nay, we’ve noa
 _parlours_. if yah dunnut loike wer company, there’s maister’s; un’ if
 yah dunnut loike maister, there’s us.”
 
“then i shall go upstairs,” i answered; “show chamber.”
 
i put my basin on tray, and went myself to fetch some more milk. with
 great grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded in my ascent: we
 mounted to the garrets; opened door, now and then, to look into
 the apartments we passed.
 
“here’s rahm,” said, at last, flinging back cranky board on
 hinges. “it’s weel eneugh to ate few porridge in. there’s pack o’
 corn i’ t’ corner, thear, meeterly clane; if ye’re feared o’ muckying
 yer grand silk cloes, spread yer hankerchir o’ t’ top on’t.”
 
the “rahm” was kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of malt and grain;
 various sacks of which articles were piled around, leaving wide, bare
 space in the middle.
 
“why, man,” i exclaimed, facing him angrily, “this is not place to
 sleep in. i wish to see my bed-room.”
 
“_bed-rume_!” repeated, in tone of mockery. “yah’s see all t’
 _bed-rumes_ thear is—yon’s mine.”
 
pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first in
 being more naked about the walls, and having large, low, curtainless
 bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.
 
“what do i want with yours?” i retorted. “i suppose mr. heathcliff does
 not lodge at the top of the house, does he?”
 
“oh! it’s maister _hathecliff’s_ ye’re wanting?” cried he, as if making
 new discovery. “couldn’t ye ha’ said soa, at onst? un’ then, i mud
 ha’ telled ye, baht all this wark, that that’s just one ye cannut
 see—he allas keeps it locked, un’ nob’dy iver mells on’t but hisseln.”
 
“you’ve nice house, joseph,” i could not refrain from observing, “and
 pleasant inmates; and i think the concentrated essence of all the
 madness in the world took up its abode in my brain the day i linked my
 fate with theirs! however, that is not to the present purpose—there are
 other rooms. for heaven’s sake be quick, and let settle somewhere!”
 
made reply to this adjuration; only plodding doggedly down the
 wooden steps, and halting before an apartment which, from that halt
 and the superior quality of its furniture, i conjectured to be the best
 one. there was carpet—a good one, but the pattern was obliterated by
 dust; fireplace hung with cut-paper, dropping to pieces; handsome
 oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtains of rather expensive material
 and modern make; but they had evidently experienced rough usage: the
 vallances hung in festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron rod
 supporting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the drapery to
 trail upon the floor. the chairs were also damaged, many of them
 severely; and deep indentations deformed the panels of the walls. i was
 endeavouring to gather resolution for entering and taking possession,
 when my fool of guide announced,—“this here is t’ maister’s.” my
 supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my patience
 exhausted. i insisted on being provided instantly with place of
 refuge, and means of repose.
 
“whear the divil?” began the religious elder. “the lord bless us! the
 lord forgie us! whear the _hell_ wold ye gang? ye marred, wearisome
 nowt! ye’ve seen all but hareton’s bit of cham’er. there’s not
 another hoile to lig down in i’ th’ hahse!”
 
i was so vexed, i flung my tray and its contents on the ground; and
 then seated myself at the stairs’-head, hid my face in my hands, and
 cried.
 
“ech! ech!” exclaimed joseph. “weel done, miss cathy! weel done, miss
 cathy! howsiver, t’ maister sall just tum’le o’er them brocken pots;
 un’ then we’s hear summut; we’s hear how it’s to be. gooid-for-naught
 madling! ye desarve pining fro’ this to churstmas, flinging t’ precious
 gifts uh god under fooit i’ yer flaysome rages! but i’m mista’en if ye
 shew yer sperrit lang. will hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye?
 i nobbut wish may catch ye i’ that plisky. i nobbut wish may.”
 
and so went on scolding to his den beneath, taking the candle with
 him; and i remained in the dark. the period of reflection succeeding
 this silly action compelled to admit the necessity of smothering my
 pride and choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its
 effects. an unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of
 throttler, whom i now recognised as of our old skulker: it had
 spent its whelphood at the grange, and was given by my father to mr.
 hindley. i fancy it knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way of
 salute, and then hastened to devour the porridge; while i groped from
 step to step, collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the
 spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. our
 labours were scarcely over when i heard earnshaw’s tread in the
 passage; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed to the wall; i
 stole into the nearest doorway. the dog’s endeavour to avoid him was
 unsuccessful; as i guessed by scutter downstairs, and prolonged,
 piteous yelping. i had better luck: passed on, entered his chamber,
 and shut the door. directly after joseph came up with hareton, to put
 him to bed. i had found shelter in hareton’s room, and the old man, on
 seeing me, said,—“they’s rahm for boath ye un’ yer pride, now, i sud
 think i’ the hahse. it’s empty; ye may hev’ it all to yerseln, un’ him
 as allas maks third, i’ sich ill company!”
 
gladly did i take advantage of this intimation; and the minute i flung
 myself into chair, by the fire, i nodded, and slept. my slumber was
 deep and sweet, though over far too soon. mr. heathcliff awoke me; he
 had just come in, and demanded, in his loving manner, what i was doing
 there? i told him the cause of my staying up so late—that had the
 key of our room in his pocket. the adjective _our_ gave mortal offence.
 swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he’d—but i’ll not
 repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct: is ingenious
 and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence! i sometimes wonder at
 him with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, i assure you, tiger
 or venomous serpent could not rouse terror in equal to that which
 wakens. told of catherine’s illness, and accused my brother of
 causing it; promising that i should be edgar’s proxy in suffering, till
 could get hold of him.
 
i do hate him—i am wretched—i have been fool! beware of uttering one
 breath of this to any one at the grange. i shall expect you every
 day—don’t disappoint me!—isabella.
 



chapter xiv
 

as soon as i had perused this epistle i went to the master, and
 informed him that his sister had arrived at the heights, and sent a
 letter expressing her sorrow for mrs. linton’s situation, and her
 ardent desire to see him; with wish that would transmit to her, as
 early as possible, some token of forgiveness by me.
 
“forgiveness!” said linton. “i have nothing to forgive her, ellen. you
 may call at wuthering heights this afternoon, if you like, and say that
 i am not _angry_, but i’m _sorry_ to have lost her; especially as i can
 never think she’ll be happy. it is out of the question my going to see
 her, however: we are eternally divided; and should she really wish to
 oblige me, let her persuade the villain she has married to leave the
 country.”
 
“and you won’t write her little note, sir?” i asked, imploringly.
 
“no,” answered. “it is needless. my communication with heathcliff’s
 family shall be as sparing as his with mine. it shall not exist!”
 
mr. edgar’s coldness depressed exceedingly; and all the way from the
 grange i puzzled my brains how to put more heart into what said,
 when i repeated it; and how to soften his refusal of even few lines
 to console isabella. i daresay she had been on the watch for since
 morning: i saw her looking through the lattice as i came up the garden
 causeway, and i nodded to her; but she drew back, as if afraid of being
 observed. i entered without knocking. there never was such dreary,
 dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented! i must confess,
 that if i had been in the young lady’s place, i would, at least, have
 swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with duster. but she already
 partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed her. her
 pretty face was wan and listless; her hair uncurled: some locks hanging
 lankly down, and some carelessly twisted round her head. probably she
 had not touched her dress since yester evening. hindley was not there.
 mr. heathcliff sat at table, turning over some papers in his
 pocket-book; but rose when i appeared, asked how i did, quite
 friendly, and offered chair. was the only thing there that
 seemed decent; and i thought never looked better. so much had
 circumstances altered their positions, that would certainly have
 struck stranger as born and bred gentleman; and his wife as a
 thorough little slattern! she came forward eagerly to greet me, and
 held out one hand to take the expected letter. i shook my head. she
 wouldn’t understand the hint, but followed to sideboard, where i
 went to lay my bonnet, and importuned in whisper to give her
 directly what i had brought. heathcliff guessed the meaning of her
 manœuvres, and said—“if you have got anything for isabella (as no
 doubt you have, nelly), give it to her. you needn’t make secret of
 it: we have secrets between us.”
 
“oh, i have nothing,” i replied, thinking it best to speak the truth at
 once. “my master bid tell his sister that she must not expect either
 letter or visit from him at present. sends his love, ma’am, and
 his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have
 occasioned; but thinks that after this time his household and the
 household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
 keeping it up.”
 
mrs. heathcliff’s lip quivered slightly, and she returned to her seat
 in the window. her husband took his stand on the hearthstone, near me,
 and began to put questions concerning catherine. i told him as much as
 i thought proper of her illness, and extorted from me, by
 cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin. i
 blamed her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and ended
 by hoping that would follow mr. linton’s example and avoid future
 interference with his family, for good or evil.
 
“mrs. linton is now just recovering,” i said; “she’ll never be like she
 was, but her life is spared; and if you really have regard for her,
 you’ll shun crossing her way again: nay, you’ll move out of this
 country entirely; and that you may not regret it, i’ll inform you
 catherine linton is as different now from your old friend catherine
 earnshaw, as that young lady is different from me. her appearance is
 changed greatly, her character much more so; and the person who is
 compelled, of necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his
 affection hereafter by the remembrance of what she once was, by common
 humanity, and sense of duty!”
 
“that is quite possible,” remarked heathcliff, forcing himself to seem
 calm: “quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
 humanity and sense of duty to fall back upon. but do you imagine that
 i shall leave catherine to his _duty_ and _humanity_? and can you
 compare my feelings respecting catherine to his? before you leave this
 house, i must exact promise from you that you’ll get an interview
 with her: consent, or refuse, i _will_ see her! what do you say?”
 
“i say, mr. heathcliff,” i replied, “you must not: you never shall,
 through my means. another encounter between you and the master would
 kill her altogether.”
 
“with your aid that may be avoided,” continued; “and should there be
 danger of such an event—should be the cause of adding single
 trouble more to her existence—why, i think i shall be justified in
 going to extremes! i wish you had sincerity enough to tell whether
 catherine would suffer greatly from his loss: the fear that she would
 restrains me. and there you see the distinction between our feelings:
 had been in my place, and i in his, though i hated him with hatred
 that turned my life to gall, i never would have raised hand against
 him. you may look incredulous, if you please! i never would have
 banished him from her society as long as she desired his. the moment
 her regard ceased, i would have torn his heart out, and drunk his
 blood! but, till then—if you don’t believe me, you don’t know me—till
 then, i would have died by inches before i touched single hair of his
 head!”
 
“and yet,” i interrupted, “you have scruples in completely ruining
 all hopes of her perfect restoration, by thrusting yourself into her
 remembrance now, when she has nearly forgotten you, and involving her
 in new tumult of discord and distress.”
 
“you suppose she has nearly forgotten me?” said. “oh, nelly! you
 know she has not! you know as well as i do, that for every thought she
 spends on linton she spends thousand on me! at most miserable
 period of my life, i had notion of the kind: it haunted on my
 return to the neighbourhood last summer; but only her own assurance
 could make admit the horrible idea again. and then, linton would be
 nothing, nor hindley, nor all the dreams that ever i dreamt. two words
 would comprehend my future—_death_ and _hell_: existence, after losing
 her, would be hell. yet i was fool to fancy for moment that she
 valued edgar linton’s attachment more than mine. if loved with all
 the powers of his puny being, couldn’t love as much in eighty years
 as i could in day. and catherine has heart as deep as i have: the
 could be as readily contained in that horse-trough as her whole
 affection be monopolised by him. tush! is scarcely degree dearer
 to her than her dog, or her horse. it is not in him to be loved like
 me: how can she love in him what has not?”
 
“catherine and edgar are as fond of each other as any two people can
 be,” cried isabella, with sudden vivacity. “no one has right to talk
 in that manner, and i won’t hear my brother depreciated in silence!”
 
“your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn’t he?” observed
 heathcliff, scornfully. “he turns you adrift on the world with
 surprising alacrity.”
 
“he is not aware of what i suffer,” she replied. “i didn’t tell him
 that.”
 
“you have been telling him something, then: you have written, have
 you?”
 
“to say that i was married, i did write—you saw the note.”
 
“and nothing since?”
 
“no.”
 
“my young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of condition,”
 i remarked. “somebody’s love comes short in her case, obviously; whose,
 i may guess; but, perhaps, i shouldn’t say.”
 
“i should guess it was her own,” said heathcliff. “she degenerates into
 mere slut! she is tired of trying to please uncommonly early.
 you’d hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding she was
 weeping to go home. however, she’ll suit this house so much the better
 for not being over nice, and i’ll take care she does not disgrace by
 rambling abroad.”
 
“well, sir,” returned i, “i hope you’ll consider that mrs. heathcliff
 is accustomed to be looked after and waited on; and that she has been
 brought up like an only daughter, whom every one was ready to serve.
 you must let her have maid to keep things tidy about her, and you
 must treat her kindly. whatever be your notion of mr. edgar, you cannot
 doubt that she has capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn’t
 have abandoned the elegancies, and comforts, and friends of her former
 home, to fix contentedly, in such wilderness as this, with you.”
 
“she abandoned them under delusion,” answered; “picturing in a
 hero of romance, and expecting unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous
 devotion. i can hardly regard her in the light of rational creature,
 so obstinately has she persisted in forming fabulous notion of my
 character and acting on the false impressions she cherished. but, at
 last, i think she begins to know me: i don’t perceive the silly smiles
 and grimaces that provoked at first; and the senseless incapability
 of discerning that i was in earnest when i gave her my opinion of her
 infatuation and herself. it was marvellous effort of perspicacity to
 discover that i did not love her. i believed, at one time, lessons
 could teach her that! and yet it is poorly learnt; for this morning she
 announced, as piece of appalling intelligence, that i had actually
 succeeded in making her hate me! positive labour of hercules, i
 assure you! if it be achieved, i have cause to return thanks. can i
 trust your assertion, isabella? are you sure you hate me? if i let you
 alone for half day, won’t you come sighing and wheedling to again?
 i daresay she would rather i had seemed all tenderness before you: it
 wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed. but i don’t care who knows
 that the passion was wholly on one side: and i never told her lie
 about it. she cannot accuse of showing one bit of deceitful
 softness. the first thing she saw do, on coming out of the grange,
 was to hang up her little dog; and when she pleaded for it, the first
 words i uttered were wish that i had the hanging of every being
 belonging to her, except one: possibly she took that exception for
 herself. but brutality disgusted her: i suppose she has an innate
 admiration of it, if only her precious person were secure from injury!
 now, was it not the depth of absurdity—of genuine idiocy, for that
 pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that i could love her?
 tell your master, nelly, that i never, in all my life, met with such an
 abject thing as she is. she even disgraces the name of linton; and i’ve
 sometimes relented, from pure lack of invention, in my experiments on
 what she could endure, and still creep shamefully cringing back! but
 tell him, also, to set his fraternal and magisterial heart at ease:
 that i keep strictly within the limits of the law. i have avoided, up
 to this period, giving her the slightest right to claim separation;
 and, what’s more, she’d thank nobody for dividing us. if she desired to
 go, she might: the nuisance of her presence outweighs the gratification
 to be derived from tormenting her!”
 
“mr. heathcliff,” said i, “this is the talk of madman; your wife,
 most likely, is convinced you are mad; and, for that reason, she has
 borne with you hitherto: but now that you say she may go, she’ll
 doubtless avail herself of the permission. you are not so bewitched,
 ma’am, are you, as to remain with him of your own accord?”
 
“take care, ellen!” answered isabella, her eyes sparkling irefully;
 there was misdoubting by their expression the full success of her
 partner’s endeavours to make himself detested. “don’t put faith in a
 single word speaks. he’s lying fiend! monster, and not human
 being! i’ve been told i might leave him before; and i’ve made the
 attempt, but i dare not repeat it! only, ellen, promise you’ll not
 mention syllable of his infamous conversation to my brother or
 catherine. whatever may pretend, wishes to provoke edgar to
 desperation: says has married on purpose to obtain power over
 him; and sha’n’t obtain it—i’ll die first! i just hope, i pray, that
 may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me! the single pleasure
 i can imagine is to die, or to see him dead!”
 
“there—that will do for the present!” said heathcliff. “if you are
 called upon in court of law, you’ll remember her language, nelly! and
 take good look at that countenance: she’s near the point which would
 suit me. no; you’re not fit to be your own guardian, isabella, now; and
 i, being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however
 distasteful the obligation may be. go upstairs; i have something to say
 to ellen dean in private. that’s not the way: upstairs, i tell you!
 why, this is the road upstairs, child!”
 
seized, and thrust her from the room; and returned muttering—“i have
 pity! i have pity! the more the worms writhe, the more i yearn to
 crush out their entrails! it is moral teething; and i grind with
 greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain.”
 
“do you understand what the word pity means?” i said, hastening to
 resume my bonnet. “did you ever feel touch of it in your life?”
 
“put that down!” interrupted, perceiving my intention to depart.
 “you are not going yet. come here now, nelly: i must either persuade or
 compel you to aid in fulfilling my determination to see catherine,
 and that without delay. i swear that i meditate harm: i don’t desire
 to cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult mr. linton; i only
 wish to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill; and to
 ask if anything that i could do would be of use to her. last night i
 was in the grange garden six hours, and i’ll return there to-night; and
 every night i’ll haunt the place, and every day, till i find an
 opportunity of entering. if edgar linton meets me, i shall not hesitate
 to knock him down, and give him enough to insure his quiescence while i
 stay. if his servants oppose me, i shall threaten them off with these
 pistols. but wouldn’t it be better to prevent my coming in contact with
 them, or their master? and you could do it so easily. i’d warn you when
 i came, and then you might let in unobserved, as soon as she was
 alone, and watch till i departed, your conscience quite calm: you would
 be hindering mischief.”
 
i protested against playing that treacherous part in my employer’s
 house: and, besides, i urged the cruelty and selfishness of his
 destroying mrs. linton’s tranquillity for his satisfaction. “the
 commonest occurrence startles her painfully,” i said. “she’s all
 nerves, and she couldn’t bear the surprise, i’m positive. don’t
 persist, sir! or else i shall be obliged to inform my master of your
 designs; and he’ll take measures to secure his house and its inmates
 from any such unwarrantable intrusions!”
 
“in that case i’ll take measures to secure you, woman!” exclaimed
 heathcliff; “you shall not leave wuthering heights till to-morrow
 morning. it is foolish story to assert that catherine could not bear
 to see me; and as to surprising her, i don’t desire it: you must
 prepare her—ask her if i may come. you say she never mentions my name,
 and that i am never mentioned to her. to whom should she mention if
 i am forbidden topic in the house? she thinks you are all spies for
 her husband. oh, i’ve doubt she’s in hell among you! i guess by her
 silence, as much as anything, what she feels. you say she is often
 restless, and anxious-looking: is that proof of tranquillity? you
 talk of her mind being unsettled. how the devil could it be otherwise
 in her frightful isolation? and that insipid, paltry creature attending
 her from _duty_ and _humanity_! from _pity_ and _charity_! might as
 well plant an oak in flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine
 can restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares! let us
 settle it at once: will you stay here, and am i to fight my way to
 catherine over linton and his footman? or will you be my friend, as you
 have been hitherto, and do what i request? decide! because there is no
 reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn
 ill-nature!”
 
well, mr. lockwood, i argued and complained, and flatly refused him
 fifty times; but in the long run forced to an agreement. i
 engaged to carry letter from him to my mistress; and should she
 consent, i promised to let him have intelligence of linton’s next
 absence from home, when might come, and get in as was able: i
 wouldn’t be there, and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the
 way. was it right or wrong? i fear it was wrong, though expedient. i
 thought i prevented another explosion by my compliance; and i thought,
 too, it might create favourable crisis in catherine’s mental illness:
 and then i remembered mr. edgar’s stern rebuke of my carrying tales;
 and i tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject, by
 affirming, with frequent iteration, that that betrayal of trust, if it
 merited so harsh an appellation, should be the last. notwithstanding,
 my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither; and many
 misgivings i had, ere i could prevail on myself to put the missive into
 mrs. linton’s hand.
 
but here is kenneth; i’ll go down, and tell him how much better you
 are. my history is _dree_, as we say, and will serve to while away
 another morning.
 
* * * * *
 

dree, and dreary! i reflected as the good woman descended to receive
 the doctor: and not exactly of the kind which i should have chosen to
 amuse me. but never mind! i’ll extract wholesome medicines from mrs.
 dean’s bitter herbs; and firstly, let beware of the fascination that
 lurks in catherine heathcliff’s brilliant eyes. i should be in a
 curious taking if i surrendered my heart to that young person, and the
 daughter turned out second edition of the mother.
 



chapter xv
 

another week over—and i am so many days nearer health, and spring! i
 have now heard all my neighbour’s history, at different sittings, as
 the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations. i’ll
 continue it in her own words, only little condensed. she is, on the
 whole, very fair narrator, and i don’t think i could improve her
 style.
 
* * * * *
 

in the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the heights, i
 knew, as well as if i saw him, that mr. heathcliff was about the place;
 and i shunned going out, because i still carried his letter in my
 pocket, and didn’t want to be threatened or teased any more. i had made
 up my mind not to give it till my master went somewhere, as i could not
 guess how its receipt would affect catherine. the consequence was, that
 it did not reach her before the lapse of three days. the fourth was
 sunday, and i brought it into her room after the family were gone to
 church. there was man servant left to keep the house with me, and we
 generally made practice of locking the doors during the hours of
 service; but on that occasion the weather was so warm and pleasant that
 i set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement, as i knew who would
 be coming, i told my companion that the mistress wished very much for
 some oranges, and must run over to the village and get few, to be
 paid for on the morrow. departed, and i went upstairs.
 
mrs. linton sat in loose white dress, with light shawl over her
 shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual. her thick, long
 hair had been partly removed at the beginning of her illness, and now
 she wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and
 neck. her appearance was altered, as i had told heathcliff; but when
 she was calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the change. the flash of
 her eyes had been succeeded by dreamy and melancholy softness; they
 longer gave the impression of looking at the objects around her:
 they appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond—you would have said
 out of this world. then, the paleness of her face—its haggard aspect
 having vanished as she recovered flesh—and the peculiar expression
 arising from her mental state, though painfully suggestive of their
 causes, added to the touching interest which she awakened;
 and—invariably to me, i know, and to any person who saw her, i should
 think—refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and stamped her as
 one doomed to decay.
 
book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely perceptible
 wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. i believe linton had laid it
 there: for she never endeavoured to divert herself with reading, or
 occupation of any kind, and would spend many an hour in trying to
 entice her attention to some subject which had formerly been her
 amusement. she was conscious of his aim, and in her better moods
 endured his efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness by now and
 then suppressing wearied sigh, and checking him at last with the
 saddest of smiles and kisses. at other times, she would turn petulantly
 away, and hide her face in her hands, or even push him off angrily; and
 then took care to let her alone, for was certain of doing no
 good.
 
gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing; and the full, mellow flow of
 the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear. it was sweet
 substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which
 drowned that music about the grange when the trees were in leaf. at
 wuthering heights it always sounded on quiet days following great
 thaw or season of steady rain. and of wuthering heights catherine was
 thinking as she listened: that is, if she thought or listened at all;
 but she had the vague, distant look i mentioned before, which expressed
 recognition of material things either by ear or eye.
 
“there’s letter for you, mrs. linton,” i said, gently inserting it in
 one hand that rested on her knee. “you must read it immediately,
 because it wants an answer. shall i break the seal?” “yes,” she
 answered, without altering the direction of her eyes. i opened it—it
 was very short. “now,” i continued, “read it.” she drew away her hand,
 and let it fall. i replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it
 should please her to glance down; but that movement was so long delayed
 that at last i resumed—“must i read it, ma’am? it is from mr.
 heathcliff.”
 
there was start and troubled gleam of recollection, and struggle
 to arrange her ideas. she lifted the letter, and seemed to peruse it;
 and when she came to the signature she sighed: yet still i found she
 had not gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to hear her reply,
 she merely pointed to the name, and gazed at with mournful and
 questioning eagerness.
 
“well, wishes to see you,” said i, guessing her need of an
 interpreter. “he’s in the garden by this time, and impatient to know
 what answer i shall bring.”
 
as i spoke, i observed large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath
 raise its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back,
 announce, by wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did
 not consider stranger. mrs. linton bent forward, and listened
 breathlessly. the minute after step traversed the hall; the open
 house was too tempting for heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely
 supposed that i was inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to
 trust to his own audacity. with straining eagerness catherine gazed
 towards the entrance of her chamber. did not hit the right room
 directly: she motioned to admit him, but found it out ere i could
 reach the door, and in stride or two was at her side, and had her
 grasped in his arms.
 
neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes, during
 which period bestowed more kisses than ever gave in his life
 before, i daresay: but then my mistress had kissed him first, and i
 plainly saw that could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look
 into her face! the same conviction had stricken him as me, from the
 instant beheld her, that there was prospect of ultimate recovery
 there—she was fated, sure to die.
 
“oh, cathy! oh, my life! how can i bear it?” was the first sentence he
 uttered, in tone that did not seek to disguise his despair. and now
 stared at her so earnestly that i thought the very intensity of his
 gaze would bring tears into his eyes; but they burned with anguish:
 they did not melt.
 
“what now?” said catherine, leaning back, and returning his look with a
 suddenly clouded brow: her humour was mere vane for constantly
 varying caprices. “you and edgar have broken my heart, heathcliff! and
 you both come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be
 pitied! i shall not pity you, not i. you have killed me—and thriven on
 it, i think. how strong you are! how many years do you mean to live
 after i am gone?”
 
heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; attempted to rise,
 but she seized his hair, and kept him down.
 
“i wish i could hold you,” she continued, bitterly, “till we were both
 dead! i shouldn’t care what you suffered. i care nothing for your
 sufferings. why shouldn’t you suffer? i do! will you forget me? will
 you be happy when i am in the earth? will you say twenty years hence,
 ‘that’s the grave of catherine earnshaw? i loved her long ago, and was
 wretched to lose her; but it is past. i’ve loved many others since: my
 children are dearer to than she was; and, at death, i shall not
 rejoice that i am going to her: i shall be sorry that i must leave
 them!’ will you say so, heathcliff?”
 
“don’t torture till i’m as mad as yourself,” cried he, wrenching his
 head free, and grinding his teeth.
 
the two, to cool spectator, made strange and fearful picture. well
 might catherine deem that heaven would be land of exile to her,
 unless with her mortal body she cast away her moral character also. her
 present countenance had wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a
 bloodless lip and scintillating eye; and she retained in her closed
 fingers portion of the locks she had been grasping. as to her
 companion, while raising himself with one hand, had taken her arm
 with the other; and so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to the
 requirements of her condition, that on his letting go i saw four
 distinct impressions left blue in the colourless skin.
 
“are you possessed with devil,” pursued, savagely, “to talk in
 that manner to when you are dying? do you reflect that all those
 words will be branded in my memory, and eating deeper eternally after
 you have left me? you know you lie to say i have killed you: and,
 catherine, you know that i could as soon forget you as my existence! is
 it not sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at
 peace i shall writhe in the torments of hell?”
 
“i shall not be at peace,” moaned catherine, recalled to sense of
 physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart, which
 beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation. she said
 nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then she continued, more
 kindly—
 
“i’m not wishing you greater torment than i have, heathcliff. i only
 wish us never to be parted: and should word of mine distress you
 hereafter, think i feel the same distress underground, and for my own
 sake, forgive me! come here and kneel down again! you never harmed me
 in your life. nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember
 than my harsh words! won’t you come here again? do!”
 
heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leant over, but not so
 far as to let her see his face, which was livid with emotion. she bent
 round to look at him; would not permit it: turning abruptly, he
 walked to the fireplace, where stood, silent, with his back towards
 us. mrs. linton’s glance followed him suspiciously: every movement woke
 new sentiment in her. after pause and prolonged gaze, she
 resumed; addressing in accents of indignant disappointment:—
 
“oh, you see, nelly, would not relent moment to keep out of the
 grave. _that_ is how i’m loved! well, never mind. that is not _my_
 heathcliff. i shall love mine yet; and take him with me: he’s in my
 soul. and,” added she musingly, “the thing that irks most is this
 shattered prison, after all. i’m tired of being enclosed here. i’m
 wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be always there:
 not seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the
 walls of an aching heart: but really with it, and in it. nelly, you
 think you are better and more fortunate than i; in full health and
 strength: you are sorry for me—very soon that will be altered. i shall
 be sorry for _you_. i shall be incomparably beyond and above you all. i
 _wonder_ won’t be near me!” she went on to herself. “i thought he
 wished it. heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now. do come to
 me, heathcliff.”
 
in her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the
 chair. at that earnest appeal turned to her, looking absolutely
 desperate. his eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on her; his
 breast heaved convulsively. an instant they held asunder, and then how
 they met i hardly saw, but catherine made spring, and caught her,
 and they were locked in an embrace from which i thought my mistress
 would never be released alive: in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly
 insensible. flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my
 approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she had fainted, gnashed at
 me, and foamed like mad dog, and gathered her to him with greedy
 jealousy. i did not feel as if i were in the company of creature of
 my own species: it appeared that would not understand, though i
 spoke to him; so i stood off, and held my tongue, in great perplexity.
 
movement of catherine’s relieved little presently: she put up
 her hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to his as held her;
 while he, in return, covering her with frantic caresses, said wildly—
 
“you teach now how cruel you’ve been—cruel and false. _why_ did you
 despise me? _why_ did you betray your own heart, cathy? i have not one
 word of comfort. you deserve this. you have killed yourself. yes, you
 may kiss me, and cry; and wring out my kisses and tears: they’ll blight
 you—they’ll damn you. you loved me—then what _right_ had you to leave
 me? what right—answer me—for the poor fancy you felt for linton?
 because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that god or
 satan could inflict would have parted us, _you_, of your own will, did
 it. i have not broken your heart—_you_ have broken it; and in breaking
 it, you have broken mine. so much the worse for that i am strong. do
 i want to live? what kind of living will it be when you—oh, god! would
 _you_ like to live with your soul in the grave?”
 
“let alone. let alone,” sobbed catherine. “if i’ve done wrong,
 i’m dying for it. it is enough! you left too: but i won’t upbraid
 you! i forgive you. forgive me!”
 
“it is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those
 wasted hands,” answered. “kiss again; and don’t let see your
 eyes! i forgive what you have done to me. i love _my_ murderer—but
 _yours_! how can i?”
 
they were silent—their faces hid against each other, and washed by each
 other’s tears. at least, i suppose the weeping was on both sides; as it
 seemed heathcliff _could_ weep on great occasion like this.
 
i grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away,
 the man whom i had sent off returned from his errand, and i could
 distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, concourse
 thickening outside gimmerton chapel porch.
 
“service is over,” i announced. “my master will be here in half an
 hour.”
 
heathcliff groaned curse, and strained catherine closer: she never
 moved.
 
ere long i perceived group of the servants passing up the road
 towards the kitchen wing. mr. linton was not far behind; opened the
 gate himself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely
 afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.
 
“now is here,” i exclaimed. “for heaven’s sake, hurry down! you’ll
 not meet any one on the front stairs. do be quick; and stay among the
 trees till is fairly in.”
 
“i must go, cathy,” said heathcliff, seeking to extricate himself from
 his companion’s arms. “but if i live, i’ll see you again before you are
 asleep. i won’t stray five yards from your window.”
 
“you must not go!” she answered, holding him as firmly as her strength
 allowed. “you _shall_ not, i tell you.”
 
“for one hour,” pleaded earnestly.
 
“not for one minute,” she replied.
 
“i _must_—linton will be up immediately,” persisted the alarmed
 intruder.
 
would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act—she clung fast,
 gasping: there was mad resolution in her face.
 
“no!” she shrieked. “oh, don’t, don’t go. it is the last time! edgar
 will not hurt us. heathcliff, i shall die! i shall die!”
 
“damn the fool! there is,” cried heathcliff, sinking back into his
 seat. “hush, my darling! hush, hush, catherine! i’ll stay. if shot
 so, i’d expire with blessing on my lips.”
 
and there they were fast again. i heard my master mounting the
 stairs—the cold sweat ran from my forehead: i was horrified.
 
“are you going to listen to her ravings?” i said, passionately. “she
 does not know what she says. will you ruin her, because she has not wit
 to help herself? get up! you could be free instantly. that is the most
 diabolical deed that ever you did. we are all done for—master,
 mistress, and servant.”
 
i wrung my hands, and cried out; and mr. linton hastened his step at
 the noise. in the midst of my agitation, i was sincerely glad to
 observe that catherine’s arms had fallen relaxed, and her head hung
 down.
 
“she’s fainted, or dead,” i thought: “so much the better. far better
 that she should be dead, than lingering burden and misery-maker to
 all about her.”
 
edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with astonishment and
 rage. what meant to do i cannot tell; however, the other stopped all
 demonstrations, at once, by placing the lifeless-looking form in his
 arms.
 
“look there!” said. “unless you be fiend, help her first—then you
 shall speak to me!”
 
walked into the parlour, and sat down. mr. linton summoned me, and
 with great difficulty, and after resorting to many means, we managed to
 restore her to sensation; but she was all bewildered; she sighed, and
 moaned, and knew nobody. edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her
 hated friend. i did not. i went, at the earliest opportunity, and
 besought him to depart; affirming that catherine was better, and he
 should hear from in the morning how she passed the night.
 
“i shall not refuse to go out of doors,” answered; “but i shall stay
 in the garden: and, nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow. i shall
 be under those larch-trees. mind! or i pay another visit, whether
 linton be in or not.”
 
sent rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and,
 ascertaining that what i stated was apparently true, delivered the
 house of his luckless presence.
 



chapter xvi
 

about twelve o’clock that night was born the catherine you saw at
 wuthering heights: puny, seven-months’ child; and two hours after the
 mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss
 heathcliff, or know edgar. the latter’s distraction at his bereavement
 is subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how
 deep the sorrow sunk. great addition, in my eyes, was his being left
 without an heir. i bemoaned that, as i gazed on the feeble orphan; and
 i mentally abused old linton for (what was only natural partiality) the
 securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son’s. an
 unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing! it might have wailed out of life,
 and nobody cared morsel, during those first hours of existence. we
 redeemed the neglect afterwards; but its beginning was as friendless as
 its end is likely to be.
 
next morning—bright and cheerful out of doors—stole softened in through
 the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch and its occupant
 with mellow, tender glow. edgar linton had his head laid on the
 pillow, and his eyes shut. his young and fair features were almost as
 deathlike as those of the form beside him, and almost as fixed: but
 _his_ was the hush of exhausted anguish, and _hers_ of perfect peace.
 her brow smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expression of a
 smile; angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared.
 and i partook of the infinite calm in which she lay: my mind was never
 in holier frame than while i gazed on that untroubled image of divine
 rest. i instinctively echoed the words she had uttered few hours
 before: “incomparably beyond and above us all! whether still on earth
 or now in heaven, her spirit is at home with god!”
 
i don’t know if it be peculiarity in me, but i am seldom otherwise
 than happy while watching in the chamber of death, should frenzied
 or despairing mourner share the duty with me. i see repose that
 neither earth nor hell can break, and i feel an assurance of the
 endless and shadowless hereafter—the eternity they have entered—where
 life is boundless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in
 its fulness. i noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is
 even in love like mr. linton’s, when so regretted catherine’s
 blessed release! to be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward
 and impatient existence she had led, whether she merited haven of
 peace at last. one might doubt in seasons of cold reflection; but not
 then, in the presence of her corpse. it asserted its own tranquillity,
 which seemed pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.
 
do you believe such people _are_ happy in the other world, sir? i’d
 give great deal to know.
 
i declined answering mrs. dean’s question, which struck as something
 heterodox. she proceeded:
 
retracing the course of catherine linton, i fear we have right to
 think she is; but we’ll leave her with her maker.
 
the master looked asleep, and i ventured soon after sunrise to quit the
 room and steal out to the pure refreshing air. the servants thought me
 gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my
 chief motive was seeing mr. heathcliff. if had remained among the
 larches all night, would have heard nothing of the stir at the
 grange; unless, perhaps, might catch the gallop of the messenger
 going to gimmerton. if had come nearer, would probably be aware,
 from the lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of
 the outer doors, that all was not right within. i wished, yet feared,
 to find him. i felt the terrible news must be told, and i longed to get
 it over; but _how_ to do it i did not know. was there—at least, a
 few yards further in the park; leant against an old ash-tree, his hat
 off, and his hair soaked with the dew that had gathered on the budded
 branches, and fell pattering round him. had been standing long
 time in that position, for i saw pair of ousels passing and repassing
 scarcely three feet from him, busy in building their nest, and
 regarding his proximity more than that of piece of timber. they
 flew off at my approach, and raised his eyes and spoke:—“she’s
 dead!” said; “i’ve not waited for you to learn that. put your
 handkerchief away—don’t snivel before me. damn you all! she wants none
 of _your_ tears!”
 
i was weeping as much for him as her: we do sometimes pity creatures
 that have none of the feeling either for themselves or others. when i
 first looked into his face, i perceived that had got intelligence of
 the catastrophe; and foolish notion struck that his heart was
 quelled and prayed, because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on
 the ground.
 
“yes, she’s dead!” i answered, checking my sobs and drying my cheeks.
 “gone to heaven, i hope; where we may, every one, join her, if we take
 due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good!”
 
“did _she_ take due warning, then?” asked heathcliff, attempting a
 sneer. “did she die like saint? come, give true history of the
 event. how did—?”
 
endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and
 compressing his mouth held silent combat with his inward agony,
 defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.
 “how did she die?” resumed, at last—fain, notwithstanding his
 hardihood, to have support behind him; for, after the struggle, he
 trembled, in spite of himself, to his very finger-ends.
 
“poor wretch!” i thought; “you have heart and nerves the same as your
 brother men! why should you be anxious to conceal them? your pride
 cannot blind god! you tempt him to wring them, till forces cry of
 humiliation.”
 
“quietly as lamb!” i answered, aloud. “she drew sigh, and stretched
 herself, like child reviving, and sinking again to sleep; and five
 minutes after i felt one little pulse at her heart, and nothing more!”
 
“and—did she ever mention me?” asked, hesitating, as if dreaded
 the answer to his question would introduce details that could not
 bear to hear.
 
“her senses never returned: she recognised nobody from the time you
 left her,” i said. “she lies with sweet smile on her face; and her
 latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days. her life closed in a
 gentle dream—may she wake as kindly in the other world!”
 
“may she wake in torment!” cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping
 his foot, and groaning in sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
 “why, she’s liar to the end! where is she? not _there_—not in
 heaven—not perished—where? oh! you said you cared nothing for my
 sufferings! and i pray one prayer—i repeat it till my tongue
 stiffens—catherine earnshaw, may you not rest as long as i am living;
 you said i killed you—haunt me, then! the murdered _do_ haunt their
 murderers, i believe. i know that ghosts _have_ wandered on earth. be
 with always—take any form—drive mad! only _do_ not leave in
 this abyss, where i cannot find you! oh, god! it is unutterable! i
 _cannot_ live without my life! i _cannot_ live without my soul!”
 
dashed his head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up his eyes,
 howled, not like man, but like savage beast being goaded to death
 with knives and spears. i observed several splashes of blood about the
 bark of the tree, and his hand and forehead were both stained; probably
 the scene i witnessed was repetition of others acted during the
 night. it hardly moved my compassion—it appalled me: still, i felt
 reluctant to quit him so. but the moment recollected himself enough
 to notice watching, thundered command for to go, and i
 obeyed. was beyond my skill to quiet or console!
 
mrs. linton’s funeral was appointed to take place on the friday
 following her decease; and till then her coffin remained uncovered, and
 strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the great drawing-room.
 linton spent his days and nights there, sleepless guardian; and—a
 circumstance concealed from all but me—heathcliff spent his nights, at
 least, outside, equally stranger to repose. i held communication
 with him; still, i was conscious of his design to enter, if could;
 and on the tuesday, little after dark, when my master, from sheer
 fatigue, had been compelled to retire couple of hours, i went and
 opened one of the windows; moved by his perseverance to give him a
 chance of bestowing on the faded image of his idol one final adieu. he
 did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously and
 briefly; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slightest noise.
 indeed, i shouldn’t have discovered that had been there, except for
 the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse’s face, and for
 observing on the floor curl of light hair, fastened with silver
 thread; which, on examination, i ascertained to have been taken from a
 locket hung round catherine’s neck. heathcliff had opened the trinket
 and cast out its contents, replacing them by black lock of his own. i
 twisted the two, and enclosed them together.
 
mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his
 sister to the grave; sent excuse, but never came; so that,
 besides her husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and
 servants. isabella was not asked.
 
the place of catherine’s interment, to the surprise of the villagers,
 was neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the lintons, nor
 yet by the tombs of her own relations, outside. it was dug on green
 slope in corner of the kirkyard, where the wall is so low that heath
 and bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor; and peat-mould
 almost buries it. her husband lies in the same spot now; and they have
 each simple headstone above, and plain grey block at their feet, to
 mark the graves.
 



chapter xvii
 

that friday made the last of our fine days for month. in the evening
 the weather broke: the wind shifted from south to north-east, and
 brought rain first, and then sleet and snow. on the morrow one could
 hardly imagine that there had been three weeks of summer: the primroses
 and crocuses were hidden under wintry drifts; the larks were silent,
 the young leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened. and dreary,
 and chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over! my master kept his
 room; i took possession of the lonely parlour, converting it into a
 nursery: and there i was, sitting with the moaning doll of child laid
 on my knee; rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still
 driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the door opened,
 and some person entered, out of breath and laughing! my anger was
 greater than my astonishment for minute. i supposed it one of the
 maids, and i cried—“have done! how dare you show your giddiness here?
 what would mr. linton say if heard you?”
 
“excuse me!” answered familiar voice; “but i know edgar is in bed,
 and i cannot stop myself.”
 
with that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and holding her
 hand to her side.
 
“i have run the whole way from wuthering heights!” she continued, after
 pause; “except where i’ve flown. i couldn’t count the number of falls
 i’ve had. oh, i’m aching all over! don’t be alarmed! there shall be an
 explanation as soon as i can give it; only just have the goodness to
 step out and order the carriage to take on to gimmerton, and tell a
 servant to seek up few clothes in my wardrobe.”
 
the intruder was mrs. heathcliff. she certainly seemed in laughing
 predicament: her hair streamed on her shoulders, dripping with snow and
 water; she was dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore,
 befitting her age more than her position: low frock with short
 sleeves, and nothing on either head or neck. the frock was of light
 silk, and clung to her with wet, and her feet were protected merely by
 thin slippers; add to this deep cut under one ear, which only the
 cold prevented from bleeding profusely, white face scratched and
 bruised, and frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue; and
 you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when i had had
 leisure to examine her.
 
“my dear young lady,” i exclaimed, “i’ll stir nowhere, and hear
 nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes, and put
 on dry things; and certainly you shall not go to gimmerton to-night, so
 it is needless to order the carriage.”
 
“certainly i shall,” she said; “walking or riding: yet i’ve no
 objection to dress myself decently. and—ah, see how it flows down my
 neck now! the fire does make it smart.”
 
she insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she would let me
 touch her; and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get
 ready, and maid set to pack up some necessary attire, did i obtain
 her consent for binding the wound and helping to change her garments.
 
“now, ellen,” she said, when my task was finished and she was seated in
 an easy-chair on the hearth, with cup of tea before her, “you sit
 down opposite me, and put poor catherine’s baby away: i don’t like to
 see it! you mustn’t think i care little for catherine, because i
 behaved so foolishly on entering: i’ve cried, too, bitterly—yes, more
 than any one else has reason to cry. we parted unreconciled, you
 remember, and i sha’n’t forgive myself. but, for all that, i was not
 going to sympathise with him—the brute beast! oh, give the poker!
 this is the last thing of his i have about me:” she slipped the gold
 ring from her third finger, and threw it on the floor. “i’ll smash it!”
 she continued, striking it with childish spite, “and then i’ll burn
 it!” and she took and dropped the misused article among the coals.
 “there! shall buy another, if gets back again. he’d be capable
 of coming to seek me, to tease edgar. i dare not stay, lest that notion
 should possess his wicked head! and besides, edgar has not been kind,
 has he? and i won’t come suing for his assistance; nor will i bring him
 into more trouble. necessity compelled to seek shelter here; though,
 if i had not learned was out of the way, i’d have halted at the
 kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself, got you to bring what i wanted,
 and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed—of that
 incarnate goblin! ah, was in such fury! if had caught me! it’s
 pity earnshaw is not his match in strength: i wouldn’t have run till
 i’d seen him all but demolished, had hindley been able to do it!”
 
“well, don’t talk so fast, miss!” i interrupted; “you’ll disorder the
 handkerchief i have tied round your face, and make the cut bleed again.
 drink your tea, and take breath, and give over laughing: laughter is
 sadly out of place under this roof, and in your condition!”
 
“an undeniable truth,” she replied. “listen to that child! it maintains
 constant wail—send it out of my hearing for an hour; i sha’n’t stay
 any longer.”
 
i rang the bell, and committed it to servant’s care; and then i
 inquired what had urged her to escape from wuthering heights in such an
 unlikely plight, and where she meant to go, as she refused remaining
 with us.
 
“i ought, and i wished to remain,” answered she, “to cheer edgar and
 take care of the baby, for two things, and because the grange is my
 right home. but i tell you wouldn’t let me! do you think could
 bear to see grow fat and merry—could bear to think that we were
 tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning our comfort? now, i have the
 satisfaction of being sure that detests me, to the point of its
 annoying him seriously to have within ear-shot or eyesight: i
 notice, when i enter his presence, the muscles of his countenance are
 involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred; partly arising
 from his knowledge of the good causes i have to feel that sentiment for
 him, and partly from original aversion. it is strong enough to make me
 feel pretty certain that would not chase over england, supposing
 i contrived clear escape; and therefore i must get quite away. i’ve
 recovered from my first desire to be killed by him: i’d rather he’d
 kill himself! has extinguished my love effectually, and so i’m at my
 ease. i can recollect yet how i loved him; and can dimly imagine that i
 could still be loving him, if—no, no! even if had doted on me, the
 devilish nature would have revealed its existence somehow. catherine
 had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him so dearly, knowing him so
 well. monster! would that could be blotted out of creation, and out
 of my memory!”
 
“hush, hush! he’s human being,” i said. “be more charitable: there
 are worse men than is yet!”
 
“he’s not human being,” she retorted; “and has claim on my
 charity. i gave him my heart, and took and pinched it to death, and
 flung it back to me. people feel with their hearts, ellen: and since he
 has destroyed mine, i have not power to feel for him: and i would not,
 though groaned from this to his dying day, and wept tears of blood
 for catherine! no, indeed, indeed, i wouldn’t!” and here isabella began
 to cry; but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes, she
 recommenced. “you asked, what has driven to flight at last? i was
 compelled to attempt it, because i had succeeded in rousing his rage a
 pitch above his malignity. pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers
 requires more coolness than knocking on the head. was worked up to
 forget the fiendish prudence boasted of, and proceeded to murderous
 violence. i experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him: the
 sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so i fairly
 broke free; and if ever i come into his hands again is welcome to a
 signal revenge.
 
“yesterday, you know, mr. earnshaw should have been at the funeral. he
 kept himself sober for the purpose—tolerably sober: not going to bed
 mad at six o’clock and getting up drunk at twelve. consequently, he
 rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for dance;
 and instead, sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by
 tumblerfuls.
 
“heathcliff—i shudder to name him! has been stranger in the house
 from last sunday till to-day. whether the angels have fed him, or his
 kin beneath, i cannot tell; but has not eaten meal with us for
 nearly week. has just come home at dawn, and gone upstairs to his
 chamber; locking himself in—as if anybody dreamt of coveting his
 company! there has continued, praying like methodist: only the
 deity implored is senseless dust and ashes; and god, when addressed,
 was curiously confounded with his own black father! after concluding
 these precious orisons—and they lasted generally till grew hoarse
 and his voice was strangled in his throat—he would be off again; always
 straight down to the grange! i wonder edgar did not send for a
 constable, and give him into custody! for me, grieved as i was about
 catherine, it was impossible to avoid regarding this season of
 deliverance from degrading oppression as holiday.
 
“i recovered spirits sufficient to hear joseph’s eternal lectures
 without weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot
 of frightened thief than formerly. you wouldn’t think that i should
 cry at anything joseph could say; but and hareton are detestable
 companions. i’d rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than
 with ‘t’ little maister’ and his staunch supporter, that odious old
 man! when heathcliff is in, i’m often obliged to seek the kitchen and
 their society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when he
 is not, as was the case this week, i establish table and chair at one
 corner of the house fire, and never mind how mr. earnshaw may occupy
 himself; and does not interfere with my arrangements. is quieter
 now than used to be, if one provokes him: more sullen and
 depressed, and less furious. joseph affirms he’s sure he’s an altered
 man: that the lord has touched his heart, and is saved ‘so as by
 fire.’ i’m puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change: but it is
 not my business.
 
“yester-evening i sat in my nook reading some old books till late on
 towards twelve. it seemed so dismal to go upstairs, with the wild snow
 blowing outside, and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirkyard
 and the new-made grave! i dared hardly lift my eyes from the page
 before me, that melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place.
 hindley sat opposite, his head leant on his hand; perhaps meditating on
 the same subject. had ceased drinking at point below
 irrationality, and had neither stirred nor spoken during two or three
 hours. there was sound through the house but the moaning wind, which
 shook the windows every now and then, the faint crackling of the coals,
 and the click of my snuffers as i removed at intervals the long wick of
 the candle. hareton and joseph were probably fast asleep in bed. it was
 very, very sad: and while i read i sighed, for it seemed as if all joy
 had vanished from the world, never to be restored.
 
“the doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen
 latch: heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual;
 owing, i suppose, to the sudden storm. that entrance was fastened, and
 we heard him coming round to get in by the other. i rose with an
 irrepressible expression of what i felt on my lips, which induced my
 companion, who had been staring towards the door, to turn and look at
 me.
 
“‘i’ll keep him out five minutes,’ exclaimed. ‘you won’t object?’
 
“‘no, you may keep him out the whole night for me,’ i answered. ‘do!
 put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts.’
 
“earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front; then
 came and brought his chair to the other side of my table, leaning over
 it, and searching in my eyes for sympathy with the burning hate that
 gleamed from his: as both looked and felt like an assassin, he
 couldn’t exactly find that; but discovered enough to encourage him
 to speak.
 
“‘you, and i,’ said, ‘have each great debt to settle with the man
 out yonder! if we were neither of us cowards, we might combine to
 discharge it. are you as soft as your brother? are you willing to
 endure to the last, and not once attempt repayment?’
 
“‘i’m weary of enduring now,’ i replied; ‘and i’d be glad of a
 retaliation that wouldn’t recoil on myself; but treachery and violence
 are spears pointed at both ends; they wound those who resort to them
 worse than their enemies.’
 
“‘treachery and violence are just return for treachery and violence!’
 cried hindley. ‘mrs. heathcliff, i’ll ask you to do nothing; but sit
 still and be dumb. tell now, can you? i’m sure you would have as
 much pleasure as i in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend’s
 existence; he’ll be _your_ death unless you overreach him; and he’ll be
 _my_ ruin. damn the hellish villain! knocks at the door as if he
 were master here already! promise to hold your tongue, and before that
 clock strikes—it wants three minutes of one—you’re free woman!’
 
“he took the implements which i described to you in my letter from his
 breast, and would have turned down the candle. i snatched it away,
 however, and seized his arm.
 
“‘i’ll not hold my tongue!’ i said; ‘you mustn’t touch him. let the
 door remain shut, and be quiet!’
 
“‘no! i’ve formed my resolution, and by god i’ll execute it!’ cried the
 desperate being. ‘i’ll do you kindness in spite of yourself, and
 hareton justice! and you needn’t trouble your head to screen me;
 catherine is gone. nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though
 i cut my throat this minute—and it’s time to make an end!’
 
“i might as well have struggled with bear, or reasoned with a
 lunatic. the only resource left was to run to lattice and warn his
 intended victim of the fate which awaited him.
 
“‘you’d better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!’ i exclaimed, in
 rather triumphant tone. ‘mr. earnshaw has mind to shoot you, if you
 persist in endeavouring to enter.’
 
“‘you’d better open the door, you—’ answered, addressing by some
 elegant term that i don’t care to repeat.
 
“‘i shall not meddle in the matter,’ i retorted again. ‘come in and get
 shot, if you please. i’ve done my duty.’
 
“with that i shut the window and returned to my place by the fire;
 having too small stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any
 anxiety for the danger that menaced him. earnshaw swore passionately at
 me: affirming that i loved the villain yet; and calling all sorts of
 names for the base spirit i evinced. and i, in my secret heart (and
 conscience never reproached me), thought what blessing it would be
 for _him_ should heathcliff put him out of misery; and what blessing
 for _me_ should send heathcliff to his right abode! as i sat nursing
 these reflections, the casement behind was banged on to the floor by
 blow from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked
 blightingly through. the stanchions stood too close to suffer his
 shoulders to follow, and i smiled, exulting in my fancied security. his
 hair and clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth,
 revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.
 
“‘isabella, let in, or i’ll make you repent!’ ‘girned,’ as joseph
 calls it.
 
“‘i cannot commit murder,’ i replied. ‘mr. hindley stands sentinel with
 knife and loaded pistol.’
 
“‘let in by the kitchen door,’ said.
 
“‘hindley will be there before me,’ i answered: ‘and that’s poor love
 of yours that cannot bear shower of snow! we were left at peace in
 our beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment blast of
 winter returns, you must run for shelter! heathcliff, if i were you,
 i’d go stretch myself over her grave and die like faithful dog. the
 world is surely not worth living in now, is it? you had distinctly
 impressed on the idea that catherine was the whole joy of your life:
 i can’t imagine how you think of surviving her loss.’
 
“‘he’s there, is he?’ exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap. ‘if i
 can get my arm out i can hit him!’
 
“i’m afraid, ellen, you’ll set down as really wicked; but you don’t
 know all, so don’t judge. i wouldn’t have aided or abetted an attempt
 on even _his_ life for anything. wish that were dead, i must; and
 therefore i was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
 consequences of my taunting speech, when flung himself on earnshaw’s
 weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.
 
“the charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
 owner’s wrist. heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
 flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket. then
 took stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
 in. his adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
 of blood, that gushed from an artery or large vein. the ruffian
 kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the
 flags, holding with one hand, meantime, to prevent summoning
 joseph. exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing
 him completely; but getting out of breath, finally desisted, and
 dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle. there tore
 off the sleeve of earnshaw’s coat, and bound up the wound with brutal
 roughness; spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically
 as had kicked before. being at liberty, i lost time in seeking
 the old servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my
 hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as descended the steps two at
 once.
 
“‘what is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?’
 
“‘there’s this to do,’ thundered heathcliff, ‘that your master’s mad;
 and should last another month, i’ll have him to an asylum. and how
 the devil did you come to fasten out, you toothless hound? don’t
 stand muttering and mumbling there. come, i’m not going to nurse him.
 wash that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle—it is more
 than half brandy!’
 
“‘and so ye’ve been murthering on him?’ exclaimed joseph, lifting his
 hands and eyes in horror. ‘if iver i seed seeght loike this! may the
 lord—’
 
“heathcliff gave him push on to his knees in the middle of the blood,
 and flung towel to him; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, he
 joined his hands and began prayer, which excited my laughter from its
 odd phraseology. i was in the condition of mind to be shocked at
 nothing: in fact, i was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves
 at the foot of the gallows.
 
“‘oh, i forgot you,’ said the tyrant. ‘you shall do that. down with
 you. and you conspire with him against me, do you, viper? there, that
 is work fit for you!’
 
“he shook till my teeth rattled, and pitched beside joseph, who
 steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing would
 set off for the grange directly. mr. linton was magistrate, and
 though had fifty wives dead, should inquire into this. was so
 obstinate in his resolution, that heathcliff deemed it expedient to
 compel from my lips recapitulation of what had taken place; standing
 over me, heaving with malevolence, as i reluctantly delivered the
 account in answer to his questions. it required great deal of labour
 to satisfy the old man that heathcliff was not the aggressor;
 especially with my hardly-wrung replies. however, mr. earnshaw soon
 convinced him that was alive still; joseph hastened to administer a
 dose of spirits, and by their succour his master presently regained
 motion and consciousness. heathcliff, aware that his opponent was
 ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called him
 deliriously intoxicated; and said should not notice his atrocious
 conduct further, but advised him to get to bed. to my joy, left us,
 after giving this judicious counsel, and hindley stretched himself on
 the hearthstone. i departed to my own room, marvelling that i had
 escaped so easily.
 
“this morning, when i came down, about half an hour before noon, mr.
 earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; his evil genius, almost
 as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney. neither appeared
 inclined to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, i
 commenced alone. nothing hindered from eating heartily, and i
 experienced certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at
 intervals, i cast look towards my silent companions, and felt the
 comfort of quiet conscience within me. after i had done, i ventured
 on the unusual liberty of drawing near the fire, going round earnshaw’s
 seat, and kneeling in the corner beside him.
 
“heathcliff did not glance my way, and i gazed up, and contemplated his
 features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone. his
 forehead, that i once thought so manly, and that i now think so
 diabolical, was shaded with heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were
 nearly quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes
 were wet then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in
 an expression of unspeakable sadness. had it been another, i would have
 covered my face in the presence of such grief. in _his_ case, i was
 gratified; and, ignoble as it seems to insult fallen enemy, i
 couldn’t miss this chance of sticking in dart: his weakness was the
 only time when i could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.”
 
“fie, fie, miss!” i interrupted. “one might suppose you had never
 opened bible in your life. if god afflict your enemies, surely that
 ought to suffice you. it is both mean and presumptuous to add your
 torture to his!”
 
“in general i’ll allow that it would be, ellen,” she continued; “but
 what misery laid on heathcliff could content me, unless i have hand
 in it? i’d rather suffered _less_, if i might cause his sufferings
 and might _know_ that i was the cause. oh, i owe him so much. on
 only one condition can i hope to forgive him. it is, if i may take an
 eye for an eye, tooth for tooth; for every wrench of agony return a
 wrench: reduce him to my level. as was the first to injure, make him
 the first to implore pardon; and then—why then, ellen, i might show you
 some generosity. but it is utterly impossible i can ever be revenged,
 and therefore i cannot forgive him. hindley wanted some water, and i
 handed him glass, and asked him how was.
 
“‘not as ill as i wish,’ replied. ‘but leaving out my arm, every
 inch of is as sore as if i had been fighting with legion of imps!’
 
“‘yes, wonder,’ was my next remark. ‘catherine used to boast that
 she stood between you and bodily harm: she meant that certain persons
 would not hurt you for fear of offending her. it’s well people don’t
 _really_ rise from their grave, or, last night, she might have
 witnessed repulsive scene! are not you bruised, and cut over your
 chest and shoulders?’
 
“‘i can’t say,’ answered; ‘but what do you mean? did dare to
 strike when i was down?’
 
“‘he trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground,’ i
 whispered. ‘and his mouth watered to tear you with his teeth; because
 he’s only half man: not so much, and the rest fiend.’
 
“mr. earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our mutual foe;
 who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed insensible to anything around him:
 the longer stood, the plainer his reflections revealed their
 blackness through his features.
 
“‘oh, if god would but give strength to strangle him in my last
 agony, i’d go to hell with joy,’ groaned the impatient man, writhing to
 rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the
 struggle.
 
“‘nay, it’s enough that has murdered one of you,’ i observed aloud.
 ‘at the grange, every one knows your sister would have been living now
 had it not been for mr. heathcliff. after all, it is preferable to be
 hated than loved by him. when i recollect how happy we were—how happy
 catherine was before came—i’m fit to curse the day.’
 
“most likely, heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than
 the spirit of the person who said it. his attention was roused, i saw,
 for his eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and drew his breath
 in suffocating sighs. i stared full at him, and laughed scornfully. the
 clouded windows of hell flashed moment towards me; the fiend which
 usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that i did not
 fear to hazard another sound of derision.
 
“‘get up, and begone out of my sight,’ said the mourner.
 
“i guessed uttered those words, at least, though his voice was
 hardly intelligible.
 
“‘i beg your pardon,’ i replied. ‘but i loved catherine too; and her
 brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, i shall supply. now
 that she’s dead, i see her in hindley: hindley has exactly her eyes, if
 you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and
 her—’
 
“‘get up, wretched idiot, before i stamp you to death!’ cried,
 making movement that caused to make one also.
 
“‘but then,’ i continued, holding myself ready to flee, ‘if poor
 catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
 degrading title of mrs. heathcliff, she would soon have presented a
 similar picture! _she_ wouldn’t have borne your abominable behaviour
 quietly: her detestation and disgust must have found voice.’
 
“the back of the settle and earnshaw’s person interposed between and
 him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, snatched dinner-knife
 from the table and flung it at my head. it struck beneath my ear, and
 stopped the sentence i was uttering; but, pulling it out, i sprang to
 the door and delivered another; which i hope went little deeper than
 his missile. the last glimpse i caught of him was furious rush on his
 part, checked by the embrace of his host; and both fell locked together
 on the hearth. in my flight through the kitchen i bid joseph speed to
 his master; i knocked over hareton, who was hanging litter of puppies
 from chair-back in the doorway; and, blessed as soul escaped from
 purgatory, i bounded, leaped, and flew down the steep road; then,
 quitting its windings, shot direct across the moor, rolling over banks,
 and wading through marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
 beacon-light of the grange. and far rather would i be condemned to a
 perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night,
 abide beneath the roof of wuthering heights again.”
 
isabella ceased speaking, and took drink of tea; then she rose, and
 bidding put on her bonnet, and great shawl i had brought, and
 turning deaf ear to my entreaties for her to remain another hour, she
 stepped on to chair, kissed edgar’s and catherine’s portraits,
 bestowed similar salute on me, and descended to the carriage,
 accompanied by fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her
 mistress. she was driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but
 regular correspondence was established between her and my master when
 things were more settled. i believe her new abode was in the south,
 near london; there she had born few months subsequent to her
 escape. was christened linton, and, from the first, she reported him
 to be an ailing, peevish creature.
 
mr. heathcliff, meeting one day in the village, inquired where she
 lived. i refused to tell. remarked that it was not of any moment,
 only she must beware of coming to her brother: she should not be with
 him, if had to keep her himself. though i would give information,
 discovered, through some of the other servants, both her place of
 residence and the existence of the child. still, didn’t molest her:
 for which forbearance she might thank his aversion, i suppose. often
 asked about the infant, when saw me; and on hearing its name, smiled
 grimly, and observed: “they wish to hate it too, do they?”
 
“i don’t think they wish you to know anything about it,” i answered.
 
“but i’ll have it,” said, “when i want it. they may reckon on that!”
 
fortunately its mother died before the time arrived; some thirteen
 years after the decease of catherine, when linton was twelve, or a
 little more.
 
on the day succeeding isabella’s unexpected visit i had opportunity
 of speaking to my master: shunned conversation, and was fit for
 discussing nothing. when i could get him to listen, i saw it pleased
 him that his sister had left her husband; whom abhorred with an
 intensity which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to
 allow. so deep and sensitive was his aversion, that refrained from
 going anywhere where was likely to see or hear of heathcliff. grief,
 and that together, transformed him into complete hermit: threw up
 his office of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the
 village on all occasions, and spent life of entire seclusion within
 the limits of his park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on
 the moors, and visits to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or
 early morning before other wanderers were abroad. but was too good
 to be thoroughly unhappy long. _he_ didn’t pray for catherine’s soul to
 haunt him. time brought resignation, and melancholy sweeter than
 common joy. recalled her memory with ardent, tender love, and
 hopeful aspiring to the better world; where doubted not she was
 gone.
 
and had earthly consolation and affections also. for few days, i
 said, seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that
 coldness melted as fast as snow in april, and ere the tiny thing could
 stammer word or totter step it wielded despot’s sceptre in his
 heart. it was named catherine; but never called it the name in full,
 as had never called the first catherine short: probably because
 heathcliff had habit of doing so. the little one was always cathy: it
 formed to him distinction from the mother, and yet connection with
 her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
 from its being his own.
 
i used to draw comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and
 perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so
 opposite in similar circumstances. they had both been fond husbands,
 and were both attached to their children; and i could not see how they
 shouldn’t both have taken the same road, for good or evil. but, i
 thought in my mind, hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has
 shown himself sadly the worse and the weaker man. when his ship struck,
 the captain abandoned his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save
 her, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving hope for their luckless
 vessel. linton, on the contrary, displayed the true courage of loyal
 and faithful soul: trusted god; and god comforted him. one hoped,
 and the other despaired: they chose their own lots, and were
 righteously doomed to endure them. but you’ll not want to hear my
 moralising, mr. lockwood; you’ll judge, as well as i can, all these
 things: at least, you’ll think you will, and that’s the same. the end
 of earnshaw was what might have been expected; it followed fast on his
 sister’s: there were scarcely six months between them. we, at the
 grange, never got very succinct account of his state preceding it;
 all that i did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the
 preparations for the funeral. mr. kenneth came to announce the event to
 my master.
 
“well, nelly,” said he, riding into the yard one morning, too early not
 to alarm with an instant presentiment of bad news, “it’s yours and
 my turn to go into mourning at present. who’s given us the slip now, do
 you think?”
 
“who?” i asked in flurry.
 
“why, guess!” returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a
 hook by the door. “and nip up the corner of your apron: i’m certain
 you’ll need it.”
 
“not mr. heathcliff, surely?” i exclaimed.
 
“what! would you have tears for him?” said the doctor. “no,
 heathcliff’s tough young fellow: looks blooming to-day. i’ve just
 seen him. he’s rapidly regaining flesh since lost his better half.”
 
“who is it, then, mr. kenneth?” i repeated impatiently.
 
“hindley earnshaw! your old friend hindley,” replied, “and my wicked
 gossip: though he’s been too wild for this long while. there! i said
 we should draw water. but cheer up! died true to his character:
 drunk as lord. poor lad! i’m sorry, too. one can’t help missing an
 old companion: though had the worst tricks with him that ever man
 imagined, and has done many rascally turn. he’s barely
 twenty-seven, it seems; that’s your own age: who would have thought you
 were born in one year?”
 
i confess this blow was greater to than the shock of mrs. linton’s
 death: ancient associations lingered round my heart; i sat down in the
 porch and wept as for blood relation, desiring mr. kenneth to get
 another servant to introduce him to the master. i could not hinder
 myself from pondering on the question—“had had fair play?” whatever
 i did, that idea would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious
 that i resolved on requesting leave to go to wuthering heights, and
 assist in the last duties to the dead. mr. linton was extremely
 reluctant to consent, but i pleaded eloquently for the friendless
 condition in which lay; and i said my old master and foster-brother
 had claim on my services as strong as his own. besides, i reminded
 him that the child hareton was his wife’s nephew, and, in the absence
 of nearer kin, ought to act as its guardian; and ought to and
 must inquire how the property was left, and look over the concerns of
 his brother-in-law. was unfit for attending to such matters then,
 but bid speak to his lawyer; and at length permitted to go.
 his lawyer had been earnshaw’s also: i called at the village, and asked
 him to accompany me. shook his head, and advised that heathcliff
 should be let alone; affirming, if the truth were known, hareton would
 be found little else than beggar.
 
“his father died in debt,” said; “the whole property is mortgaged,
 and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity
 of creating some interest in the creditor’s heart, that may be
 inclined to deal leniently towards him.”
 
when i reached the heights, i explained that i had come to see
 everything carried on decently; and joseph, who appeared in sufficient
 distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence. mr. heathcliff said he
 did not perceive that i was wanted; but i might stay and order the
 arrangements for the funeral, if i chose.
 
“correctly,” remarked, “that fool’s body should be buried at the
 cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. i happened to leave him ten
 minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval fastened the two
 doors of the house against me, and has spent the night in drinking
 himself to death deliberately! we broke in this morning, for we heard
 him snorting like horse; and there was, laid over the settle:
 flaying and scalping would not have wakened him. i sent for kenneth,
 and came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: was
 both dead and cold, and stark; and so you’ll allow it was useless
 making more stir about him!”
 
the old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:
 
“i’d rayther he’d goan hisseln for t’ doctor! i sud ha’ taen tent o’ t’
 maister better nor him—and warn’t deead when i left, naught o’ t’
 soart!”
 
i insisted on the funeral being respectable. mr. heathcliff said i
 might have my own way there too: only, desired to remember that
 the money for the whole affair came out of his pocket. maintained a
 hard, careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if
 anything, it expressed flinty gratification at piece of difficult
 work successfully executed. i observed once, indeed, something like
 exultation in his aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the
 coffin from the house. had the hypocrisy to represent mourner: and
 previous to following with hareton, lifted the unfortunate child on
 to the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, “now, my bonny lad, you
 are _mine_! and we’ll see if one tree won’t grow as crooked as another,
 with the same wind to twist it!” the unsuspecting thing was pleased at
 this speech: played with heathcliff’s whiskers, and stroked his
 cheek; but i divined its meaning, and observed tartly, “that boy must
 go back with to thrushcross grange, sir. there is nothing in the
 world less yours than is!”
 
“does linton say so?” demanded.
 
“of course—he has ordered to take him,” i replied.
 
“well,” said the scoundrel, “we’ll not argue the subject now: but i
 have fancy to try my hand at rearing young one; so intimate to your
 master that i must supply the place of this with my own, if attempt
 to remove it. i don’t engage to let hareton go undisputed; but i’ll be
 pretty sure to make the other come! remember to tell him.”
 
this hint was enough to bind our hands. i repeated its substance on my
 return; and edgar linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke
 more of interfering. i’m not aware that could have done it to any
 purpose, had been ever so willing.
 
the guest was now the master of wuthering heights: held firm
 possession, and proved to the attorney—who, in his turn, proved it to
 mr. linton—that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land owned for
 cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, heathcliff, was the
 mortgagee. in that manner hareton, who should now be the first
 gentleman in the neighbourhood, was reduced to state of complete
 dependence on his father’s inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house
 as servant, deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right
 himself, because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that has
 been wronged.
 



chapter xviii
 

the twelve years, continued mrs. dean, following that dismal period
 were the happiest of my life: my greatest troubles in their passage
 rose from our little lady’s trifling illnesses, which she had to
 experience in common with all children, rich and poor. for the rest,
 after the first six months, she grew like larch, and could walk and
 talk too, in her own way, before the heath blossomed second time over
 mrs. linton’s dust. she was the most winning thing that ever brought
 sunshine into desolate house: real beauty in face, with the
 earnshaws’ handsome dark eyes, but the lintons’ fair skin and small
 features, and yellow curling hair. her spirit was high, though not
 rough, and qualified by heart sensitive and lively to excess in its
 affections. that capacity for intense attachments reminded of her
 mother: still she did not resemble her: for she could be soft and mild
 as dove, and she had gentle voice and pensive expression: her anger
 was never furious; her love never fierce: it was deep and tender.
 however, it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil her gifts. a
 propensity to be saucy was one; and perverse will, that indulged
 children invariably acquire, whether they be good tempered or cross. if
 servant chanced to vex her, it was always—“i shall tell papa!” and if
 reproved her, even by look, you would have thought it a
 heart-breaking business: i don’t believe ever did speak harsh word
 to her. took her education entirely on himself, and made it an
 amusement. fortunately, curiosity and quick intellect made her an apt
 scholar: she learned rapidly and eagerly, and did honour to his
 teaching.
 
till she reached the age of thirteen she had not once been beyond the
 range of the park by herself. mr. linton would take her with him mile
 or so outside, on rare occasions; but trusted her to one else.
 gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears; the chapel, the only
 building she had approached or entered, except her own home. wuthering
 heights and mr. heathcliff did not exist for her: she was perfect
 recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented. sometimes, indeed, while
 surveying the country from her nursery window, she would observe—
 
“ellen, how long will it be before i can walk to the top of those
 hills? i wonder what lies on the other side—is it the sea?”
 
“no, miss cathy,” i would answer; “it is hills again, just like these.”
 
“and what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them?” she
 once asked.
 
the abrupt descent of penistone crags particularly attracted her
 notice; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the topmost
 heights, and the whole extent of landscape besides lay in shadow. i
 explained that they were bare masses of stone, with hardly enough earth
 in their clefts to nourish stunted tree.
 
“and why are they bright so long after it is evening here?” she
 pursued.
 
“because they are great deal higher up than we are,” replied i; “you
 could not climb them, they are too high and steep. in winter the frost
 is always there before it comes to us; and deep into summer i have
 found snow under that black hollow on the north-east side!”
 
“oh, you have been on them!” she cried gleefully. “then i can go, too,
 when i am woman. has papa been, ellen?”
 
“papa would tell you, miss,” i answered, hastily, “that they are not
 worth the trouble of visiting. the moors, where you ramble with him,
 are much nicer; and thrushcross park is the finest place in the world.”
 
“but i know the park, and i don’t know those,” she murmured to herself.
 “and i should delight to look round from the brow of that tallest
 point: my little pony minny shall take some time.”
 
one of the maids mentioning the fairy cave, quite turned her head with
 desire to fulfil this project: she teased mr. linton about it; and he
 promised she should have the journey when she got older. but miss
 catherine measured her age by months, and, “now, am i old enough to go
 to penistone crags?” was the constant question in her mouth. the road
 thither wound close by wuthering heights. edgar had not the heart to
 pass it; so she received as constantly the answer, “not yet, love: not
 yet.”
 
i said mrs. heathcliff lived above dozen years after quitting her
 husband. her family were of delicate constitution: she and edgar both
 lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.
 what her last illness was, i am not certain: i conjecture, they died of
 the same thing, kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but
 incurable, and rapidly consuming life towards the close. she wrote to
 inform her brother of the probable conclusion of four-months’
 indisposition under which she had suffered, and entreated him to come
 to her, if possible; for she had much to settle, and she wished to bid
 him adieu, and deliver linton safely into his hands. her hope was that
 linton might be left with him, as had been with her: his father, she
 would fain convince herself, had desire to assume the burden of his
 maintenance or education. my master hesitated not moment in complying
 with her request: reluctant as was to leave home at ordinary calls,
 flew to answer this; commending catherine to my peculiar vigilance,
 in his absence, with reiterated orders that she must not wander out of
 the park, even under my escort: did not calculate on her going
 unaccompanied.
 
was away three weeks. the first day or two my charge sat in corner
 of the library, too sad for either reading or playing: in that quiet
 state she caused little trouble; but it was succeeded by an interval
 of impatient, fretful weariness; and being too busy, and too old then,
 to run up and down amusing her, i hit on method by which she might
 entertain herself. i used to send her on her travels round the
 grounds—now on foot, and now on pony; indulging her with patient
 audience of all her real and imaginary adventures when she returned.
 
the summer shone in full prime; and she took such taste for this
 solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out from breakfast
 till tea; and then the evenings were spent in recounting her fanciful
 tales. i did not fear her breaking bounds; because the gates were
 generally locked, and i thought she would scarcely venture forth alone,
 if they had stood wide open. unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced.
 catherine came to me, one morning, at eight o’clock, and said she was
 that day an arabian merchant, going to cross the desert with his
 caravan; and i must give her plenty of provision for herself and
 beasts: horse, and three camels, personated by large hound and a
 couple of pointers. i got together good store of dainties, and slung
 them in basket on one side of the saddle; and she sprang up as gay as
 fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the july
 sun, and trotted off with merry laugh, mocking my cautious counsel to
 avoid galloping, and come back early. the naughty thing never made her
 appearance at tea. one traveller, the hound, being an old dog and fond
 of its ease, returned; but neither cathy, nor the pony, nor the two
 pointers were visible in any direction: i despatched emissaries down
 this path, and that path, and at last went wandering in search of her
 myself. there was labourer working at fence round plantation, on
 the borders of the grounds. i inquired of him if had seen our young
 lady.
 
“i saw her at morn,” replied: “she would have to cut her hazel
 switch, and then she leapt her galloway over the hedge yonder, where it
 is lowest, and galloped out of sight.”
 
you may guess how i felt at hearing this news. it struck directly
 she must have started for penistone crags. “what will become of her?” i
 ejaculated, pushing through gap which the man was repairing, and
 making straight to the high-road. i walked as if for wager, mile
 after mile, till turn brought in view of the heights; but no
 catherine could i detect, far or near. the crags lie about mile and a
 half beyond mr. heathcliff’s place, and that is four from the grange,
 so i began to fear night would fall ere i could reach them. “and what
 if she should have slipped in clambering among them,” i reflected, “and
 been killed, or broken some of her bones?” my suspense was truly
 painful; and, at first, it gave delightful relief to observe, in
 hurrying by the farmhouse, charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying
 under window, with swelled head and bleeding ear. i opened the wicket
 and ran to the door, knocking vehemently for admittance. woman whom i
 knew, and who formerly lived at gimmerton, answered: she had been
 servant there since the death of mr. earnshaw.
 
“ah,” said she, “you are come a-seeking your little mistress! don’t be
 frightened. she’s here safe: but i’m glad it isn’t the master.”
 
“he is not at home then, is he?” i panted, quite breathless with quick
 walking and alarm.
 
“no, no,” she replied: “both and joseph are off, and i think they
 won’t return this hour or more. step in and rest you bit.”
 
i entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth, rocking
 herself in little chair that had been her mother’s when child. her
 hat was hung against the wall, and she seemed perfectly at home,
 laughing and chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to hareton—now
 great, strong lad of eighteen—who stared at her with considerable
 curiosity and astonishment: comprehending precious little of the fluent
 succession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased
 pouring forth.
 
“very well, miss!” i exclaimed, concealing my joy under an angry
 countenance. “this is your last ride, till papa comes back. i’ll not
 trust you over the threshold again, you naughty, naughty girl!”
 
“aha, ellen!” she cried, gaily, jumping up and running to my side. “i
 shall have pretty story to tell to-night; and so you’ve found out.
 have you ever been here in your life before?”
 
“put that hat on, and home at once,” said i. “i’m dreadfully grieved at
 you, miss cathy: you’ve done extremely wrong! it’s use pouting and
 crying: that won’t repay the trouble i’ve had, scouring the country
 after you. to think how mr. linton charged to keep you in; and you
 stealing off so! it shows you are cunning little fox, and nobody will
 put faith in you any more.”
 
“what have i done?” sobbed she, instantly checked. “papa charged me
 nothing: he’ll not scold me, ellen—he’s never cross, like you!”
 
“come, come!” i repeated. “i’ll tie the riband. now, let us have no
 petulance. oh, for shame! you thirteen years old, and such baby!”
 
this exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat from her head, and
 retreating to the chimney out of my reach.
 
“nay,” said the servant, “don’t be hard on the bonny lass, mrs. dean.
 we made her stop: she’d fain have ridden forwards, afeard you should be
 uneasy. hareton offered to go with her, and i thought should: it’s a
 wild road over the hills.”
 
hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hands in his pockets,
 too awkward to speak; though looked as if did not relish my
 intrusion.
 
“how long am i to wait?” i continued, disregarding the woman’s
 interference. “it will be dark in ten minutes. where is the pony, miss
 cathy? and where is phoenix? i shall leave you, unless you be quick; so
 please yourself.”
 
“the pony is in the yard,” she replied, “and phoenix is shut in there.
 he’s bitten—and so is charlie. i was going to tell you all about it;
 but you are in bad temper, and don’t deserve to hear.”
 
i picked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it; but perceiving
 that the people of the house took her part, she commenced capering
 round the room; and on my giving chase, ran like mouse over and under
 and behind the furniture, rendering it ridiculous for to pursue.
 hareton and the woman laughed, and she joined them, and waxed more
 impertinent still; till i cried, in great irritation,—“well, miss
 cathy, if you were aware whose house this is you’d be glad enough to
 get out.”
 
“it’s _your_ father’s, isn’t it?” said she, turning to hareton.
 
“nay,” replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.
 
could not stand steady gaze from her eyes, though they were just
 his own.
 
“whose then—your master’s?” she asked.
 
coloured deeper, with different feeling, muttered an oath, and
 turned away.
 
“who is his master?” continued the tiresome girl, appealing to me. “he
 talked about ‘our house,’ and ‘our folk.’ i thought had been the
 owner’s son. and never said miss: should have done, shouldn’t he,
 if he’s servant?”
 
hareton grew black as thunder-cloud at this childish speech. i
 silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded in equipping her
 for departure.
 
“now, get my horse,” she said, addressing her unknown kinsman as she
 would one of the stable-boys at the grange. “and you may come with me.
 i want to see where the goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear
 about the _fairishes_, as you call them: but make haste! what’s the
 matter? get my horse, i say.”
 
“i’ll see thee damned before i be _thy_ servant!” growled the lad.
 
“you’ll see _what?_” asked catherine in surprise.
 
“damned—thou saucy witch!” replied.
 
“there, miss cathy! you see you have got into pretty company,” i
 interposed. “nice words to be used to young lady! pray don’t begin to
 dispute with him. come, let us seek for minny ourselves, and begone.”
 
“but, ellen,” cried she, staring fixed in astonishment, “how dare he
 speak so to me? mustn’t be made to do as i ask him? you wicked
 creature, i shall tell papa what you said.—now, then!”
 
hareton did not appear to feel this threat; so the tears sprang into
 her eyes with indignation. “you bring the pony,” she exclaimed, turning
 to the woman, “and let my dog free this moment!”
 
“softly, miss,” answered the addressed. “you’ll lose nothing by being
 civil. though mr. hareton, there, be not the master’s son, he’s your
 cousin: and i was never hired to serve you.”
 
“_he_ my cousin!” cried cathy, with scornful laugh.
 
“yes, indeed,” responded her reprover.
 
“oh, ellen! don’t let them say such things,” she pursued in great
 trouble. “papa is gone to fetch my cousin from london: my cousin is a
 gentleman’s son. that my—” she stopped, and wept outright; upset at the
 bare notion of relationship with such clown.
 
“hush, hush!” i whispered; “people can have many cousins and of all
 sorts, miss cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they
 needn’t keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.”
 
“he’s not—he’s not my cousin, ellen!” she went on, gathering fresh
 grief from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms for refuge
 from the idea.
 
i was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual revelations;
 having doubt of linton’s approaching arrival, communicated by the
 former, being reported to mr. heathcliff; and feeling as confident that
 catherine’s first thought on her father’s return would be to seek an
 explanation of the latter’s assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred.
 hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for servant,
 seemed moved by her distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the
 door, took, to propitiate her, fine crooked-legged terrier whelp
 from the kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist! for he
 meant nought. pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed him with a
 glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.
 
i could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor
 fellow; who was well-made, athletic youth, good-looking in features,
 and stout and healthy, but attired in garments befitting his daily
 occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after
 rabbits and game. still, i thought i could detect in his physiognomy a
 mind owning better qualities than his father ever possessed. good
 things lost amid wilderness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far
 over-topped their neglected growth; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a
 wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and
 favourable circumstances. mr. heathcliff, i believe, had not treated
 him physically ill; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no
 temptation to that course of oppression: had none of the timid
 susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment, in
 heathcliff’s judgment. appeared to have bent his malevolence on
 making him brute: was never taught to read or write; never rebuked
 for any bad habit which did not annoy his keeper; never led single
 step towards virtue, or guarded by single precept against vice. and
 from what i heard, joseph contributed much to his deterioration, by a
 narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to flatter and pet him, as
 boy, because was the head of the old family. and as had been in
 the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and heathcliff, when children,
 of putting the master past his patience, and compelling him to seek
 solace in drink by what termed their “offald ways,” so at present he
 laid the whole burden of hareton’s faults on the shoulders of the
 usurper of his property. if the lad swore, wouldn’t correct him: nor
 however culpably behaved. it gave joseph satisfaction, apparently,
 to watch him go the worst lengths: allowed that the lad was ruined:
 that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but then reflected that
 heathcliff must answer for it. hareton’s blood would be required at his
 hands; and there lay immense consolation in that thought. joseph had
 instilled into him pride of name, and of his lineage; would, had
 dared, have fostered hate between him and the present owner of the
 heights: but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition; and he
 confined his feelings regarding him to muttered innuendoes and private
 comminations. i don’t pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode
 of living customary in those days at wuthering heights: i only speak
 from hearsay; for i saw little. the villagers affirmed mr. heathcliff
 was _near_, and cruel hard landlord to his tenants; but the house,
 inside, had regained its ancient aspect of comfort under female
 management, and the scenes of riot common in hindley’s time were not
 now enacted within its walls. the master was too gloomy to seek
 companionship with any people, good or bad; and is yet.
 
this, however, is not making progress with my story. miss cathy
 rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded her own dogs,
 charlie and phoenix. they came limping and hanging their heads; and we
 set out for home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us. i could not
 wring from my little lady how she had spent the day; except that, as i
 supposed, the goal of her pilgrimage was penistone crags; and she
 arrived without adventure to the gate of the farmhouse, when hareton
 happened to issue forth, attended by some canine followers, who
 attacked her train. they had smart battle, before their owners could
 separate them: that formed an introduction. catherine told hareton who
 she was, and where she was going; and asked him to show her the way:
 finally, beguiling him to accompany her. opened the mysteries of the
 fairy cave, and twenty other queer places. but, being in disgrace, i
 was not favoured with description of the interesting objects she saw.
 i could gather, however, that her guide had been favourite till she
 hurt his feelings by addressing him as servant; and heathcliff’s
 housekeeper hurt hers by calling him her cousin. then the language he
 had held to her rankled in her heart; she who was always “love,” and
 “darling,” and “queen,” and “angel,” with everybody at the grange, to
 be insulted so shockingly by stranger! she did not comprehend it; and
 hard work i had to obtain promise that she would not lay the
 grievance before her father. i explained how objected to the whole
 household at the heights, and how sorry would be to find she had
 been there; but i insisted most on the fact, that if she revealed my
 negligence of his orders, would perhaps be so angry that i should
 have to leave; and cathy couldn’t bear that prospect: she pledged her
 word, and kept it for my sake. after all, she was sweet little girl.
 



chapter xix
 

letter, edged with black, announced the day of my master’s return.
 isabella was dead; and wrote to bid get mourning for his
 daughter, and arrange room, and other accommodations, for his
 youthful nephew. catherine ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming
 her father back; and indulged most sanguine anticipations of the
 innumerable excellencies of her “real” cousin. the evening of their
 expected arrival came. since early morning she had been busy ordering
 her own small affairs; and now attired in her new black frock—poor
 thing! her aunt’s death impressed her with definite sorrow—she
 obliged me, by constant worrying, to walk with her down through the
 grounds to meet them.
 
“linton is just six months younger than i am,” she chattered, as we
 strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf, under
 shadow of the trees. “how delightful it will be to have him for a
 playfellow! aunt isabella sent papa beautiful lock of his hair; it
 was lighter than mine—more flaxen, and quite as fine. i have it
 carefully preserved in little glass box; and i’ve often thought what
 pleasure it would be to see its owner. oh! i am happy—and papa, dear,
 dear papa! come, ellen, let us run! come, run.”
 
she ran, and returned and ran again, many times before my sober
 footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on the grassy
 bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently; but that was
 impossible: she couldn’t be still minute.
 
“how long they are!” she exclaimed. “ah, i see some dust on the
 road—they are coming! no! when will they be here? may we not go a
 little way—half mile, ellen, only just half mile? do say yes, to
 that clump of birches at the turn!”
 
i refused staunchly. at length her suspense was ended: the travelling
 carriage rolled in sight. miss cathy shrieked and stretched out her
 arms as soon as she caught her father’s face looking from the window.
 descended, nearly as eager as herself; and considerable interval
 elapsed ere they had thought to spare for any but themselves. while
 they exchanged caresses i took peep in to see after linton. was
 asleep in corner, wrapped in warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had
 been winter. pale, delicate, effeminate boy, who might have been
 taken for my master’s younger brother, so strong was the resemblance:
 but there was sickly peevishness in his aspect that edgar linton
 never had. the latter saw looking; and having shaken hands, advised
 to close the door, and leave him undisturbed; for the journey had
 fatigued him. cathy would fain have taken one glance, but her father
 told her to come, and they walked together up the park, while i
 hastened before to prepare the servants.
 
“now, darling,” said mr. linton, addressing his daughter, as they
 halted at the bottom of the front steps: “your cousin is not so strong
 or so merry as you are, and has lost his mother, remember, very
 short time since; therefore, don’t expect him to play and run about
 with you directly. and don’t harass him much by talking: let him be
 quiet this evening, at least, will you?”
 
“yes, yes, papa,” answered catherine: “but i do want to see him; and he
 hasn’t once looked out.”
 
the carriage stopped; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted to the
 ground by his uncle.
 
“this is your cousin cathy, linton,” said, putting their little
 hands together. “she’s fond of you already; and mind you don’t grieve
 her by crying to-night. try to be cheerful now; the travelling is at an
 end, and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you
 please.”
 
“let go to bed, then,” answered the boy, shrinking from catherine’s
 salute; and put his fingers to his eyes to remove incipient tears.
 
“come, come, there’s good child,” i whispered, leading him in.
 “you’ll make her weep too—see how sorry she is for you!”
 
i do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his cousin put on as
 sad countenance as himself, and returned to her father. all three
 entered, and mounted to the library, where tea was laid ready. i
 proceeded to remove linton’s cap and mantle, and placed him on chair
 by the table; but was sooner seated than began to cry afresh.
 my master inquired what was the matter.
 
“i can’t sit on chair,” sobbed the boy.
 
“go to the sofa, then, and ellen shall bring you some tea,” answered
 his uncle patiently.
 
had been greatly tried, during the journey, i felt convinced, by his
 fretful ailing charge. linton slowly trailed himself off, and lay down.
 cathy carried footstool and her cup to his side. at first she sat
 silent; but that could not last: she had resolved to make pet of her
 little cousin, as she would have him to be; and she commenced stroking
 his curls, and kissing his cheek, and offering him tea in her saucer,
 like baby. this pleased him, for was not much better: dried his
 eyes, and lightened into faint smile.
 
“oh, he’ll do very well,” said the master to me, after watching them a
 minute. “very well, if we can keep him, ellen. the company of child
 of his own age will instil new spirit into him soon, and by wishing for
 strength he’ll gain it.”
 
“ay, if we can keep him!” i mused to myself; and sore misgivings came
 over that there was slight hope of that. and then, i thought, how
 ever will that weakling live at wuthering heights? between his father
 and hareton, what playmates and instructors they’ll be. our doubts were
 presently decided—even earlier than i expected. i had just taken the
 children upstairs, after tea was finished, and seen linton asleep—he
 would not suffer to leave him till that was the case—i had come
 down, and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting bedroom
 candle for mr. edgar, when maid stepped out of the kitchen and
 informed that mr. heathcliff’s servant joseph was at the door, and
 wished to speak with the master.
 
“i shall ask him what wants first,” i said, in considerable
 trepidation. “a very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
 instant they have returned from long journey. i don’t think the
 master can see him.”
 
joseph had advanced through the kitchen as i uttered these words, and
 now presented himself in the hall. was donned in his sunday
 garments, with his most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding
 his hat in one hand, and his stick in the other, proceeded to clean
 his shoes on the mat.
 
“good-evening, joseph,” i said, coldly. “what business brings you here
 to-night?”
 
“it’s maister linton i mun spake to,” answered, waving me
 disdainfully aside.
 
“mr. linton is going to bed; unless you have something particular to
 say, i’m sure won’t hear it now,” i continued. “you had better sit
 down in there, and entrust your message to me.”
 
“which is his rahm?” pursued the fellow, surveying the range of closed
 doors.
 
i perceived was bent on refusing my mediation, so very reluctantly i
 went up to the library, and announced the unseasonable visitor,
 advising that should be dismissed till next day. mr. linton had no
 time to empower to do so, for joseph mounted close at my heels, and,
 pushing into the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the
 table, with his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began
 in an elevated tone, as if anticipating opposition—
 
“hathecliff has sent for his lad, and i munn’t goa back ’bout him.”
 
edgar linton was silent minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow
 overcast his features: would have pitied the child on his own
 account; but, recalling isabella’s hopes and fears, and anxious wishes
 for her son, and her commendations of him to his care, grieved
 bitterly at the prospect of yielding him up, and searched in his heart
 how it might be avoided. plan offered itself: the very exhibition of
 any desire to keep him would have rendered the claimant more
 peremptory: there was nothing left but to resign him. however, was
 not going to rouse him from his sleep.
 
“tell mr. heathcliff,” answered calmly, “that his shall come to
 wuthering heights to-morrow. is in bed, and too tired to go the
 distance now. you may also tell him that the mother of linton desired
 him to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his health is
 very precarious.”
 
“noa!” said joseph, giving thud with his prop on the floor, and
 assuming an authoritative air. “noa! that means naught. hathecliff maks
 noa ’count o’ t’ mother, nor ye norther; but he’ll hev his lad; und i
 mun tak’ him—soa now ye knaw!”
 
“you shall not to-night!” answered linton decisively. “walk down stairs
 at once, and repeat to your master what i have said. ellen, show him
 down. go—”
 
and, aiding the indignant elder with lift by the arm, rid the room
 of him and closed the door.
 
“varrah weell!” shouted joseph, as slowly drew off. “to-morn, he’s
 come hisseln, and thrust _him_ out, if ye darr!”
 



chapter xx
 

to obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, mr. linton
 commissioned to take the boy home early, on catherine’s pony; and,
 said he—“as we shall now have influence over his destiny, good or
 bad, you must say nothing of where is gone to my daughter: she
 cannot associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain
 in ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be restless, and anxious
 to visit the heights. merely tell her his father sent for him suddenly,
 and has been obliged to leave us.”
 
linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o’clock,
 and astonished to be informed that must prepare for further
 travelling; but i softened off the matter by stating that was going
 to spend some time with his father, mr. heathcliff, who wished to see
 him so much, did not like to defer the pleasure till should
 recover from his late journey.
 
“my father!” cried, in strange perplexity. “mamma never told i
 had father. where does live? i’d rather stay with uncle.”
 
“he lives little distance from the grange,” i replied; “just beyond
 those hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when you get
 hearty. and you should be glad to go home, and to see him. you must try
 to love him, as you did your mother, and then will love you.”
 
“but why have i not heard of him before?” asked linton. “why didn’t
 mamma and live together, as other people do?”
 
“he had business to keep him in the north,” i answered, “and your
 mother’s health required her to reside in the south.”
 
“and why didn’t mamma speak to about him?” persevered the child.
 “she often talked of uncle, and i learnt to love him long ago. how am i
 to love papa? i don’t know him.”
 
“oh, all children love their parents,” i said. “your mother, perhaps,
 thought you would want to be with him if she mentioned him often to
 you. let us make haste. an early ride on such beautiful morning is
 much preferable to an hour’s more sleep.”
 
“is _she_ to go with us,” demanded, “the little girl i saw
 yesterday?”
 
“not now,” replied i.
 
“is uncle?” continued.
 
“no, i shall be your companion there,” i said.
 
linton sank back on his pillow and fell into brown study.
 
“i won’t go without uncle,” cried at length: “i can’t tell where you
 mean to take me.”
 
i attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing reluctance to
 meet his father; still obstinately resisted any progress towards
 dressing, and i had to call for my master’s assistance in coaxing him
 out of bed. the poor thing was finally got off, with several delusive
 assurances that his absence should be short: that mr. edgar and cathy
 would visit him, and other promises, equally ill-founded, which i
 invented and reiterated at intervals throughout the way. the pure
 heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of
 minny, relieved his despondency after while. began to put
 questions concerning his new home, and its inhabitants, with greater
 interest and liveliness.
 
“is wuthering heights as pleasant place as thrushcross grange?” he
 inquired, turning to take last glance into the valley, whence light
 mist mounted and formed fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.
 
“it is not so buried in trees,” i replied, “and it is not quite so
 large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air
 is healthier for you—fresher and drier. you will, perhaps, think the
 building old and dark at first; though it is respectable house: the
 next best in the neighbourhood. and you will have such nice rambles on
 the moors. hareton earnshaw—that is, miss cathy’s other cousin, and so
 yours in manner—will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
 bring book in fine weather, and make green hollow your study; and,
 now and then, your uncle may join you in walk: does, frequently,
 walk out on the hills.”
 
“and what is my father like?” asked. “is as young and handsome as
 uncle?”
 
“he’s as young,” said i; “but has black hair and eyes, and looks
 sterner; and is taller and bigger altogether. he’ll not seem to you
 so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it is not his way: still,
 mind you, be frank and cordial with him; and naturally he’ll be fonder
 of you than any uncle, for you are his own.”
 
“black hair and eyes!” mused linton. “i can’t fancy him. then i am not
 like him, am i?”
 
“not much,” i answered: not morsel, i thought, surveying with regret
 the white complexion and slim frame of my companion, and his large
 languid eyes—his mother’s eyes, save that, unless morbid touchiness
 kindled them moment, they had not vestige of her sparkling spirit.
 
“how strange that should never come to see mamma and me!” he
 murmured. “has ever seen me? if has, i must have been baby. i
 remember not single thing about him!”
 
“why, master linton,” said i, “three hundred miles is great distance;
 and ten years seem very different in length to grown-up person
 compared with what they do to you. it is probable mr. heathcliff
 proposed going from summer to summer, but never found convenient
 opportunity; and now it is too late. don’t trouble him with questions
 on the subject: it will disturb him, for good.”
 
the boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the remainder
 of the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate. i watched
 to catch his impressions in his countenance. surveyed the carved
 front and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and
 crooked firs, with solemn intentness, and then shook his head: his
 private feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.
 but had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation
 within. before dismounted, i went and opened the door. it was
 half-past six; the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was
 clearing and wiping down the table. joseph stood by his master’s chair
 telling some tale concerning lame horse; and hareton was preparing
 for the hayfield.
 
“hallo, nelly!” said mr. heathcliff, when saw me. “i feared i should
 have to come down and fetch my property myself. you’ve brought it, have
 you? let us see what we can make of it.”
 
got up and strode to the door: hareton and joseph followed in gaping
 curiosity. poor linton ran frightened eye over the faces of the
 three.
 
“sure-ly,” said joseph after grave inspection, “he’s swopped wi’ ye,
 maister, an’ yon’s his lass!”
 
heathcliff, having stared his into an ague of confusion, uttered a
 scornful laugh.
 
“god! what beauty! what lovely, charming thing!” exclaimed.
 “hav’n’t they reared it on snails and sour milk, nelly? oh, damn my
 soul! but that’s worse than i expected—and the devil knows i was not
 sanguine!”
 
i bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter. did
 not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father’s speech, or
 whether it were intended for him: indeed, was not yet certain that
 the grim, sneering stranger was his father. but clung to with
 growing trepidation; and on mr. heathcliff’s taking seat and bidding
 him “come hither” hid his face on my shoulder and wept.
 
“tut, tut!” said heathcliff, stretching out hand and dragging him
 roughly between his knees, and then holding up his head by the chin.
 “none of that nonsense! we’re not going to hurt thee, linton—isn’t that
 thy name? thou art thy mother’s child, entirely! where is _my_ share in
 thee, puling chicken?”
 
took off the boy’s cap and pushed back his thick flaxen curls, felt
 his slender arms and his small fingers; during which examination linton
 ceased crying, and lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.
 
“do you know me?” asked heathcliff, having satisfied himself that the
 limbs were all equally frail and feeble.
 
“no,” said linton, with gaze of vacant fear.
 
“you’ve heard of me, i daresay?”
 
“no,” replied again.
 
“no! what shame of your mother, never to waken your filial regard for
 me! you are my son, then, i’ll tell you; and your mother was wicked
 slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possessed.
 now, don’t wince, and colour up! though it _is_ something to see you
 have not white blood. be good lad; and i’ll do for you. nelly, if you
 be tired you may sit down; if not, get home again. i guess you’ll
 report what you hear and see to the cipher at the grange; and this
 thing won’t be settled while you linger about it.”
 
“well,” replied i, “i hope you’ll be kind to the boy, mr. heathcliff,
 or you’ll not keep him long; and he’s all you have akin in the wide
 world, that you will ever know—remember.”
 
“i’ll be _very_ kind to him, you needn’t fear,” said, laughing.
 “only nobody else must be kind to him: i’m jealous of monopolising his
 affection. and, to begin my kindness, joseph, bring the lad some
 breakfast. hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work. yes, nell,”
 added, when they had departed, “my is prospective owner of your
 place, and i should not wish him to die till i was certain of being his
 successor. besides, he’s _mine_, and i want the triumph of seeing _my_
 descendant fairly lord of their estates; my child hiring their children
 to till their fathers’ lands for wages. that is the sole consideration
 which can make endure the whelp: i despise him for himself, and hate
 him for the memories revives! but that consideration is sufficient:
 he’s as safe with me, and shall be tended as carefully as your master
 tends his own. i have room upstairs, furnished for him in handsome
 style; i’ve engaged tutor, also, to come three times week, from
 twenty miles’ distance, to teach him what pleases to learn. i’ve
 ordered hareton to obey him: and in fact i’ve arranged everything with
 view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in him, above his
 associates. i do regret, however, that so little deserves the
 trouble: if i wished any blessing in the world, it was to find him a
 worthy object of pride; and i’m bitterly disappointed with the
 whey-faced, whining wretch!”
 
while was speaking, joseph returned bearing basin of
 milk-porridge, and placed it before linton: who stirred round the
 homely mess with look of aversion, and affirmed could not eat it.
 i saw the old man-servant shared largely in his master’s scorn of the
 child; though was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart,
 because heathcliff plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour.
 
“cannot ate it?” repeated he, peering in linton’s face, and subduing
 his voice to whisper, for fear of being overheard. “but maister
 hareton nivir ate naught else, when wer little ’un; and what wer
 gooid eneugh for him’s gooid eneugh for ye, i’s rayther think!”
 
“i _sha’n’t_ eat it!” answered linton, snappishly. “take it away.”
 
joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.
 
“is there aught ails th’ victuals?” asked, thrusting the tray under
 heathcliff’s nose.
 
“what should ail them?” said.
 
“wah!” answered joseph, “yon dainty chap says cannut ate ’em. but i
 guess it’s raight! his mother wer just soa—we wer a’most too mucky to
 sow t’ corn for makking her breead.”
 
“don’t mention his mother to me,” said the master, angrily. “get him
 something that can eat, that’s all. what is his usual food, nelly?”
 
i suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received
 instructions to prepare some. come, i reflected, his father’s
 selfishness may contribute to his comfort. perceives his delicate
 constitution, and the necessity of treating him tolerably. i’ll console
 mr. edgar by acquainting him with the turn heathcliff’s humour has
 taken. having excuse for lingering longer, i slipped out, while
 linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of friendly
 sheep-dog. but was too much on the alert to be cheated: as i closed
 the door, i heard cry, and frantic repetition of the words—
 
“don’t leave me! i’ll not stay here! i’ll not stay here!”
 
then the latch was raised and fell: they did not suffer him to come
 forth. i mounted minny, and urged her to trot; and so my brief
 guardianship ended.
 



chapter xxi
 

we had sad work with little cathy that day: she rose in high glee,
 eager to join her cousin, and such passionate tears and lamentations
 followed the news of his departure that edgar himself was obliged to
 soothe her, by affirming should come back soon: added, however,
 “if i can get him”; and there were hopes of that. this promise
 poorly pacified her; but time was more potent; and though still at
 intervals she inquired of her father when linton would return, before
 she did see him again his features had waxed so dim in her memory that
 she did not recognise him.
 
when i chanced to encounter the housekeeper of wuthering heights, in
 paying business visits to gimmerton, i used to ask how the young master
 got on; for lived almost as secluded as catherine herself, and was
 never to be seen. i could gather from her that continued in weak
 health, and was tiresome inmate. she said mr. heathcliff seemed to
 dislike him ever longer and worse, though took some trouble to
 conceal it: had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could
 not do at all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes
 together. there seldom passed much talk between them: linton learnt his
 lessons and spent his evenings in small apartment they called the
 parlour: or else lay in bed all day: for was constantly getting
 coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort.
 
“and i never knew such faint-hearted creature,” added the woman; “nor
 one so careful of hisseln. _will_ go on, if i leave the window open
 bit late in the evening. oh! it’s killing, breath of night air! and
 must have fire in the middle of summer; and joseph’s bacca-pipe is
 poison; and must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk,
 milk for ever—heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter;
 and there he’ll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the
 fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and
 if hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him—hareton is not bad-natured,
 though he’s rough—they’re sure to part, one swearing and the other
 crying. i believe the master would relish earnshaw’s thrashing him to a
 mummy, if were not his son; and i’m certain would be fit to turn
 him out of doors, if knew half the nursing gives hisseln. but
 then won’t go into danger of temptation: never enters the
 parlour, and should linton show those ways in the house where is, he
 sends him upstairs directly.”
 
i divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered
 young heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if were not so
 originally; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed: though still
 i was moved with sense of grief at his lot, and wish that had
 been left with us. mr. edgar encouraged to gain information: he
 thought great deal about him, i fancy, and would have run some risk
 to see him; and told once to ask the housekeeper whether ever
 came into the village? she said had only been twice, on horseback,
 accompanying his father; and both times pretended to be quite
 knocked up for three or four days afterwards. that housekeeper left, if
 i recollect rightly, two years after came; and another, whom i did
 not know, was her successor; she lives there still.
 
time wore on at the grange in its former pleasant way till miss cathy
 reached sixteen. on the anniversary of her birth we never manifested
 any signs of rejoicing, because it was also the anniversary of my late
 mistress’s death. her father invariably spent that day alone in the
 library; and walked, at dusk, as far as gimmerton kirkyard, where he
 would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight. therefore catherine
 was thrown on her own resources for amusement. this twentieth of march
 was beautiful spring day, and when her father had retired, my young
 lady came down dressed for going out, and said she asked to have a
 ramble on the edge of the moor with me: mr. linton had given her leave,
 if we went only short distance and were back within the hour.
 
“so make haste, ellen!” she cried. “i know where i wish to go; where a
 colony of moor-game are settled: i want to see whether they have made
 their nests yet.”
 
“that must be good distance up,” i answered; “they don’t breed on the
 edge of the moor.”
 
“no, it’s not,” she said. “i’ve gone very near with papa.”
 
i put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more of the
 matter. she bounded before me, and returned to my side, and was off
 again like young greyhound; and, at first, i found plenty of
 entertainment in listening to the larks singing far and near, and
 enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine; and watching her, my pet and my
 delight, with her golden ringlets flying loose behind, and her bright
 cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as wild rose, and her eyes
 radiant with cloudless pleasure. she was happy creature, and an
 angel, in those days. it’s pity she could not be content.
 
“well,” said i, “where are your moor-game, miss cathy? we should be at
 them: the grange park-fence is great way off now.”
 
“oh, little further—only little further, ellen,” was her answer,
 continually. “climb to that hillock, pass that bank, and by the time
 you reach the other side i shall have raised the birds.”
 
but there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass, that, at
 length, i began to be weary, and told her we must halt, and retrace our
 steps. i shouted to her, as she had outstripped long way; she
 either did not hear or did not regard, for she still sprang on, and i
 was compelled to follow. finally, she dived into hollow; and before i
 came in sight of her again, she was two miles nearer wuthering heights
 than her own home; and i beheld couple of persons arrest her, one of
 whom i felt convinced was mr. heathcliff himself.
 
cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least, hunting
 out the nests of the grouse. the heights were heathcliff’s land, and he
 was reproving the poacher.
 
“i’ve neither taken any nor found any,” she said, as i toiled to them,
 expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement. “i didn’t mean
 to take them; but papa told there were quantities up here, and i
 wished to see the eggs.”
 
heathcliff glanced at with an ill-meaning smile, expressing his
 acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his malevolence towards
 it, and demanded who “papa” was?
 
“mr. linton of thrushcross grange,” she replied. “i thought you did not
 know me, or you wouldn’t have spoken in that way.”
 
“you suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected, then?” said,
 sarcastically.
 
“and what are you?” inquired catherine, gazing curiously on the
 speaker. “that man i’ve seen before. is your son?”
 
she pointed to hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing
 but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his
 age: seemed as awkward and rough as ever.
 
“miss cathy,” i interrupted, “it will be three hours instead of one
 that we are out, presently. we really must go back.”
 
“no, that man is not my son,” answered heathcliff, pushing aside.
 “but i have one, and you have seen him before too; and, though your
 nurse is in hurry, i think both you and she would be the better for a
 little rest. will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my
 house? you’ll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a
 kind welcome.”
 
i whispered catherine that she mustn’t, on any account, accede to the
 proposal: it was entirely out of the question.
 
“why?” she asked, aloud. “i’m tired of running, and the ground is dewy:
 i can’t sit here. let us go, ellen. besides, says i have seen his
 son. he’s mistaken, i think; but i guess where lives: at the
 farmhouse i visited in coming from penistone crags. don’t you?”
 
“i do. come, nelly, hold your tongue—it will be treat for her to look
 in on us. hareton, get forwards with the lass. you shall walk with me,
 nelly.”
 
“no, she’s not going to any such place,” i cried, struggling to release
 my arm, which had seized: but she was almost at the door-stones
 already, scampering round the brow at full speed. her appointed
 companion did not pretend to escort her: shied off by the road-side,
 and vanished.
 
“mr. heathcliff, it’s very wrong,” i continued: “you know you mean no
 good. and there she’ll see linton, and all will be told as soon as ever
 we return; and i shall have the blame.”
 
“i want her to see linton,” answered; “he’s looking better these few
 days; it’s not often he’s fit to be seen. and we’ll soon persuade her
 to keep the visit secret: where is the harm of it?”
 
“the harm of it is, that her father would hate if found i
 suffered her to enter your house; and i am convinced you have bad
 design in encouraging her to do so,” i replied.
 
“my design is as honest as possible. i’ll inform you of its whole
 scope,” said. “that the two cousins may fall in love, and get
 married. i’m acting generously to your master: his young chit has no
 expectations, and should she second my wishes she’ll be provided for at
 once as joint successor with linton.”
 
“if linton died,” i answered, “and his life is quite uncertain,
 catherine would be the heir.”
 
“no, she would not,” said. “there is clause in the will to secure
 it so: his property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, i desire
 their union, and am resolved to bring it about.”
 
“and i’m resolved she shall never approach your house with again,” i
 returned, as we reached the gate, where miss cathy waited our coming.
 
heathcliff bade be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
 open the door. my young lady gave him several looks, as if she could
 not exactly make up her mind what to think of him; but now smiled
 when met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and i
 was foolish enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him
 from desiring her injury. linton stood on the hearth. had been out
 walking in the fields, for his cap was on, and was calling to joseph
 to bring him dry shoes. had grown tall of his age, still wanting
 some months of sixteen. his features were pretty yet, and his eye and
 complexion brighter than i remembered them, though with merely
 temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.
 
“now, who is that?” asked mr. heathcliff, turning to cathy. “can you
 tell?”
 
“your son?” she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then
 the other.
 
“yes, yes,” answered he: “but is this the only time you have beheld
 him? think! ah! you have short memory. linton, don’t you recall your
 cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?”
 
“what, linton!” cried cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
 “is that little linton? he’s taller than i am! are you linton?”
 
the youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself: she kissed him
 fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in
 the appearance of each. catherine had reached her full height; her
 figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole
 aspect sparkling with health and spirits. linton’s looks and movements
 were very languid, and his form extremely slight; but there was grace
 in his manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not
 unpleasing. after exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his
 cousin went to mr. heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his
 attention between the objects inside and those that lay without:
 pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really noting the
 former alone.
 
“and you are my uncle, then!” she cried, reaching up to salute him. “i
 thought i liked you, though you were cross at first. why don’t you
 visit at the grange with linton? to live all these years such close
 neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?”
 
“i visited it once or twice too often before you were born,” he
 answered. “there—damn it! if you have any kisses to spare, give them to
 linton: they are thrown away on me.”
 
“naughty ellen!” exclaimed catherine, flying to attack next with her
 lavish caresses. “wicked ellen! to try to hinder from entering. but
 i’ll take this walk every morning in future: may i, uncle? and
 sometimes bring papa. won’t you be glad to see us?”
 
“of course,” replied the uncle, with hardly suppressed grimace,
 resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed visitors. “but
 stay,” continued, turning towards the young lady. “now i think of
 it, i’d better tell you. mr. linton has prejudice against me: we
 quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if
 you mention coming here to him, he’ll put veto on your visits
 altogether. therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless
 of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you
 must not mention it.”
 
“why did you quarrel?” asked catherine, considerably crestfallen.
 
“he thought too poor to wed his sister,” answered heathcliff, “and
 was grieved that i got her: his pride was hurt, and he’ll never forgive
 it.”
 
“that’s wrong!” said the young lady: “some time i’ll tell him so. but
 linton and i have share in your quarrel. i’ll not come here, then;
 shall come to the grange.”
 
“it will be too far for me,” murmured her cousin: “to walk four miles
 would kill me. no, come here, miss catherine, now and then: not every
 morning, but once or twice week.”
 
the father launched towards his glance of bitter contempt.
 
“i am afraid, nelly, i shall lose my labour,” muttered to me. “miss
 catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his value, and send
 him to the devil. now, if it had been hareton!—do you know that, twenty
 times day, i covet hareton, with all his degradation? i’d have loved
 the lad had been some one else. but i think he’s safe from _her_
 love. i’ll pit him against that paltry creature, unless it bestir
 itself briskly. we calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen.
 oh, confound the vapid thing! he’s absorbed in drying his feet, and
 never looks at her.—linton!”
 
“yes, father,” answered the boy.
 
“have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even rabbit
 or weasel’s nest? take her into the garden, before you change your
 shoes; and into the stable to see your horse.”
 
“wouldn’t you rather sit here?” asked linton, addressing cathy in a
 tone which expressed reluctance to move again.
 
“i don’t know,” she replied, casting longing look to the door, and
 evidently eager to be active.
 
kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire. heathcliff rose, and
 went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for
 hareton. hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered. the young
 man had been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks
 and his wetted hair.
 
“oh, i’ll ask _you_, uncle,” cried miss cathy, recollecting the
 housekeeper’s assertion. “that is not my cousin, is he?”
 
“yes,” replied, “your mother’s nephew. don’t you like him?”
 
catherine looked queer.
 
“is not handsome lad?” continued.
 
the uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered sentence in
 heathcliff’s ear. laughed; hareton darkened: i perceived was very
 sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously dim notion of his
 inferiority. but his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming—
 
“you’ll be the favourite among us, hareton! she says you are a—what was
 it? well, something very flattering. here! you go with her round the
 farm. and behave like gentleman, mind! don’t use any bad words; and
 don’t stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to
 hide your face when she is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly,
 and keep your hands out of your pockets. be off, and entertain her as
 nicely as you can.”
 
watched the couple walking past the window. earnshaw had his
 countenance completely averted from his companion. seemed studying
 the familiar landscape with stranger’s and an artist’s interest.
 catherine took sly look at him, expressing small admiration. she then
 turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself,
 and tripped merrily on, lilting tune to supply the lack of
 conversation.
 
“i’ve tied his tongue,” observed heathcliff. “he’ll not venture a
 single syllable all the time! nelly, you recollect at his age—nay,
 some years younger. did i ever look so stupid: so ‘gaumless,’ as joseph
 calls it?”
 
“worse,” i replied, “because more sullen with it.”
 
“i’ve pleasure in him,” continued, reflecting aloud. “he has
 satisfied my expectations. if were born fool i should not enjoy it
 half so much. but he’s fool; and i can sympathise with all his
 feelings, having felt them myself. i know what suffers now, for
 instance, exactly: it is merely beginning of what shall suffer,
 though. and he’ll never be able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness
 and ignorance. i’ve got him faster than his scoundrel of father
 secured me, and lower; for takes pride in his brutishness. i’ve
 taught him to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and weak. don’t
 you think hindley would be proud of his son, if could see him?
 almost as proud as i am of mine. but there’s this difference; one is
 gold put to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to
 ape service of silver. _mine_ has nothing valuable about it; yet i
 shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor stuff can go.
 _his_ had first-rate qualities, and they are lost: rendered worse than
 unavailing. _i_ have nothing to regret; _he_ would have more than any,
 but i, are aware of. and the best of it is, hareton is damnably fond of
 me! you’ll own that i’ve outmatched hindley there. if the dead villain
 could rise from his grave to abuse for his offspring’s wrongs, i
 should have the fun of seeing the said offspring fight him back again,
 indignant that should dare to rail at the one friend has in the
 world!”
 
heathcliff chuckled fiendish laugh at the idea. i made reply,
 because i saw that expected none. meantime, our young companion, who
 sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms
 of uneasiness, probably repenting that had denied himself the treat
 of catherine’s society for fear of little fatigue. his father
 remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand
 irresolutely extended towards his cap.
 
“get up, you idle boy!” exclaimed, with assumed heartiness. “away
 after them! they are just at the corner, by the stand of hives.”
 
linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth. the lattice was
 open, and, as stepped out, i heard cathy inquiring of her unsociable
 attendant what was that inscription over the door? hareton stared up,
 and scratched his head like true clown.
 
“it’s some damnable writing,” answered. “i cannot read it.”
 
“can’t read it?” cried catherine; “i can read it: it’s english. but i
 want to know why it is there.”
 
linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth had exhibited.
 
“he does not know his letters,” said to his cousin. “could you
 believe in the existence of such colossal dunce?”
 
“is all as should be?” asked miss cathy, seriously; “or is he
 simple: not right? i’ve questioned him twice now, and each time he
 looked so stupid i think does not understand me. i can hardly
 understand _him_, i’m sure!”
 
linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at hareton tauntingly; who
 certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.
 
“there’s nothing the matter but laziness; is there, earnshaw?” said.
 “my cousin fancies you are an idiot. there you experience the
 consequence of scorning ‘book-larning,’ as you would say. have you
 noticed, catherine, his frightful yorkshire pronunciation?”
 
“why, where the devil is the use on’t?” growled hareton, more ready in
 answering his daily companion. was about to enlarge further, but the
 two youngsters broke into noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being
 delighted to discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of
 amusement.
 
“where is the use of the devil in that sentence?” tittered linton.
 “papa told you not to say any bad words, and you can’t open your mouth
 without one. do try to behave like gentleman, now do!”
 
“if thou weren’t more lass than lad, i’d fell thee this minute, i
 would; pitiful lath of crater!” retorted the angry boor, retreating,
 while his face burnt with mingled rage and mortification; for was
 conscious of being insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.
 
mr. heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as i, smiled
 when saw him go; but immediately afterwards cast look of singular
 aversion on the flippant pair, who remained chattering in the doorway:
 the boy finding animation enough while discussing hareton’s faults and
 deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of his goings on; and the girl
 relishing his pert and spiteful sayings, without considering the
 ill-nature they evinced. i began to dislike, more than to compassionate
 linton, and to excuse his father in some measure for holding him cheap.
 
we stayed till afternoon: i could not tear miss cathy away sooner; but
 happily my master had not quitted his apartment, and remained ignorant
 of our prolonged absence. as we walked home, i would fain have
 enlightened my charge on the characters of the people we had quitted:
 but she got it into her head that i was prejudiced against them.
 
“aha!” she cried, “you take papa’s side, ellen: you are partial i know;
 or else you wouldn’t have cheated so many years into the notion that
 linton lived long way from here. i’m really extremely angry; only i’m
 so pleased i can’t show it! but you must hold your tongue about my
 uncle; he’s _my_ uncle, remember; and i’ll scold papa for quarrelling
 with him.”
 
and so she ran on, till i relinquished the endeavour to convince her of
 her mistake. she did not mention the visit that night, because she did
 not see mr. linton. next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin; and
 still i was not altogether sorry: i thought the burden of directing and
 warning would be more efficiently borne by him than me. but was too
 timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun
 connection with the household of the heights, and catherine liked good
 reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.
 
“papa!” she exclaimed, after the morning’s salutations, “guess whom i
 saw yesterday, in my walk on the moors. ah, papa, you started! you’ve
 not done right, have you, now? i saw—but listen, and you shall hear how
 i found you out; and ellen, who is in league with you, and yet
 pretended to pity so, when i kept hoping, and was always
 disappointed about linton’s coming back!”
 
she gave faithful account of her excursion and its consequences; and
 my master, though cast more than one reproachful look at me, said
 nothing till she had concluded. then drew her to him, and asked if
 she knew why had concealed linton’s near neighbourhood from her?
 could she think it was to deny her pleasure that she might harmlessly
 enjoy?
 
“it was because you disliked mr. heathcliff,” she answered.
 
“then you believe i care more for my own feelings than yours, cathy?”
 said. “no, it was not because i disliked mr. heathcliff, but because
 mr. heathcliff dislikes me; and is most diabolical man, delighting to
 wrong and ruin those hates, if they give him the slightest
 opportunity. i knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with
 your cousin without being brought into contact with him; and i knew he
 would detest you on my account; so for your own good, and nothing else,
 i took precautions that you should not see linton again. i meant to
 explain this some time as you grew older, and i’m sorry i delayed it.”
 
“but mr. heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,” observed catherine, not
 at all convinced; “and _he_ didn’t object to our seeing each other: he
 said i might come to his house when i pleased; only i must not tell
 you, because you had quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for
 marrying aunt isabella. and you won’t. _you_ are the one to be blamed:
 is willing to let _us_ be friends, at least; linton and i; and you
 are not.”
 
my master, perceiving that she would not take his word for her
 uncle-in-law’s evil disposition, gave hasty sketch of his conduct to
 isabella, and the manner in which wuthering heights became his
 property. could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for
 though spoke little of it, still felt the same horror and
 detestation of his ancient enemy that had occupied his heart ever since
 mrs. linton’s death. “she might have been living yet, if it had not
 been for him!” was his constant bitter reflection; and, in his eyes,
 heathcliff seemed murderer. miss cathy—conversant with bad deeds
 except her own slight acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion,
 arising from hot temper and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day
 they were committed—was amazed at the blackness of spirit that could
 brood on and cover revenge for years, and deliberately prosecute its
 plans without visitation of remorse. she appeared so deeply impressed
 and shocked at this new view of human nature—excluded from all her
 studies and all her ideas till now—that mr. edgar deemed it unnecessary
 to pursue the subject. merely added: “you will know hereafter,
 darling, why i wish you to avoid his house and family; now return to
 your old employments and amusements, and think more about them.”
 
catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her lessons for a
 couple of hours, according to custom; then she accompanied him into the
 grounds, and the whole day passed as usual: but in the evening, when
 she had retired to her room, and i went to help her to undress, i found
 her crying, on her knees by the bedside.
 
“oh, fie, silly child!” i exclaimed. “if you had any real griefs you’d
 be ashamed to waste tear on this little contrariety. you never had
 one shadow of substantial sorrow, miss catherine. suppose, for a
 minute, that master and i were dead, and you were by yourself in the
 world: how would you feel, then? compare the present occasion with such
 an affliction as that, and be thankful for the friends you have,
 instead of coveting more.”
 
“i’m not crying for myself, ellen,” she answered, “it’s for him. he
 expected to see again to-morrow, and there he’ll be so disappointed:
 and he’ll wait for me, and i sha’n’t come!”
 
“nonsense!” said i, “do you imagine has thought as much of you as
 you have of him? hasn’t hareton for companion? not one in a
 hundred would weep at losing relation they had just seen twice, for
 two afternoons. linton will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself
 further about you.”
 
“but may i not write note to tell him why i cannot come?” she asked,
 rising to her feet. “and just send those books i promised to lend him?
 his books are not as nice as mine, and wanted to have them
 extremely, when i told him how interesting they were. may i not,
 ellen?”
 
“no, indeed! no, indeed!” replied i with decision. “then would write
 to you, and there’d never be an end of it. no, miss catherine, the
 acquaintance must be dropped entirely: so papa expects, and i shall see
 that it is done.”
 
“but how can one little note—?” she recommenced, putting on an
 imploring countenance.
 
“silence!” i interrupted. “we’ll not begin with your little notes. get
 into bed.”
 
she threw at very naughty look, so naughty that i would not kiss
 her good-night at first: i covered her up, and shut her door, in great
 displeasure; but, repenting half-way, i returned softly, and lo! there
 was miss standing at the table with bit of blank paper before her and
 pencil in her hand, which she guiltily slipped out of sight on my
 entrance.
 
“you’ll get nobody to take that, catherine,” i said, “if you write it;
 and at present i shall put out your candle.”
 
i set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as i did so slap on my
 hand and petulant “cross thing!” i then quitted her again, and she
 drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevish humours. the letter was
 finished and forwarded to its destination by milk-fetcher who came
 from the village; but that i didn’t learn till some time afterwards.
 weeks passed on, and cathy recovered her temper; though she grew
 wondrous fond of stealing off to corners by herself; and often, if i
 came near her suddenly while reading, she would start and bend over the
 book, evidently desirous to hide it; and i detected edges of loose
 paper sticking out beyond the leaves. she also got trick of coming
 down early in the morning and lingering about the kitchen, as if she
 were expecting the arrival of something; and she had small drawer in
 cabinet in the library, which she would trifle over for hours, and
 whose key she took special care to remove when she left it.
 
one day, as she inspected this drawer, i observed that the playthings
 and trinkets which recently formed its contents were transmuted into
 bits of folded paper. my curiosity and suspicions were roused; i
 determined to take peep at her mysterious treasures; so, at night, as
 soon as she and my master were safe upstairs, i searched, and readily
 found among my house keys one that would fit the lock. having opened, i
 emptied the whole contents into my apron, and took them with to
 examine at leisure in my own chamber. though i could not but suspect, i
 was still surprised to discover that they were mass of
 correspondence—daily almost, it must have been—from linton heathcliff:
 answers to documents forwarded by her. the earlier dated were
 embarrassed and short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious
 love-letters, foolish, as the age of the writer rendered natural, yet
 with touches here and there which i thought were borrowed from more
 experienced source. some of them struck as singularly odd compounds
 of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong feeling, and concluding in
 the affected, wordy style that schoolboy might use to fancied,
 incorporeal sweetheart. whether they satisfied cathy i don’t know; but
 they appeared very worthless trash to me. after turning over as many as
 i thought proper, i tied them in handkerchief and set them aside,
 relocking the vacant drawer.
 
following her habit, my young lady descended early, and visited the
 kitchen: i watched her go to the door, on the arrival of certain
 little boy; and, while the dairymaid filled his can, she tucked
 something into his jacket pocket, and plucked something out. i went
 round by the garden, and laid wait for the messenger; who fought
 valorously to defend his trust, and we spilt the milk between us; but i
 succeeded in abstracting the epistle; and, threatening serious
 consequences if did not look sharp home, i remained under the wall
 and perused miss cathy’s affectionate composition. it was more simple
 and more eloquent than her cousin’s: very pretty and very silly. i
 shook my head, and went meditating into the house. the day being wet,
 she could not divert herself with rambling about the park; so, at the
 conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to the solace of the
 drawer. her father sat reading at the table; and i, on purpose, had
 sought bit of work in some unripped fringes of the window-curtain,
 keeping my eye steadily fixed on her proceedings. never did any bird
 flying back to plundered nest, which it had left brimful of chirping
 young ones, express more complete despair, in its anguished cries and
 flutterings, than she by her single “oh!” and the change that
 transfigured her late happy countenance. mr. linton looked up.
 
“what is the matter, love? have you hurt yourself?” said.
 
his tone and look assured her _he_ had not been the discoverer of the
 hoard.
 
“no, papa!” she gasped. “ellen! ellen! come upstairs—i’m sick!”
 
i obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.
 
“oh, ellen! you have got them,” she commenced immediately, dropping on
 her knees, when we were enclosed alone. “oh, give them to me, and i’ll
 never, never do so again! don’t tell papa. you have not told papa,
 ellen? say you have not? i’ve been exceedingly naughty, but i won’t do
 it any more!”
 
with grave severity in my manner i bade her stand up.
 
“so,” i exclaimed, “miss catherine, you are tolerably far on, it seems:
 you may well be ashamed of them! fine bundle of trash you study in
 your leisure hours, to be sure: why, it’s good enough to be printed!
 and what do you suppose the master will think when i display it before
 him? i hav’n’t shown it yet, but you needn’t imagine i shall keep your
 ridiculous secrets. for shame! and you must have led the way in writing
 such absurdities: would not have thought of beginning, i’m certain.”
 
“i didn’t! i didn’t!” sobbed cathy, fit to break her heart. “i didn’t
 once think of loving him till—”
 
“_loving_!” cried i, as scornfully as i could utter the word.
 “_loving_! did anybody ever hear the like! i might just as well talk of
 loving the miller who comes once year to buy our corn. pretty loving,
 indeed! and both times together you have seen linton hardly four hours
 in your life! now here is the babyish trash. i’m going with it to the
 library; and we’ll see what your father says to such _loving_.”
 
she sprang at her precious epistles, but i held them above my head; and
 then she poured out further frantic entreaties that i would burn
 them—do anything rather than show them. and being really fully as much
 inclined to laugh as scold—for i esteemed it all girlish vanity—i at
 length relented in measure, and asked,—“if i consent to burn them,
 will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive letter again,
 nor book (for i perceive you have sent him books), nor locks of hair,
 nor rings, nor playthings?”
 
“we don’t send playthings,” cried catherine, her pride overcoming her
 shame.
 
“nor anything at all, then, my lady?” i said. “unless you will, here i
 go.”
 
“i promise, ellen!” she cried, catching my dress. “oh, put them in the
 fire, do, do!”
 
but when i proceeded to open place with the poker the sacrifice was
 too painful to be borne. she earnestly supplicated that i would spare
 her one or two.
 
“one or two, ellen, to keep for linton’s sake!”
 
i unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them in from an
 angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.
 
“i will have one, you cruel wretch!” she screamed, darting her hand
 into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed fragments, at the
 expense of her fingers.
 
“very well—and i will have some to exhibit to papa!” i answered,
 shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning anew to the door.
 
she emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and motioned to
 finish the immolation. it was done; i stirred up the ashes, and
 interred them under shovelful of coals; and she mutely, and with a
 sense of intense injury, retired to her private apartment. i descended
 to tell my master that the young lady’s qualm of sickness was almost
 gone, but i judged it best for her to lie down while. she wouldn’t
 dine; but she reappeared at tea, pale, and red about the eyes, and
 marvellously subdued in outward aspect. next morning i answered the
 letter by slip of paper, inscribed, “master heathcliff is requested
 to send more notes to miss linton, as she will not receive them.”
 and, thenceforth, the little boy came with vacant pockets.
 



chapter xxii
 

summer drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past michaelmas, but
 the harvest was late that year, and few of our fields were still
 uncleared. mr. linton and his daughter would frequently walk out among
 the reapers; at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk,
 and the evening happening to be chill and damp, my master caught bad
 cold, that settled obstinately on his lungs, and confined him indoors
 throughout the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.
 
poor cathy, frightened from her little romance, had been considerably
 sadder and duller since its abandonment; and her father insisted on her
 reading less, and taking more exercise. she had his companionship no
 longer; i esteemed it duty to supply its lack, as much as possible,
 with mine: an inefficient substitute; for i could only spare two or
 three hours, from my numerous diurnal occupations, to follow her
 footsteps, and then my society was obviously less desirable than his.
 
on an afternoon in october, or the beginning of november—a fresh watery
 afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling with moist, withered
 leaves, and the cold blue sky was half hidden by clouds—dark grey
 streamers, rapidly mounting from the west, and boding abundant rain—i
 requested my young lady to forego her ramble, because i was certain of
 showers. she refused; and i unwillingly donned cloak, and took my
 umbrella to accompany her on stroll to the bottom of the park: a
 formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited—and that she
 invariably was when mr. edgar had been worse than ordinary, thing
 never known from his confession, but guessed both by her and from
 his increased silence and the melancholy of his countenance. she went
 sadly on: there was running or bounding now, though the chill wind
 might well have tempted her to race. and often, from the side of my
 eye, i could detect her raising hand, and brushing something off her
 cheek. i gazed round for means of diverting her thoughts. on one side
 of the road rose high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks,
 with their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure: the soil was too
 loose for the latter; and strong winds had blown some nearly
 horizontal. in summer miss catherine delighted to climb along these
 trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above the ground;
 and i, pleased with her agility and her light, childish heart, still
 considered it proper to scold every time i caught her at such an
 elevation, but so that she knew there was necessity for descending.
 from dinner to tea she would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing
 nothing except singing old songs—my nursery lore—to herself, or
 watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to
 fly: or nestling with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming,
 happier than words can express.
 
“look, miss!” i exclaimed, pointing to nook under the roots of one
 twisted tree. “winter is not here yet. there’s little flower up
 yonder, the last bud from the multitude of bluebells that clouded those
 turf steps in july with lilac mist. will you clamber up, and pluck it
 to show to papa?”
 
cathy stared long time at the lonely blossom trembling in its earthy
 shelter, and replied, at length—“no, i’ll not touch it: but it looks
 melancholy, does it not, ellen?”
 
“yes,” i observed, “about as starved and sackless as you: your cheeks
 are bloodless; let us take hold of hands and run. you’re so low, i
 daresay i shall keep up with you.”
 
“no,” she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at intervals
 to muse over bit of moss, or tuft of blanched grass, or fungus
 spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage; and, ever
 and anon, her hand was lifted to her averted face.
 
“catherine, why are you crying, love?” i asked, approaching and putting
 my arm over her shoulder. “you mustn’t cry because papa has cold; be
 thankful it is nothing worse.”
 
she now put further restraint on her tears; her breath was stifled
 by sobs.
 
“oh, it _will_ be something worse,” she said. “and what shall i do when
 papa and you leave me, and i am by myself? i can’t forget your words,
 ellen; they are always in my ear. how life will be changed, how dreary
 the world will be, when papa and you are dead.”
 
“none can tell whether you won’t die before us,” i replied. “it’s wrong
 to anticipate evil. we’ll hope there are years and years to come before
 any of us go: master is young, and i am strong, and hardly forty-five.
 my mother lived till eighty, canty dame to the last. and suppose mr.
 linton were spared till saw sixty, that would be more years than you
 have counted, miss. and would it not be foolish to mourn calamity
 above twenty years beforehand?”
 
“but aunt isabella was younger than papa,” she remarked, gazing up with
 timid hope to seek further consolation.
 
“aunt isabella had not you and to nurse her,” i replied. “she wasn’t
 as happy as master: she hadn’t as much to live for. all you need do, is
 to wait well on your father, and cheer him by letting him see you
 cheerful; and avoid giving him anxiety on any subject: mind that,
 cathy! i’ll not disguise but you might kill him if you were wild and
 reckless, and cherished foolish, fanciful affection for the of a
 person who would be glad to have him in his grave; and allowed him to
 discover that you fretted over the separation has judged it
 expedient to make.”
 
“i fret about nothing on earth except papa’s illness,” answered my
 companion. “i care for nothing in comparison with papa. and i’ll
 never—never—oh, never, while i have my senses, do an act or say word
 to vex him. i love him better than myself, ellen; and i know it by
 this: i pray every night that i may live after him; because i would
 rather be miserable than that should be: that proves i love him
 better than myself.”
 
“good words,” i replied. “but deeds must prove it also; and after is
 well, remember you don’t forget resolutions formed in the hour of
 fear.”
 
as we talked, we neared door that opened on the road; and my young
 lady, lightening into sunshine again, climbed up and seated herself on
 the top of the wall, reaching over to gather some hips that bloomed
 scarlet on the summit branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the
 highway side: the lower fruit had disappeared, but only birds could
 touch the upper, except from cathy’s present station. in stretching to
 pull them, her hat fell off; and as the door was locked, she proposed
 scrambling down to recover it. i bid her be cautious lest she got a
 fall, and she nimbly disappeared. but the return was such easy
 matter: the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rosebushes
 and blackberry stragglers could yield assistance in re-ascending.
 i, like fool, didn’t recollect that, till i heard her laughing and
 exclaiming—“ellen! you’ll have to fetch the key, or else i must run
 round to the porter’s lodge. i can’t scale the ramparts on this side!”
 
“stay where you are,” i answered; “i have my bundle of keys in my
 pocket: perhaps i may manage to open it; if not, i’ll go.”
 
catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the door, while
 i tried all the large keys in succession. i had applied the last, and
 found that none would do; so, repeating my desire that she would remain
 there, i was about to hurry home as fast as i could, when an
 approaching sound arrested me. it was the trot of horse; cathy’s
 dance stopped also.
 
“who is that?” i whispered.
 
“ellen, i wish you could open the door,” whispered back my companion,
 anxiously.
 
“ho, miss linton!” cried deep voice (the rider’s), “i’m glad to meet
 you. don’t be in haste to enter, for i have an explanation to ask and
 obtain.”
 
“i sha’n’t speak to you, mr. heathcliff,” answered catherine. “papa
 says you are wicked man, and you hate both him and me; and ellen says
 the same.”
 
“that is nothing to the purpose,” said heathcliff. (he it was.) “i
 don’t hate my son, i suppose; and it is concerning him that i demand
 your attention. yes; you have cause to blush. two or three months
 since, were you not in the habit of writing to linton? making love in
 play, eh? you deserved, both of you, flogging for that! you especially,
 the elder; and less sensitive, as it turns out. i’ve got your letters,
 and if you give any pertness i’ll send them to your father. i
 presume you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it, didn’t you?
 well, you dropped linton with it into slough of despond. was in
 earnest: in love, really. as true as i live, he’s dying for you;
 breaking his heart at your fickleness: not figuratively, but actually.
 though hareton has made him standing jest for six weeks, and i have
 used more serious measures, and attempted to frighten him out of his
 idiocy, gets worse daily; and he’ll be under the sod before summer,
 unless you restore him!”
 
“how can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?” i called from the
 inside. “pray ride on! how can you deliberately get up such paltry
 falsehoods? miss cathy, i’ll knock the lock off with stone: you won’t
 believe that vile nonsense. you can feel in yourself it is impossible
 that person should die for love of stranger.”
 
“i was not aware there were eavesdroppers,” muttered the detected
 villain. “worthy mrs. dean, i like you, but i don’t like your
 double-dealing,” added aloud. “how could _you_ lie so glaringly as
 to affirm i hated the ‘poor child’? and invent bugbear stories to
 terrify her from my door-stones? catherine linton (the very name warms
 me), my bonny lass, i shall be from home all this week; go and see if i
 have not spoken truth: do, there’s darling! just imagine your father
 in my place, and linton in yours; then think how you would value your
 careless lover if refused to stir step to comfort you, when your
 father himself entreated him; and don’t, from pure stupidity, fall into
 the same error. i swear, on my salvation, he’s going to his grave, and
 none but you can save him!”
 
the lock gave way and i issued out.
 
“i swear linton is dying,” repeated heathcliff, looking hard at me.
 “and grief and disappointment are hastening his death. nelly, if you
 won’t let her go, you can walk over yourself. but i shall not return
 till this time next week; and i think your master himself would
 scarcely object to her visiting her cousin.”
 
“come in,” said i, taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to
 re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
 the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.
 
pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed—
 
“miss catherine, i’ll own to you that i have little patience with
 linton; and hareton and joseph have less. i’ll own that he’s with a
 harsh set. pines for kindness, as well as love; and kind word from
 you would be his best medicine. don’t mind mrs. dean’s cruel cautions;
 but be generous, and contrive to see him. dreams of you day and
 night, and cannot be persuaded that you don’t hate him, since you
 neither write nor call.”
 
i closed the door, and rolled stone to assist the loosened lock in
 holding it; and spreading my umbrella, i drew my charge underneath: for
 the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and
 warned us to avoid delay. our hurry prevented any comment on the
 encounter with heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but i divined
 instinctively that catherine’s heart was clouded now in double
 darkness. her features were so sad, they did not seem hers: she
 evidently regarded what she had heard as every syllable true.
 
the master had retired to rest before we came in. cathy stole to his
 room to inquire how was; had fallen asleep. she returned, and
 asked to sit with her in the library. we took our tea together; and
 afterwards she lay down on the rug, and told not to talk, for she
 was weary. i got book, and pretended to read. as soon as she supposed
 absorbed in my occupation, she recommenced her silent weeping: it
 appeared, at present, her favourite diversion. i suffered her to enjoy
 it while; then i expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all mr.
 heathcliff’s assertions about his son, as if i were certain she would
 coincide. alas! i hadn’t skill to counteract the effect his account had
 produced: it was just what intended.
 
“you may be right, ellen,” she answered; “but i shall never feel at
 ease till i know. and i must tell linton it is not my fault that i
 don’t write, and convince him that i shall not change.”
 
what use were anger and protestations against her silly credulity? we
 parted that night—hostile; but next day beheld on the road to
 wuthering heights, by the side of my wilful young mistress’s pony. i
 couldn’t bear to witness her sorrow: to see her pale, dejected
 countenance, and heavy eyes: and i yielded, in the faint hope that
 linton himself might prove, by his reception of us, how little of the
 tale was founded on fact.
 



chapter xxiii
 

the rainy night had ushered in misty morning—half frost, half
 drizzle—and temporary brooks crossed our path—gurgling from the
 uplands. my feet were thoroughly wetted; i was cross and low; exactly
 the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things. we
 entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether mr.
 heathcliff were really absent: because i put slight faith in his own
 affirmation.
 
joseph seemed sitting in sort of elysium alone, beside roaring
 fire; quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces
 of toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth. catherine
 ran to the hearth to warm herself. i asked if the master was in? my
 question remained so long unanswered, that i thought the old man had
 grown deaf, and repeated it louder.
 
“na—ay!” snarled, or rather screamed through his nose. “na—ay! yah
 muh goa back whear yah coom frough.”
 
“joseph!” cried peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner
 room. “how often am i to call you? there are only few red ashes now.
 joseph! come this moment.”
 
vigorous puffs, and resolute stare into the grate, declared had no
 ear for this appeal. the housekeeper and hareton were invisible; one
 gone on an errand, and the other at his work, probably. we knew
 linton’s tones, and entered.
 
“oh, i hope you’ll die in garret, starved to death!” said the boy,
 mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant.
 
stopped on observing his error: his cousin flew to him.
 
“is that you, miss linton?” said, raising his head from the arm of
 the great chair, in which reclined. “no—don’t kiss me: it takes my
 breath. dear me! papa said you would call,” continued he, after
 recovering little from catherine’s embrace; while she stood by
 looking very contrite. “will you shut the door, if you please? you left
 it open; and those—those _detestable_ creatures won’t bring coals to
 the fire. it’s so cold!”
 
i stirred up the cinders, and fetched scuttleful myself. the invalid
 complained of being covered with ashes; but had tiresome cough,
 and looked feverish and ill, so i did not rebuke his temper.
 
“well, linton,” murmured catherine, when his corrugated brow relaxed,
 “are you glad to see me? can i do you any good?”
 
“why didn’t you come before?” asked. “you should have come, instead
 of writing. it tired dreadfully writing those long letters. i’d far
 rather have talked to you. now, i can neither bear to talk, nor
 anything else. i wonder where zillah is! will you” (looking at me)
 “step into the kitchen and see?”
 
i had received thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to
 run to and fro at his behest, i replied—
 
“nobody is out there but joseph.”
 
“i want to drink,” exclaimed fretfully, turning away. “zillah is
 constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it’s miserable!
 and i’m obliged to come down here—they resolved never to hear me
 upstairs.”
 
“is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?” i asked,
 perceiving catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.
 
“attentive? makes _them_ little more attentive at least,” he
 cried. “the wretches! do you know, miss linton, that brute hareton
 laughs at me! i hate him! indeed, i hate them all: they are odious
 beings.”
 
cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on pitcher in the
 dresser, filled tumbler, and brought it. bid her add spoonful of
 wine from bottle on the table; and having swallowed small portion,
 appeared more tranquil, and said she was very kind.
 
“and are you glad to see me?” asked she, reiterating her former
 question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn of smile.
 
“yes, i am. it’s something new to hear voice like yours!” replied.
 “but i have been vexed, because you wouldn’t come. and papa swore it
 was owing to me: called pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing;
 and said you despised me; and if had been in my place, would be
 more the master of the grange than your father by this time. but you
 don’t despise me, do you, miss—?”
 
“i wish you would say catherine, or cathy,” interrupted my young lady.
 “despise you? no! next to papa and ellen, i love you better than
 anybody living. i don’t love mr. heathcliff, though; and i dare not
 come when returns: will stay away many days?”
 
“not many,” answered linton; “but goes on to the moors frequently,
 since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two
 with in his absence. do say you will. i think i should not be
 peevish with you: you’d not provoke me, and you’d always be ready to
 help me, wouldn’t you?”
 
“yes,” said catherine, stroking his long soft hair, “if i could only
 get papa’s consent, i’d spend half my time with you. pretty linton! i
 wish you were my brother.”
 
“and then you would like as well as your father?” observed he, more
 cheerfully. “but papa says you would love better than him and all
 the world, if you were my wife; so i’d rather you were that.”
 
“no, i should never love anybody better than papa,” she returned
 gravely. “and people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their sisters
 and brothers: and if you were the latter, you would live with us, and
 papa would be as fond of you as is of me.”
 
linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but cathy affirmed
 they did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father’s aversion to
 her aunt. i endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue. i couldn’t
 succeed till everything she knew was out. master heathcliff, much
 irritated, asserted her relation was false.
 
“papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods,” she answered pertly.
 
“_my_ papa scorns yours!” cried linton. “he calls him sneaking fool.”
 
“yours is wicked man,” retorted catherine; “and you are very naughty
 to dare to repeat what says. must be wicked to have made aunt
 isabella leave him as she did.”
 
“she didn’t leave him,” said the boy; “you sha’n’t contradict me.”
 
“she did,” cried my young lady.
 
“well, i’ll tell _you_ something!” said linton. “your mother hated your
 father: now then.”
 
“oh!” exclaimed catherine, too enraged to continue.
 
“and she loved mine,” added he.
 
“you little liar! i hate you now!” she panted, and her face grew red
 with passion.
 
“she did! she did!” sang linton, sinking into the recess of his chair,
 and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other
 disputant, who stood behind.
 
“hush, master heathcliff!” i said; “that’s your father’s tale, too, i
 suppose.”
 
“it isn’t: you hold your tongue!” answered. “she did, she did,
 catherine! she did, she did!”
 
cathy, beside herself, gave the chair violent push, and caused him to
 fall against one arm. was immediately seized by suffocating cough
 that soon ended his triumph. it lasted so long that it frightened even
 me. as to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the
 mischief she had done: though she said nothing. i held him till the fit
 exhausted itself. then thrust away, and leant his head down
 silently. catherine quelled her lamentations also, took seat
 opposite, and looked solemnly into the fire.
 
“how do you feel now, master heathcliff?” i inquired, after waiting ten
 minutes.
 
“i wish _she_ felt as i do,” replied: “spiteful, cruel thing!
 hareton never touches me: never struck in his life. and i was
 better to-day: and there—” his voice died in whimper.
 
“_i_ didn’t strike you!” muttered cathy, chewing her lip to prevent
 another burst of emotion.
 
sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and kept it up for
 quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress his cousin apparently, for
 whenever caught stifled sob from her put renewed pain and
 pathos into the inflexions of his voice.
 
“i’m sorry i hurt you, linton,” she said at length, racked beyond
 endurance. “but _i_ couldn’t have been hurt by that little push, and i
 had idea that you could, either: you’re not much, are you, linton?
 don’t let go home thinking i’ve done you harm. answer! speak to me.”
 
“i can’t speak to you,” murmured; “you’ve hurt so that i shall
 lie awake all night choking with this cough. if you had it you’d know
 what it was; but _you’ll_ be comfortably asleep while i’m in agony, and
 nobody near me. i wonder how you would like to pass those fearful
 nights!” and began to wail aloud, for very pity of himself.
 
“since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,” i said, “it
 won’t be miss who spoils your ease: you’d be the same had she never
 come. however, she shall not disturb you again; and perhaps you’ll get
 quieter when we leave you.”
 
“must i go?” asked catherine dolefully, bending over him. “do you want
 to go, linton?”
 
“you can’t alter what you’ve done,” replied pettishly, shrinking
 from her, “unless you alter it for the worse by teasing into a
 fever.”
 
“well, then, i must go?” she repeated.
 
“let alone, at least,” said he; “i can’t bear your talking.”
 
she lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure tiresome
 while; but as neither looked up nor spoke, she finally made a
 movement to the door, and i followed. we were recalled by scream.
 linton had slid from his seat on to the hearthstone, and lay writhing
 in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of child, determined
 to be as grievous and harassing as it can. i thoroughly gauged his
 disposition from his behaviour, and saw at once it would be folly to
 attempt humouring him. not so my companion: she ran back in terror,
 knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till grew quiet
 from lack of breath: by means from compunction at distressing her.
 
“i shall lift him on to the settle,” i said, “and may roll about as
 pleases: we can’t stop to watch him. i hope you are satisfied, miss
 cathy, that _you_ are not the person to benefit him; and that his
 condition of health is not occasioned by attachment to you. now, then,
 there is! come away: as soon as knows there is nobody by to care
 for his nonsense, he’ll be glad to lie still.”
 
she placed cushion under his head, and offered him some water; he
 rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a
 stone or block of wood. she tried to put it more comfortably.
 
“i can’t do with that,” said; “it’s not high enough.”
 
catherine brought another to lay above it.
 
“that’s _too_ high,” murmured the provoking thing.
 
“how must i arrange it, then?” she asked despairingly.
 
twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle, and
 converted her shoulder into support.
 
“no, that won’t do,” i said. “you’ll be content with the cushion,
 master heathcliff. miss has wasted too much time on you already: we
 cannot remain five minutes longer.”
 
“yes, yes, we can!” replied cathy. “he’s good and patient now. he’s
 beginning to think i shall have far greater misery than will
 to-night, if i believe is the worse for my visit: and then i dare
 not come again. tell the truth about it, linton; for i mustn’t come, if
 i have hurt you.”
 
“you must come, to cure me,” answered. “you ought to come, because
 you have hurt me: you know you have extremely! i was not as ill when
 you entered as i am at present—was i?”
 
“but you’ve made yourself ill by crying and being in passion.—i
 didn’t do it all,” said his cousin. “however, we’ll be friends now. and
 you want me: you would wish to see sometimes, really?”
 
“i told you i did,” replied impatiently. “sit on the settle and let
 lean on your knee. that’s as mamma used to do, whole afternoons
 together. sit quite still and don’t talk: but you may sing song, if
 you can sing; or you may say nice long interesting ballad—one of
 those you promised to teach me; or story. i’d rather have ballad,
 though: begin.”
 
catherine repeated the longest she could remember. the employment
 pleased both mightily. linton would have another, and after that
 another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on
 until the clock struck twelve, and we heard hareton in the court,
 returning for his dinner.
 
“and to-morrow, catherine, will you be here to-morrow?” asked young
 heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluctantly.
 
“no,” i answered, “nor next day neither.” she, however, gave a
 different response evidently, for his forehead cleared as she stooped
 and whispered in his ear.
 
“you won’t go to-morrow, recollect, miss!” i commenced, when we were
 out of the house. “you are not dreaming of it, are you?”
 
she smiled.
 
“oh, i’ll take good care,” i continued: “i’ll have that lock mended,
 and you can escape by way else.”
 
“i can get over the wall,” she said laughing. “the grange is not a
 prison, ellen, and you are not my gaoler. and besides, i’m almost
 seventeen: i’m woman. and i’m certain linton would recover quickly if
 had to look after him. i’m older than is, you know, and wiser:
 less childish, am i not? and he’ll soon do as i direct him, with some
 slight coaxing. he’s pretty little darling when he’s good. i’d make
 such pet of him, if were mine. we should never quarrel, should we,
 after we were used to each other? don’t you like him, ellen?”
 
“like him!” i exclaimed. “the worst-tempered bit of sickly slip that
 ever struggled into its teens. happily, as mr. heathcliff conjectured,
 he’ll not win twenty. i doubt whether he’ll see spring, indeed. and
 small loss to his family whenever drops off. and lucky it is for us
 that his father took him: the kinder was treated, the more tedious
 and selfish he’d be. i’m glad you have chance of having him for a
 husband, miss catherine.”
 
my companion waxed serious at hearing this speech. to speak of his
 death so regardlessly wounded her feelings.
 
“he’s younger than i,” she answered, after protracted pause of
 meditation, “and ought to live the longest: will—he must live as
 long as i do. he’s as strong now as when first came into the north;
 i’m positive of that. it’s only cold that ails him, the same as papa
 has. you say papa will get better, and why shouldn’t he?”
 
“well, well,” i cried, “after all, we needn’t trouble ourselves; for
 listen, miss,—and mind, i’ll keep my word,—if you attempt going to
 wuthering heights again, with or without me, i shall inform mr. linton,
 and, unless allow it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be
 revived.”
 
“it has been revived,” muttered cathy, sulkily.
 
“must not be continued, then,” i said.
 
“we’ll see,” was her reply, and she set off at gallop, leaving to
 toil in the rear.
 
we both reached home before our dinner-time; my master supposed we had
 been wandering through the park, and therefore demanded no
 explanation of our absence. as soon as i entered i hastened to change
 my soaked shoes and stockings; but sitting such while at the heights
 had done the mischief. on the succeeding morning i was laid up, and
 during three weeks i remained incapacitated for attending to my duties:
 calamity never experienced prior to that period, and never, i am
 thankful to say, since.
 
my little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me, and
 cheer my solitude; the confinement brought exceedingly low. it is
 wearisome, to stirring active body: but few have slighter reasons for
 complaint than i had. the moment catherine left mr. linton’s room she
 appeared at my bedside. her day was divided between us; amusement
 usurped minute: she neglected her meals, her studies, and her play;
 and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched. she must have had a
 warm heart, when she loved her father so, to give so much to me. i said
 her days were divided between us; but the master retired early, and i
 generally needed nothing after six o’clock, thus the evening was her
 own. poor thing! i never considered what she did with herself after
 tea. and though frequently, when she looked in to bid good-night, i
 remarked fresh colour in her cheeks and pinkness over her slender
 fingers, instead of fancying the hue borrowed from cold ride across
 the moors, i laid it to the charge of hot fire in the library.
 



chapter xxiv
 

at the close of three weeks i was able to quit my chamber and move
 about the house. and on the first occasion of my sitting up in the
 evening i asked catherine to read to me, because my eyes were weak. we
 were in the library, the master having gone to bed: she consented,
 rather unwillingly, i fancied; and imagining my sort of books did not
 suit her, i bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
 she selected one of her own favourites, and got forward steadily about
 an hour; then came frequent questions.
 
“ellen, are not you tired? hadn’t you better lie down now? you’ll be
 sick, keeping up so long, ellen.”
 
“no, no, dear, i’m not tired,” i returned, continually.
 
perceiving immovable, she essayed another method of showing her
 disrelish for her occupation. it changed to yawning, and stretching,
 and—
 
“ellen, i’m tired.”
 
“give over then and talk,” i answered.
 
that was worse: she fretted and sighed, and looked at her watch till
 eight, and finally went to her room, completely overdone with sleep;
 judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing she
 inflicted on her eyes. the following night she seemed more impatient
 still; and on the third from recovering my company she complained of a
 headache, and left me. i thought her conduct odd; and having remained
 alone long while, i resolved on going and inquiring whether she were
 better, and asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of upstairs
 in the dark. catherine could i discover upstairs, and none below.
 the servants affirmed they had not seen her. i listened at mr. edgar’s
 door; all was silence. i returned to her apartment, extinguished my
 candle, and seated myself in the window.
 
the moon shone bright; sprinkling of snow covered the ground, and i
 reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it into her head to walk
 about the garden, for refreshment. i did detect figure creeping along
 the inner fence of the park; but it was not my young mistress: on its
 emerging into the light, i recognised one of the grooms. stood a
 considerable period, viewing the carriage-road through the grounds;
 then started off at brisk pace, as if had detected something, and
 reappeared presently, leading miss’s pony; and there she was, just
 dismounted, and walking by its side. the man took his charge stealthily
 across the grass towards the stable. cathy entered by the
 casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where
 i awaited her. she put the door gently to, slipped off her snowy
 shoes, untied her hat, and was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage,
 to lay aside her mantle, when i suddenly rose and revealed myself. the
 surprise petrified her an instant: she uttered an inarticulate
 exclamation, and stood fixed.
 
“my dear miss catherine,” i began, too vividly impressed by her recent
 kindness to break into scold, “where have you been riding out at this
 hour? and why should you try to deceive by telling tale? where
 have you been? speak!”
 
“to the bottom of the park,” she stammered. “i didn’t tell tale.”
 
“and nowhere else?” i demanded.
 
“no,” was the muttered reply.
 
“oh, catherine!” i cried, sorrowfully. “you know you have been doing
 wrong, or you wouldn’t be driven to uttering an untruth to me. that
 does grieve me. i’d rather be three months ill, than hear you frame a
 deliberate lie.”
 
she sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw her arms round my
 neck.
 
“well, ellen, i’m so afraid of you being angry,” she said. “promise not
 to be angry, and you shall know the very truth: i hate to hide it.”
 
we sat down in the window-seat; i assured her i would not scold,
 whatever her secret might be, and i guessed it, of course; so she
 commenced—
 
“i’ve been to wuthering heights, ellen, and i’ve never missed going a
 day since you fell ill; except thrice before, and twice after you left
 your room. i gave michael books and pictures to prepare minny every
 evening, and to put her back in the stable: you mustn’t scold _him_
 either, mind. i was at the heights by half-past six, and generally
 stayed till half-past eight, and then galloped home. it was not to
 amuse myself that i went: i was often wretched all the time. now and
 then i was happy: once in week perhaps. at first, i expected there
 would be sad work persuading you to let keep my word to linton: for
 i had engaged to call again next day, when we quitted him; but, as you
 stayed upstairs on the morrow, i escaped that trouble. while michael
 was refastening the lock of the park door in the afternoon, i got
 possession of the key, and told him how my cousin wished to visit
 him, because was sick, and couldn’t come to the grange; and how papa
 would object to my going: and then i negotiated with him about the
 pony. is fond of reading, and thinks of leaving soon to get
 married; so offered, if i would lend him books out of the library,
 to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him my own, and that
 satisfied him better.
 
“on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that
 is their housekeeper) made us clean room and good fire, and told us
 that, as joseph was out at prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was
 off with his dogs—robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard
 afterwards—we might do what we liked. she brought some warm wine and
 gingerbread, and appeared exceedingly good-natured; and linton sat in
 the arm-chair, and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone,
 and we laughed and talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we
 planned where we would go, and what we would do in summer. i needn’t
 repeat that, because you would call it silly.
 
“one time, however, we were near quarrelling. said the pleasantest
 manner of spending hot july day was lying from morning till evening
 on bank of heath in the middle of the moors, with the bees humming
 dreamily about among the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead,
 and the blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly. that
 was his most perfect idea of heaven’s happiness: mine was rocking in a
 rustling green tree, with west wind blowing, and bright white clouds
 flitting rapidly above; and not only larks, but throstles, and
 blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every side,
 and the moors seen at distance, broken into cool dusky dells; but
 close by great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the breeze;
 and woods and sounding water, and the whole world awake and wild with
 joy. wanted all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; i wanted all to
 sparkle and dance in glorious jubilee. i said his heaven would be
 only half alive; and said mine would be drunk: i said i should fall
 asleep in his; and said could not breathe in mine, and began to
 grow very snappish. at last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the
 right weather came; and then we kissed each other and were friends.
 
“after sitting still an hour, i looked at the great room with its
 smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to play in,
 if we removed the table; and i asked linton to call zillah in to help
 us, and we’d have game at blindman’s-buff; she should try to catch
 us: you used to, you know, ellen. wouldn’t: there was pleasure in
 it, said; but consented to play at ball with me. we found two in
 cupboard, among heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores
 and shuttlecocks. one was marked c., and the other h.; i wished to have
 the c., because that stood for catherine, and the h. might be for
 heathcliff, his name; but the bran came out of h., and linton didn’t
 like it. i beat him constantly; and got cross again, and coughed,
 and returned to his chair. that night, though, easily recovered his
 good humour: was charmed with two or three pretty songs—_your_
 songs, ellen; and when i was obliged to go, begged and entreated me
 to come the following evening; and i promised. minny and i went flying
 home as light as air; and i dreamt of wuthering heights and my sweet,
 darling cousin, till morning.
 
“on the morrow i was sad; partly because you were poorly, and partly
 that i wished my father knew, and approved of my excursions: but it was
 beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as i rode on, the gloom cleared. i
 shall have another happy evening, i thought to myself; and what
 delights more, my pretty linton will. i trotted up their garden, and
 was turning round to the back, when that fellow earnshaw met me, took
 my bridle, and bid go in by the front entrance. patted minny’s
 neck, and said she was bonny beast, and appeared as if wanted me
 to speak to him. i only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it
 would kick him. answered in his vulgar accent, ‘it wouldn’t do mitch
 hurt if it did;’ and surveyed its legs with smile. i was half
 inclined to make it try; however, moved off to open the door, and,
 as raised the latch, looked up to the inscription above, and
 said, with stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation: ‘miss
 catherine! i can read yon, now.’
 
“‘wonderful,’ i exclaimed. ‘pray let us hear you—you _are_ grown
 clever!’
 
“he spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name—‘hareton earnshaw.’
 
“‘and the figures?’ i cried, encouragingly, perceiving that came to
 dead halt.
 
“‘i cannot tell them yet,’ answered.
 
“‘oh, you dunce!’ i said, laughing heartily at his failure.
 
“the fool stared, with grin hovering about his lips, and scowl
 gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether might not join in
 my mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really
 was, contempt. i settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity
 and desiring him to walk away, for i came to see linton, not him. he
 reddened—i saw that by the moonlight—dropped his hand from the latch,
 and skulked off, picture of mortified vanity. imagined himself to
 be as accomplished as linton, i suppose, because could spell his own
 name; and was marvellously discomfited that i didn’t think the same.”
 
“stop, miss catherine, dear!” i interrupted. “i shall not scold, but i
 don’t like your conduct there. if you had remembered that hareton was
 your cousin as much as master heathcliff, you would have felt how
 improper it was to behave in that way. at least, it was praiseworthy
 ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as linton; and
 probably did not learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed
 of his ignorance before, i have doubt; and wished to remedy it
 and please you. to sneer at his imperfect attempt was very bad
 breeding. had _you_ been brought up in his circumstances, would you be
 less rude? was as quick and as intelligent child as ever you were;
 and i’m hurt that should be despised now, because that base
 heathcliff has treated him so unjustly.”
 
“well, ellen, you won’t cry about it, will you?” she exclaimed,
 surprised at my earnestness. “but wait, and you shall hear if conned
 his b c to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the
 brute. i entered; linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to
 welcome me.
 
“‘i’m ill to-night, catherine, love,’ said; ‘and you must have all
 the talk, and let listen. come, and sit by me. i was sure you
 wouldn’t break your word, and i’ll make you promise again, before you
 go.’
 
“i knew now that i mustn’t tease him, as was ill; and i spoke softly
 and put questions, and avoided irritating him in any way. i had
 brought some of my nicest books for him: asked to read little
 of one, and i was about to comply, when earnshaw burst the door open:
 having gathered venom with reflection. advanced direct to us, seized
 linton by the arm, and swung him off the seat.
 
“‘get to thy own room!’ said, in voice almost inarticulate with
 passion; and his face looked swelled and furious. ‘take her there if
 she comes to see thee: thou shalln’t keep out of this. begone wi’ ye
 both!’
 
“he swore at us, and left linton time to answer, nearly throwing him
 into the kitchen; and clenched his fist as i followed, seemingly
 longing to knock down. i was afraid for moment, and i let one
 volume fall; kicked it after me, and shut us out. i heard a
 malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious
 joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and quivering.
 
“‘i wer sure he’d sarve ye out! he’s grand lad! he’s getten t’ raight
 sperrit in him! _he_ knaws—ay, knaws, as weel as i do, who sud be t’
 maister yonder—ech, ech, ech! made ye skift properly! ech, ech,
 ech!’
 
“‘where must we go?’ i asked of my cousin, disregarding the old
 wretch’s mockery.
 
“linton was white and trembling. was not pretty then, ellen: oh, no!
 looked frightful; for his thin face and large eyes were wrought into
 an expression of frantic, powerless fury. grasped the handle of the
 door, and shook it: it was fastened inside.
 
“‘if you don’t let in, i’ll kill you!—if you don’t let in, i’ll
 kill you!’ rather shrieked than said. ‘devil! devil!—i’ll kill
 you—i’ll kill you!’
 
“joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.
 
“‘thear, that’s t’ father!’ cried. ‘that’s father! we’ve allas
 summut o’ either side in us. niver heed, hareton, lad—dunnut be
 ’feard—he cannot get at thee!’
 
“i took hold of linton’s hands, and tried to pull him away; but he
 shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed. at last his cries were
 choked by dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and
 fell on the ground. i ran into the yard, sick with terror; and
 called for zillah, as loud as i could. she soon heard me: she was
 milking the cows in shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work,
 she inquired what there was to do? i hadn’t breath to explain; dragging
 her in, i looked about for linton. earnshaw had come out to examine the
 mischief had caused, and was then conveying the poor thing
 upstairs. zillah and i ascended after him; but stopped at the top
 of the steps, and said i shouldn’t go in: i must go home. i exclaimed
 that had killed linton, and i _would_ enter. joseph locked the door,
 and declared i should do ‘no sich stuff,’ and asked whether i were
 ‘bahn to be as mad as him.’ i stood crying till the housekeeper
 reappeared. she affirmed would be better in bit, but couldn’t
 do with that shrieking and din; and she took me, and nearly carried me
 into the house.
 
“ellen, i was ready to tear my hair off my head! i sobbed and wept so
 that my eyes were almost blind; and the ruffian you have such sympathy
 with stood opposite: presuming every now and then to bid ‘wisht,’
 and denying that it was his fault; and, finally, frightened by my
 assertions that i would tell papa, and that should be put in prison
 and hanged, commenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide
 his cowardly agitation. still, i was not rid of him: when at length
 they compelled to depart, and i had got some hundred yards off the
 premises, suddenly issued from the shadow of the road-side, and
 checked minny and took hold of me.
 
“‘miss catherine, i’m ill grieved,’ began, ‘but it’s rayther too
 bad—’
 
“i gave him cut with my whip, thinking perhaps would murder me. he
 let go, thundering one of his horrid curses, and i galloped home more
 than half out of my senses.
 
“i didn’t bid you good-night that evening, and i didn’t go to wuthering
 heights the next: i wished to go exceedingly; but i was strangely
 excited, and dreaded to hear that linton was dead, sometimes; and
 sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering hareton. on the
 third day i took courage: at least, i couldn’t bear longer suspense,
 and stole off once more. i went at five o’clock, and walked; fancying i
 might manage to creep into the house, and up to linton’s room,
 unobserved. however, the dogs gave notice of my approach. zillah
 received me, and saying ‘the lad was mending nicely,’ showed into a
 small, tidy, carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, i
 beheld linton laid on little sofa, reading one of my books. but he
 would neither speak to nor look at me, through whole hour, ellen:
 has such an unhappy temper. and what quite confounded me, when he
 did open his mouth, it was to utter the falsehood that i had occasioned
 the uproar, and hareton was not to blame! unable to reply, except
 passionately, i got up and walked from the room. sent after a
 faint ‘catherine!’ did not reckon on being answered so: but i
 wouldn’t turn back; and the morrow was the second day on which i stayed
 at home, nearly determined to visit him more. but it was so
 miserable going to bed and getting up, and never hearing anything about
 him, that my resolution melted into air before it was properly formed.
 it _had_ appeared wrong to take the journey once; now it seemed wrong
 to refrain. michael came to ask if must saddle minny; i said ‘yes,’
 and considered myself doing duty as she bore over the hills. i was
 forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it was use
 trying to conceal my presence.
 
“‘young master is in the house,’ said zillah, as she saw making for
 the parlour. i went in; earnshaw was there also, but quitted the
 room directly. linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking
 up to the fire, i began in serious tone, partly meaning it to be
 true—
 
“‘as you don’t like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
 hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last
 meeting: let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no
 wish to see me, and that mustn’t invent any more falsehoods on the
 subject.’
 
“‘sit down and take your hat off, catherine,’ answered. ‘you are so
 much happier than i am, you ought to be better. papa talks enough of my
 defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural i should
 doubt myself. i doubt whether i am not altogether as worthless as he
 calls me, frequently; and then i feel so cross and bitter, i hate
 everybody! i _am_ worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit,
 almost always; and, if you choose, you _may_ say good-bye: you’ll get
 rid of an annoyance. only, catherine, do this justice: believe that
 if i might be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, i would
 be; as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy. and
 believe that your kindness has made love you deeper than if i
 deserved your love: and though i couldn’t, and cannot help showing my
 nature to you, i regret it and repent it; and shall regret and repent
 it till i die!’
 
“i felt spoke the truth; and i felt i must forgive him: and, though
 we should quarrel the next moment, i must forgive him again. we were
 reconciled; but we cried, both of us, the whole time i stayed: not
 entirely for sorrow; yet i _was_ sorry linton had that distorted
 nature. he’ll never let his friends be at ease, and he’ll never be at
 ease himself! i have always gone to his little parlour, since that
 night; because his father returned the day after.
 
“about three times, i think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were
 the first evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled: now
 with his selfishness and spite, and now with his sufferings: but i’ve
 learned to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the
 latter. mr. heathcliff purposely avoids me: i have hardly seen him at
 all. last sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, i heard him
 abusing poor linton cruelly for his conduct of the night before. i
 can’t tell how knew of it, unless listened. linton had certainly
 behaved provokingly: however, it was the business of nobody but me, and
 i interrupted mr. heathcliff’s lecture by entering and telling him so.
 burst into laugh, and went away, saying was glad i took that
 view of the matter. since then, i’ve told linton must whisper his
 bitter things. now, ellen, you have heard all. i can’t be prevented
 from going to wuthering heights, except by inflicting misery on two
 people; whereas, if you’ll only not tell papa, my going need disturb
 the tranquillity of none. you’ll not tell, will you? it will be very
 heartless, if you do.”
 
“i’ll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, miss catherine,” i
 replied. “it requires some study; and so i’ll leave you to your rest,
 and go think it over.”
 
i thought it over aloud, in my master’s presence; walking straight from
 her room to his, and relating the whole story: with the exception of
 her conversations with her cousin, and any mention of hareton. mr.
 linton was alarmed and distressed, more than would acknowledge to
 me. in the morning, catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence, and
 she learnt also that her secret visits were to end. in vain she wept
 and writhed against the interdict, and implored her father to have pity
 on linton: all she got to comfort her was promise that would write
 and give him leave to come to the grange when pleased; but
 explaining that must longer expect to see catherine at wuthering
 heights. perhaps, had been aware of his nephew’s disposition and
 state of health, would have seen fit to withhold even that slight
 consolation.
 



chapter xxv
 

“these things happened last winter, sir,” said mrs. dean; “hardly more
 than year ago. last winter, i did not think, at another twelve
 months’ end, i should be amusing stranger to the family with relating
 them! yet, who knows how long you’ll be stranger? you’re too young to
 rest always contented, living by yourself; and i some way fancy one
 could see catherine linton and not love her. you smile; but why do you
 look so lively and interested when i talk about her? and why have you
 asked to hang her picture over your fireplace? and why—?”
 
“stop, my good friend!” i cried. “it may be very possible that _i_
 should love her; but would she love me? i doubt it too much to venture
 my tranquillity by running into temptation: and then my home is not
 here. i’m of the busy world, and to its arms i must return. go on. was
 catherine obedient to her father’s commands?”
 
“she was,” continued the housekeeper. “her affection for him was still
 the chief sentiment in her heart; and spoke without anger: spoke
 in the deep tenderness of one about to leave his treasure amid perils
 and foes, where his remembered words would be the only aid that he
 could bequeath to guide her. said to me, few days afterwards, ‘i
 wish my nephew would write, ellen, or call. tell me, sincerely, what
 you think of him: is changed for the better, or is there prospect
 of improvement, as grows man?’
 
“‘he’s very delicate, sir,’ i replied; ‘and scarcely likely to reach
 manhood: but this i can say, does not resemble his father; and if
 miss catherine had the misfortune to marry him, would not be beyond
 her control: unless she were extremely and foolishly indulgent.
 however, master, you’ll have plenty of time to get acquainted with him
 and see whether would suit her: it wants four years and more to his
 being of age.’”
 
edgar sighed; and, walking to the window, looked out towards gimmerton
 kirk. it was misty afternoon, but the february sun shone dimly, and
 we could just distinguish the two fir-trees in the yard, and the
 sparely-scattered gravestones.
 
“i’ve prayed often,” half soliloquised, “for the approach of what is
 coming; and now i begin to shrink, and fear it. i thought the memory of
 the hour i came down that glen bridegroom would be less sweet than
 the anticipation that i was soon, in few months, or, possibly, weeks,
 to be carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow! ellen, i’ve been very
 happy with my little cathy: through winter nights and summer days she
 was living hope at my side. but i’ve been as happy musing by myself
 among those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long june
 evenings, on the green mound of her mother’s grave, and
 wishing—yearning for the time when i might lie beneath it. what can i
 do for cathy? how must i quit her? i’d not care one moment for linton
 being heathcliff’s son; nor for his taking her from me, if could
 console her for my loss. i’d not care that heathcliff gained his ends,
 and triumphed in robbing of my last blessing! but should linton be
 unworthy—only feeble tool to his father—i cannot abandon her to him!
 and, hard though it be to crush her buoyant spirit, i must persevere in
 making her sad while i live, and leaving her solitary when i die.
 darling! i’d rather resign her to god, and lay her in the earth before
 me.”
 
“resign her to god as it is, sir,” i answered, “and if we should lose
 you—which may forbid—under his providence, i’ll stand her friend and
 counsellor to the last. miss catherine is good girl: i don’t fear
 that she will go wilfully wrong; and people who do their duty are
 always finally rewarded.”
 
spring advanced; yet my master gathered real strength, though he
 resumed his walks in the grounds with his daughter. to her
 inexperienced notions, this itself was sign of convalescence; and
 then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes were bright; she felt
 sure of his recovering. on her seventeenth birthday, did not visit
 the churchyard: it was raining, and i observed—
 
“you’ll surely not go out to-night, sir?”
 
answered,—“no, i’ll defer it this year little longer.”
 
wrote again to linton, expressing his great desire to see him; and,
 had the invalid been presentable, i’ve doubt his father would have
 permitted him to come. as it was, being instructed, returned an
 answer, intimating that mr. heathcliff objected to his calling at the
 grange; but his uncle’s kind remembrance delighted him, and hoped to
 meet him sometimes in his rambles, and personally to petition that his
 cousin and might not remain long so utterly divided.
 
that part of his letter was simple, and probably his own. heathcliff
 knew could plead eloquently for catherine’s company, then.
 
“i do not ask,” said, “that she may visit here; but am i never to
 see her, because my father forbids to go to her home, and you forbid
 her to come to mine? do, now and then, ride with her towards the
 heights; and let us exchange few words, in your presence! we have
 done nothing to deserve this separation; and you are not angry with me:
 you have reason to dislike me, you allow, yourself. dear uncle! send
 kind note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you please,
 except at thrushcross grange. i believe an interview would convince you
 that my father’s character is not mine: affirms i am more your
 nephew than his son; and though i have faults which render unworthy
 of catherine, she has excused them, and for her sake, you should also.
 you inquire after my health—it is better; but while i remain cut off
 from all hope, and doomed to solitude, or the society of those who
 never did and never will like me, how can i be cheerful and well?”
 
edgar, though felt for the boy, could not consent to grant his
 request; because could not accompany catherine. said, in summer,
 perhaps, they might meet: meantime, wished him to continue writing
 at intervals, and engaged to give him what advice and comfort was
 able by letter; being well aware of his hard position in his family.
 linton complied; and had been unrestrained, would probably have
 spoiled all by filling his epistles with complaints and lamentations:
 but his father kept sharp watch over him; and, of course, insisted on
 every line that my master sent being shown; so, instead of penning his
 peculiar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes constantly
 uppermost in his thoughts, harped on the cruel obligation of being
 held asunder from his friend and love; and gently intimated that mr.
 linton must allow an interview soon, or should fear was purposely
 deceiving him with empty promises.
 
cathy was powerful ally at home; and between them they at length
 persuaded my master to acquiesce in their having ride or walk
 together about once week, under my guardianship, and on the moors
 nearest the grange: for june found him still declining. though had
 set aside yearly portion of his income for my young lady’s fortune,
 had natural desire that she might retain—or at least return in a
 short time to—the house of her ancestors; and considered her only
 prospect of doing that was by union with his heir; had idea
 that the latter was failing almost as fast as himself; nor had any one,
 i believe: doctor visited the heights, and one saw master
 heathcliff to make report of his condition among us. i, for my part,
 began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that must be actually
 rallying, when mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed
 so earnest in pursuing his object. i could not picture father
 treating dying child as tyrannically and wickedly as i afterwards
 learned heathcliff had treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness:
 his efforts redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling
 plans were threatened with defeat by death.
 



chapter xxvi
 

summer was already past its prime, when edgar reluctantly yielded his
 assent to their entreaties, and catherine and i set out on our first
 ride to join her cousin. it was close, sultry day: devoid of
 sunshine, but with sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain: and our
 place of meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads.
 on arriving there, however, little herd-boy, despatched as a
 messenger, told us that,—“maister linton wer just o’ this side th’
 heights: and he’d be mitch obleeged to us to gang on bit further.”
 
“then master linton has forgot the first injunction of his uncle,” i
 observed: “he bid us keep on the grange land, and here we are off at
 once.”
 
“well, we’ll turn our horses’ heads round when we reach him,” answered
 my companion; “our excursion shall lie towards home.”
 
but when we reached him, and that was scarcely quarter of mile from
 his own door, we found had horse; and we were forced to dismount,
 and leave ours to graze. lay on the heath, awaiting our approach,
 and did not rise till we came within few yards. then walked so
 feebly, and looked so pale, that i immediately exclaimed,—“why, master
 heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying ramble this morning. how ill
 you do look!”
 
catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she changed the
 ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation
 on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether were
 worse than usual?
 
“no—better—better!” panted, trembling, and retaining her hand as if
 needed its support, while his large blue eyes wandered timidly over
 her; the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the
 languid expression they once possessed.
 
“but you have been worse,” persisted his cousin; “worse than when i saw
 you last; you are thinner, and—”
 
“i’m tired,” interrupted, hurriedly. “it is too hot for walking, let
 us rest here. and, in the morning, i often feel sick—papa says i grow
 so fast.”
 
badly satisfied, cathy sat down, and reclined beside her.
 
“this is something like your paradise,” said she, making an effort at
 cheerfulness. “you recollect the two days we agreed to spend in the
 place and way each thought pleasantest? this is nearly yours, only
 there are clouds; but then they are so soft and mellow: it is nicer
 than sunshine. next week, if you can, we’ll ride down to the grange
 park, and try mine.”
 
linton did not appear to remember what she talked of; and had
 evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of conversation. his
 lack of interest in the subjects she started, and his equal incapacity
 to contribute to her entertainment, were so obvious that she could not
 conceal her disappointment. an indefinite alteration had come over his
 whole person and manner. the pettishness that might be caressed into
 fondness, had yielded to listless apathy; there was less of the
 peevish temper of child which frets and teases on purpose to be
 soothed, and more of the self-absorbed moroseness of confirmed
 invalid, repelling consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured
 mirth of others as an insult. catherine perceived, as well as i did,
 that held it rather punishment, than gratification, to endure
 our company; and she made scruple of proposing, presently, to
 depart. that proposal, unexpectedly, roused linton from his lethargy,
 and threw him into strange state of agitation. glanced fearfully
 towards the heights, begging she would remain another half-hour, at
 least.
 
“but i think,” said cathy, “you’d be more comfortable at home than
 sitting here; and i cannot amuse you to-day, i see, by my tales, and
 songs, and chatter: you have grown wiser than i, in these six months;
 you have little taste for my diversions now: or else, if i could amuse
 you, i’d willingly stay.”
 
“stay to rest yourself,” replied. “and, catherine, don’t think or
 say that i’m _very_ unwell: it is the heavy weather and heat that make
 dull; and i walked about, before you came, great deal for me. tell
 uncle i’m in tolerable health, will you?”
 
“i’ll tell him that _you_ say so, linton. i couldn’t affirm that you
 are,” observed my young lady, wondering at his pertinacious assertion
 of what was evidently an untruth.
 
“and be here again next thursday,” continued he, shunning her puzzled
 gaze. “and give him my thanks for permitting you to come—my best
 thanks, catherine. and—and, if you _did_ meet my father, and asked
 you about me, don’t lead him to suppose that i’ve been extremely silent
 and stupid: don’t look sad and downcast, as you _are_ doing—he’ll be
 angry.”
 
“i care nothing for his anger,” exclaimed cathy, imagining she would be
 its object.
 
“but i do,” said her cousin, shuddering. “_don’t_ provoke him against
 me, catherine, for is very hard.”
 
“is severe to you, master heathcliff?” i inquired. “has grown
 weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?”
 
linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping her seat by
 his side another ten minutes, during which his head fell drowsily on
 his breast, and uttered nothing except suppressed moans of
 exhaustion or pain, cathy began to seek solace in looking for
 bilberries, and sharing the produce of her researches with me: she did
 not offer them to him, for she saw further notice would only weary and
 annoy.
 
“is it half-an-hour now, ellen?” she whispered in my ear, at last. “i
 can’t tell why we should stay. he’s asleep, and papa will be wanting us
 back.”
 
“well, we must not leave him asleep,” i answered; “wait till wakes,
 and be patient. you were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to
 see poor linton has soon evaporated!”
 
“why did _he_ wish to see me?” returned catherine. “in his crossest
 humours, formerly, i liked him better than i do in his present curious
 mood. it’s just as if it were task was compelled to perform—this
 interview—for fear his father should scold him. but i’m hardly going to
 come to give mr. heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason may have for
 ordering linton to undergo this penance. and, though i’m glad he’s
 better in health, i’m sorry he’s so much less pleasant, and so much
 less affectionate to me.”
 
“you think _he is_ better in health, then?” i said.
 
“yes,” she answered; “because always made such great deal of his
 sufferings, you know. is not tolerably well, as told to tell
 papa; but he’s better, very likely.”
 
“there you differ with me, miss cathy,” i remarked; “i should
 conjecture him to be far worse.”
 
linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror, and asked if
 any one had called his name.
 
“no,” said catherine; “unless in dreams. i cannot conceive how you
 manage to doze out of doors, in the morning.”
 
“i thought i heard my father,” gasped, glancing up to the frowning
 nab above us. “you are sure nobody spoke?”
 
“quite sure,” replied his cousin. “only ellen and i were disputing
 concerning your health. are you truly stronger, linton, than when we
 separated in winter? if you be, i’m certain one thing is not
 stronger—your regard for me: speak,—are you?”
 
the tears gushed from linton’s eyes as answered, “yes, yes, i am!”
 and, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up
 and down to detect its owner.
 
cathy rose. “for to-day we must part,” she said. “and i won’t conceal
 that i have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though i’ll
 mention it to nobody but you: not that i stand in awe of mr.
 heathcliff.”
 
“hush,” murmured linton; “for god’s sake, hush! he’s coming.” and he
 clung to catherine’s arm, striving to detain her; but at that
 announcement she hastily disengaged herself, and whistled to minny, who
 obeyed her like dog.
 
“i’ll be here next thursday,” she cried, springing to the saddle.
 “good-bye. quick, ellen!”
 
and so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed
 was in anticipating his father’s approach.
 
before we reached home, catherine’s displeasure softened into a
 perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with vague,
 uneasy doubts about linton’s actual circumstances, physical and social:
 in which i partook, though i counselled her not to say much; for a
 second journey would make us better judges. my master requested an
 account of our ongoings. his nephew’s offering of thanks was duly
 delivered, miss cathy gently touching on the rest: i also threw little
 light on his inquiries, for i hardly knew what to hide and what to
 reveal.
 



chapter xxvii
 

seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth
 rapid alteration of edgar linton’s state. the havoc that months had
 previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours. catherine
 we would fain have deluded yet; but her own quick spirit refused to
 delude her: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful
 probability, gradually ripening into certainty. she had not the heart
 to mention her ride, when thursday came round; i mentioned it for her,
 and obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library,
 where her father stopped short time daily—the brief period could
 bear to sit up—and his chamber, had become her whole world. she grudged
 each moment that did not find her bending over his pillow, or seated by
 his side. her countenance grew wan with watching and sorrow, and my
 master gladly dismissed her to what flattered himself would be a
 happy change of scene and society; drawing comfort from the hope that
 she would not now be left entirely alone after his death.
 
had fixed idea, i guessed by several observations let fall,
 that, as his nephew resembled him in person, would resemble him in
 mind; for linton’s letters bore few or indications of his defective
 character. and i, through pardonable weakness, refrained from
 correcting the error; asking myself what good there would be in
 disturbing his last moments with information that had neither power
 nor opportunity to turn to account.
 
we deferred our excursion till the afternoon; golden afternoon of
 august: every breath from the hills so full of life, that it seemed
 whoever respired it, though dying, might revive. catherine’s face was
 just like the landscape—shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid
 succession; but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more
 transient; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that
 passing forgetfulness of its cares.
 
we discerned linton watching at the same spot had selected before.
 my young mistress alighted, and told that, as she was resolved to
 stay very little while, i had better hold the pony and remain on
 horseback; but i dissented: i wouldn’t risk losing sight of the charge
 committed to minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
 master heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion:
 not the animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked
 more like fear.
 
“it is late!” said, speaking short and with difficulty. “is not your
 father very ill? i thought you wouldn’t come.”
 
“_why_ won’t you be candid?” cried catherine, swallowing her greeting.
 “why cannot you say at once you don’t want me? it is strange, linton,
 that for the second time you have brought here on purpose,
 apparently to distress us both, and for reason besides!”
 
linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half ashamed;
 but his cousin’s patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical
 behaviour.
 
“my father _is_ very ill,” she said; “and why am i called from his
 bedside? why didn’t you send to absolve from my promise, when you
 wished i wouldn’t keep it? come! i desire an explanation: playing and
 trifling are completely banished out of my mind; and i can’t dance
 attendance on your affectations now!”
 
“my affectations!” murmured; “what are they? for heaven’s sake,
 catherine, don’t look so angry! despise as much as you please; i am
 worthless, cowardly wretch: i can’t be scorned enough; but i’m too
 mean for your anger. hate my father, and spare for contempt.”
 
“nonsense!” cried catherine in passion. “foolish, silly boy! and
 there! trembles, as if i were really going to touch him! you needn’t
 bespeak contempt, linton: anybody will have it spontaneously at your
 service. get off! i shall return home: it is folly dragging you from
 the hearth-stone, and pretending—what do we pretend? let go my frock!
 if i pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
 spurn such pity. ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is. rise,
 and don’t degrade yourself into an abject reptile—_don’t_!”
 
with streaming face and an expression of agony, linton had thrown his
 nerveless frame along the ground: seemed convulsed with exquisite
 terror.
 
“oh!” sobbed, “i cannot bear it! catherine, catherine, i’m a
 traitor, too, and i dare not tell you! but leave me, and i shall be
 killed! _dear_ catherine, my life is in your hands: and you have said
 you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn’t harm you. you’ll not go,
 then? kind, sweet, good catherine! and perhaps you _will_ consent—and
 he’ll let die with you!”
 
my young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to raise him.
 the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame her vexation, and she
 grew thoroughly moved and alarmed.
 
“consent to what?” she asked. “to stay! tell the meaning of this
 strange talk, and i will. you contradict your own words, and distract
 me! be calm and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on your
 heart. you wouldn’t injure me, linton, would you? you wouldn’t let any
 enemy hurt me, if you could prevent it? i’ll believe you are coward,
 for yourself, but not cowardly betrayer of your best friend.”
 
“but my father threatened me,” gasped the boy, clasping his attenuated
 fingers, “and i dread him—i dread him! i _dare_ not tell!”
 
“oh, well!” said catherine, with scornful compassion, “keep your
 secret: _i’m_ coward. save yourself: i’m not afraid!”
 
her magnanimity provoked his tears: wept wildly, kissing her
 supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out. i was
 cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined catherine should
 never suffer to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when,
 hearing rustle among the ling, i looked up and saw mr. heathcliff
 almost close upon us, descending the heights. didn’t cast glance
 towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for linton’s
 sobs to be audible; but hailing in the almost hearty tone assumed
 to none besides, and the sincerity of which i couldn’t avoid doubting,
 said—
 
“it is something to see you so near to my house, nelly. how are you at
 the grange? let us hear. the rumour goes,” added, in lower tone,
 “that edgar linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate his
 illness?”
 
“no; my master is dying,” i replied: “it is true enough. sad thing it
 will be for us all, but blessing for him!”
 
“how long will last, do you think?” asked.
 
“i don’t know,” i said.
 
“because,” continued, looking at the two young people, who were
 fixed under his eye—linton appeared as if could not venture to stir
 or raise his head, and catherine could not move, on his
 account—“because that lad yonder seems determined to beat me; and i’d
 thank his uncle to be quick, and go before him! hallo! has the whelp
 been playing that game long? i _did_ give him some lessons about
 snivelling. is pretty lively with miss linton generally?”
 
“lively? no—he has shown the greatest distress,” i answered. “to see
 him, i should say, that instead of rambling with his sweetheart on the
 hills, ought to be in bed, under the hands of doctor.”
 
“he shall be, in day or two,” muttered heathcliff. “but first—get up,
 linton! get up!” shouted. “don’t grovel on the ground there: up,
 this moment!”
 
linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear,
 caused by his father’s glance towards him, i suppose: there was nothing
 else to produce such humiliation. made several efforts to obey, but
 his little strength was annihilated for the time, and fell back
 again with moan. mr. heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean
 against ridge of turf.
 
“now,” said he, with curbed ferocity, “i’m getting angry—and if you
 don’t command that paltry spirit of yours—_damn_ you! get up directly!”
 
“i will, father,” panted. “only, let alone, or i shall faint.
 i’ve done as you wished, i’m sure. catherine will tell you that i—that
 i—have been cheerful. ah! keep by me, catherine; give your hand.”
 
“take mine,” said his father; “stand on your feet. there now—she’ll
 lend you her arm: that’s right, look at _her_. you would imagine i was
 the devil himself, miss linton, to excite such horror. be so kind as to
 walk home with him, will you? shudders if i touch him.”
 
“linton dear!” whispered catherine, “i can’t go to wuthering heights:
 papa has forbidden me. he’ll not harm you: why are you so afraid?”
 
“i can never re-enter that house,” answered. “i’m _not_ to re-enter
 it without you!”
 
“stop!” cried his father. “we’ll respect catherine’s filial scruples.
 nelly, take him in, and i’ll follow your advice concerning the doctor,
 without delay.”
 
“you’ll do well,” replied i. “but i must remain with my mistress: to
 mind your is not my business.”
 
“you are very stiff,” said heathcliff, “i know that: but you’ll force
 to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.
 come, then, my hero. are you willing to return, escorted by me?”
 
approached once more, and made as if would seize the fragile
 being; but, shrinking back, linton clung to his cousin, and implored
 her to accompany him, with frantic importunity that admitted no
 denial. however i disapproved, i couldn’t hinder her: indeed, how could
 she have refused him herself? what was filling him with dread we had no
 means of discerning; but there was, powerless under its gripe, and
 any addition seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy. we reached the
 threshold; catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had
 conducted the invalid to chair, expecting her out immediately; when
 mr. heathcliff, pushing forward, exclaimed—“my house is not stricken
 with the plague, nelly; and i have mind to be hospitable to-day: sit
 down, and allow to shut the door.”
 
shut and locked it also. i started.
 
“you shall have tea before you go home,” added. “i am by myself.
 hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
 off on journey of pleasure; and, though i’m used to being alone, i’d
 rather have some interesting company, if i can get it. miss linton,
 take your seat by _him_. i give you what i have: the present is hardly
 worth accepting; but i have nothing else to offer. it is linton, i
 mean. how she does stare! it’s odd what savage feeling i have to
 anything that seems afraid of me! had i been born where laws are less
 strict and tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to slow
 vivisection of those two, as an evening’s amusement.”
 
drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself, “by
 hell! i hate them.”
 
“i am not afraid of you!” exclaimed catherine, who could not hear the
 latter part of his speech. she stepped close up; her black eyes
 flashing with passion and resolution. “give that key: i will have
 it!” she said. “i wouldn’t eat or drink here, if i were starving.”
 
heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table. he
 looked up, seized with sort of surprise at her boldness; or,
 possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance, of the person from whom
 she inherited it. she snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
 getting it out of his loosened fingers: but her action recalled him to
 the present; recovered it speedily.
 
“now, catherine linton,” said, “stand off, or i shall knock you
 down; and that will make mrs. dean mad.”
 
regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand and its
 contents again. “we _will_ go!” she repeated, exerting her utmost
 efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax; and finding that her nails
 made impression, she applied her teeth pretty sharply. heathcliff
 glanced at glance that kept from interfering moment.
 catherine was too intent on his fingers to notice his face. opened
 them suddenly, and resigned the object of dispute; but, ere she had
 well secured it, seized her with the liberated hand, and, pulling
 her on his knee, administered with the other shower of terrific slaps
 on both sides of the head, each sufficient to have fulfilled his
 threat, had she been able to fall.
 
at this diabolical violence i rushed on him furiously. “you villain!” i
 began to cry, “you villain!” touch on the chest silenced me: i am
 stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what with that and the rage, i
 staggered dizzily back, and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a
 blood-vessel. the scene was over in two minutes; catherine, released,
 put her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were not
 sure whether her ears were off or on. she trembled like reed, poor
 thing, and leant against the table perfectly bewildered.
 
“i know how to chastise children, you see,” said the scoundrel, grimly,
 as stooped to repossess himself of the key, which had dropped to the
 floor. “go to linton now, as i told you; and cry at your ease! i shall
 be your father, to-morrow—all the father you’ll have in few days—and
 you shall have plenty of that. you can bear plenty; you’re weakling:
 you shall have daily taste, if i catch such devil of temper in
 your eyes again!”
 
cathy ran to instead of linton, and knelt down and put her burning
 cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. her cousin had shrunk into corner of
 the settle, as quiet as mouse, congratulating himself, i dare say,
 that the correction had alighted on another than him. mr. heathcliff,
 perceiving us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea
 himself. the cups and saucers were laid ready. poured it out, and
 handed cup.
 
“wash away your spleen,” said. “and help your own naughty pet and
 mine. it is not poisoned, though i prepared it. i’m going out to seek
 your horses.”
 
our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit somewhere. we
 tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the
 windows—they were too narrow for even cathy’s little figure.
 
“master linton,” i cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned, “you
 know what your diabolical father is after, and you shall tell us, or
 i’ll box your ears, as has done your cousin’s.”
 
“yes, linton, you must tell,” said catherine. “it was for your sake i
 came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse.”
 
“give some tea, i’m thirsty, and then i’ll tell you,” answered.
 “mrs. dean, go away. i don’t like you standing over me. now, catherine,
 you are letting your tears fall into my cup. i won’t drink that. give
 another.”
 
catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. i felt disgusted
 at the little wretch’s composure, since was longer in terror for
 himself. the anguish had exhibited on the moor subsided as soon as
 ever entered wuthering heights; so i guessed had been menaced
 with an awful visitation of wrath if failed in decoying us there;
 and, that accomplished, had further immediate fears.
 
“papa wants us to be married,” continued, after sipping some of the
 liquid. “and knows your papa wouldn’t let us marry now; and he’s
 afraid of my dying if we wait; so we are to be married in the morning,
 and you are to stay here all night; and, if you do as wishes, you
 shall return home next day, and take with you.”
 
“take you with her, pitiful changeling!” i exclaimed. “_you_ marry?
 why, the man is mad! or thinks us fools, every one. and do you
 imagine that beautiful young lady, that healthy, hearty girl, will tie
 herself to little perishing monkey like you? are you cherishing the
 notion that _anybody_, let alone miss catherine linton, would have you
 for husband? you want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with
 your dastardly puling tricks: and—don’t look so silly, now! i’ve very
 good mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery, and
 your imbecile conceit.”
 
i did give him slight shaking; but it brought on the cough, and he
 took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and catherine
 rebuked me.
 
“stay all night? no,” she said, looking slowly round. “ellen, i’ll burn
 that door down but i’ll get out.”
 
and she would have commenced the execution of her threat directly, but
 linton was up in alarm for his dear self again. clasped her in his
 two feeble arms sobbing:—“won’t you have me, and save me? not let me
 come to the grange? oh, darling catherine! you mustn’t go and leave,
 after all. you _must_ obey my father—you _must_!”
 
“i must obey my own,” she replied, “and relieve him from this cruel
 suspense. the whole night! what would think? he’ll be distressed
 already. i’ll either break or burn way out of the house. be quiet!
 you’re in danger; but if you hinder me—linton, i love papa better
 than you!”
 
the mortal terror felt of mr. heathcliff’s anger restored to the boy
 his coward’s eloquence. catherine was near distraught: still, she
 persisted that she must go home, and tried entreaty in her turn,
 persuading him to subdue his selfish agony. while they were thus
 occupied, our jailor re-entered.
 
“your beasts have trotted off,” said, “and—now linton! snivelling
 again? what has she been doing to you? come, come—have done, and get to
 bed. in month or two, my lad, you’ll be able to pay her back her
 present tyrannies with vigorous hand. you’re pining for pure love,
 are you not? nothing else in the world: and she shall have you! there,
 to bed! zillah won’t be here to-night; you must undress yourself. hush!
 hold your noise! once in your own room, i’ll not come near you: you
 needn’t fear. by chance, you’ve managed tolerably. i’ll look to the
 rest.”
 
spoke these words, holding the door open for his to pass, and
 the latter achieved his exit exactly as spaniel might which suspected
 the person who attended on it of designing spiteful squeeze. the lock
 was re-secured. heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and i
 stood silent. catherine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to
 her cheek: his neighbourhood revived painful sensation. anybody else
 would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness,
 but scowled on her and muttered—“oh! you are not afraid of me? your
 courage is well disguised: you _seem_ damnably afraid!”
 
“i _am_ afraid now,” she replied, “because, if i stay, papa will be
 miserable: and how can i endure making him miserable—when he—when
 he—mr. heathcliff, _let_ go home! i promise to marry linton: papa
 would like to: and i love him. why should you wish to force to do
 what i’ll willingly do of myself?”
 
“let him dare to force you,” i cried. “there’s law in the land, thank
 god! there is; though we be in an out-of-the-way place. i’d inform if
 were my own son: and it’s felony without benefit of clergy!”
 
“silence!” said the ruffian. “to the devil with your clamour! i don’t
 want _you_ to speak. miss linton, i shall enjoy myself remarkably in
 thinking your father will be miserable: i shall not sleep for
 satisfaction. you could have hit on surer way of fixing your
 residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing
 that such an event would follow. as to your promise to marry linton,
 i’ll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place
 till it is fulfilled.”
 
“send ellen, then, to let papa know i’m safe!” exclaimed catherine,
 weeping bitterly. “or marry now. poor papa! ellen, he’ll think we’re
 lost. what shall we do?”
 
“not he! he’ll think you are tired of waiting on him, and run off for a
 little amusement,” answered heathcliff. “you cannot deny that you
 entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of his injunctions to
 the contrary. and it is quite natural that you should desire amusement
 at your age; and that you would weary of nursing sick man, and that
 man _only_ your father. catherine, his happiest days were over when
 your days began. cursed you, i dare say, for coming into the world
 (i did, at least); and it would just do if cursed you as _he_ went
 out of it. i’d join him. i don’t love you! how should i? weep away. as
 far as i can see, it will be your chief diversion hereafter; unless
 linton make amends for other losses: and your provident parent appears
 to fancy may. his letters of advice and consolation entertained me
 vastly. in his last recommended my jewel to be careful of his; and
 kind to her when got her. careful and kind—that’s paternal. but
 linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for himself.
 linton can play the little tyrant well. he’ll undertake to torture any
 number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared. you’ll
 be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his _kindness_, when you get
 home again, i assure you.”
 
“you’re right there!” i said; “explain your son’s character. show his
 resemblance to yourself: and then, i hope, miss cathy will think twice
 before she takes the cockatrice!”
 
“i don’t much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now,” answered;
 “because she must either accept him or remain prisoner, and you along
 with her, till your master dies. i can detain you both, quite
 concealed, here. if you doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and
 you’ll have an opportunity of judging!”
 
“i’ll not retract my word,” said catherine. “i’ll marry him within this
 hour, if i may go to thrushcross grange afterwards. mr. heathcliff,
 you’re cruel man, but you’re not fiend; and you won’t, from _mere_
 malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness. if papa thought i had
 left him on purpose, and if died before i returned, could i bear to
 live? i’ve given over crying: but i’m going to kneel here, at your
 knee; and i’ll not get up, and i’ll not take my eyes from your face
 till you look back at me! no, don’t turn away! _do_ look! you’ll see
 nothing to provoke you. i don’t hate you. i’m not angry that you struck
 me. have you never loved _anybody_ in all your life, uncle? _never_?
 ah! you must look once. i’m so wretched, you can’t help being sorry and
 pitying me.”
 
“keep your eft’s fingers off; and move, or i’ll kick you!” cried
 heathcliff, brutally repulsing her. “i’d rather be hugged by snake.
 how the devil can you dream of fawning on me? i _detest_ you!”
 
shrugged his shoulders: shook himself, indeed, as if his flesh crept
 with aversion; and thrust back his chair; while i got up, and opened my
 mouth, to commence downright torrent of abuse. but i was rendered
 dumb in the middle of the first sentence, by threat that i should be
 shown into room by myself the very next syllable i uttered. it was
 growing dark—we heard sound of voices at the garden-gate. our host
 hurried out instantly: _he_ had his wits about him; _we_ had not. there
 was talk of two or three minutes, and returned alone.
 
“i thought it had been your cousin hareton,” i observed to catherine.
 “i wish would arrive! who knows but might take our part?”
 
“it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange,” said
 heathcliff, overhearing me. “you should have opened lattice and
 called out: but i could swear that chit is glad you didn’t. she’s glad
 to be obliged to stay, i’m certain.”
 
at learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
 without control; and allowed us to wail on till nine o’clock. then
 bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to zillah’s chamber; and i
 whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get
 through the window there, or into garret, and out by its skylight.
 the window, however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap
 was safe from our attempts; for we were fastened in as before. we
 neither of us lay down: catherine took her station by the lattice, and
 watched anxiously for morning; deep sigh being the only answer i
 could obtain to my frequent entreaties that she would try to rest. i
 seated myself in chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment
 on my many derelictions of duty; from which, it struck then, all the
 misfortunes of my employers sprang. it was not the case, in reality, i
 am aware; but it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and i
 thought heathcliff himself less guilty than i.
 
at seven o’clock came, and inquired if miss linton had risen. she
 ran to the door immediately, and answered, “yes.” “here, then,” he
 said, opening it, and pulling her out. i rose to follow, but turned
 the lock again. i demanded my release.
 
“be patient,” replied; “i’ll send up your breakfast in while.”
 
i thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily; and catherine
 asked why i was still shut up? answered, i must try to endure it
 another hour, and they went away. i endured it two or three hours; at
 length, i heard footstep: not heathcliff’s.
 
“i’ve brought you something to eat,” said voice; “oppen t’ door!”
 
complying eagerly, i beheld hareton, laden with food enough to last me
 all day.
 
“tak’ it,” added, thrusting the tray into my hand.
 
“stay one minute,” i began.
 
“nay,” cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers i could pour
 forth to detain him.
 
and there i remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next
 night; and another, and another. five nights and four days i remained,
 altogether, seeing nobody but hareton once every morning; and was a
 model of jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving
 his sense of justice or compassion.
 



chapter xxviii
 

on the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, different step
 approached—lighter and shorter; and, this time, the person entered the
 room. it was zillah; donned in her scarlet shawl, with black silk
 bonnet on her head, and willow-basket swung to her arm.
 
“eh, dear! mrs. dean!” she exclaimed. “well! there is talk about you
 at gimmerton. i never thought but you were sunk in the blackhorse
 marsh, and missy with you, till master told you’d been found, and
 he’d lodged you here! what! and you must have got on an island, sure?
 and how long were you in the hole? did master save you, mrs. dean? but
 you’re not so thin—you’ve not been so poorly, have you?”
 
“your master is true scoundrel!” i replied. “but shall answer for
 it. needn’t have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!”
 
“what do you mean?” asked zillah. “it’s not his tale: they tell that in
 the village—about your being lost in the marsh; and i calls to
 earnshaw, when i come in—‘eh, they’s queer things, mr. hareton,
 happened since i went off. it’s sad pity of that likely young lass,
 and cant nelly dean.’ stared. i thought had not heard aught, so i
 told him the rumour. the master listened, and just smiled to
 himself, and said, ‘if they have been in the marsh, they are out now,
 zillah. nelly dean is lodged, at this minute, in your room. you can
 tell her to flit, when you go up; here is the key. the bog-water got
 into her head, and she would have run home quite flighty, but i fixed
 her till she came round to her senses. you can bid her go to the grange
 at once, if she be able, and carry message from me, that her young
 lady will follow in time to attend the squire’s funeral.’”
 
“mr. edgar is not dead?” i gasped. “oh! zillah, zillah!”
 
“no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,” she replied; “you’re right
 sickly yet. he’s not dead; doctor kenneth thinks may last another
 day. i met him on the road and asked.”
 
instead of sitting down, i snatched my outdoor things, and hastened
 below, for the way was free. on entering the house, i looked about for
 some one to give information of catherine. the place was filled with
 sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand. as i
 hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a
 slight cough drew my attention to the hearth. linton lay on the settle,
 sole tenant, sucking stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements
 with apathetic eyes. “where is miss catherine?” i demanded sternly,
 supposing i could frighten him into giving intelligence, by catching
 him thus, alone. sucked on like an innocent.
 
“is she gone?” i said.
 
“no,” replied; “she’s upstairs: she’s not to go; we won’t let her.”
 
“you won’t let her, little idiot!” i exclaimed. “direct to her room
 immediately, or i’ll make you sing out sharply.”
 
“papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there,” he
 answered. “he says i’m not to be soft with catherine: she’s my wife,
 and it’s shameful that she should wish to leave me. says she hates
 and wants to die, that she may have my money; but she shan’t have
 it: and she shan’t go home! she never shall!—she may cry, and be sick
 as much as she pleases!”
 
resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if meant to
 drop asleep.
 
“master heathcliff,” i resumed, “have you forgotten all catherine’s
 kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved her, and when
 she brought you books and sung you songs, and came many time through
 wind and snow to see you? she wept to miss one evening, because you
 would be disappointed; and you felt then that she was hundred times
 too good to you: and now you believe the lies your father tells, though
 you know detests you both. and you join him against her. that’s fine
 gratitude, is it not?”
 
the corner of linton’s mouth fell, and took the sugar-candy from his
 lips.
 
“did she come to wuthering heights because she hated you?” i continued.
 “think for yourself! as to your money, she does not even know that you
 will have any. and you say she’s sick; and yet you leave her alone, up
 there in strange house! _you_ who have felt what it is to be so
 neglected! you could pity your own sufferings; and she pitied them,
 too; but you won’t pity hers! i shed tears, master heathcliff, you
 see—an elderly woman, and servant merely—and you, after pretending
 such affection, and having reason to worship her almost, store every
 tear you have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease. ah! you’re a
 heartless, selfish boy!”
 
“i can’t stay with her,” answered crossly. “i’ll not stay by myself.
 she cries so i can’t bear it. and she won’t give over, though i say
 i’ll call my father. i did call him once, and threatened to strangle
 her if she was not quiet; but she began again the instant left the
 room, moaning and grieving all night long, though i screamed for
 vexation that i couldn’t sleep.”
 
“is mr. heathcliff out?” i inquired, perceiving that the wretched
 creature had power to sympathise with his cousin’s mental tortures.
 
“he’s in the court,” replied, “talking to doctor kenneth; who says
 uncle is dying, truly, at last. i’m glad, for i shall be master of the
 grange after him. catherine always spoke of it as _her_ house. it isn’t
 hers! it’s mine: papa says everything she has is mine. all her nice
 books are mine; she offered to give them, and her pretty birds, and
 her pony minny, if i would get the key of our room, and let her out;
 but i told her she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine. and
 then she cried, and took little picture from her neck, and said i
 should have that; two pictures in gold case, on one side her mother,
 and on the other uncle, when they were young. that was yesterday—i said
 _they_ were mine, too; and tried to get them from her. the spiteful
 thing wouldn’t let me: she pushed off, and hurt me. i shrieked
 out—that frightens her—she heard papa coming, and she broke the hinges
 and divided the case, and gave her mother’s portrait; the other she
 attempted to hide: but papa asked what was the matter, and i explained
 it. took the one i had away, and ordered her to resign hers to me;
 she refused, and he—he struck her down, and wrenched it off the chain,
 and crushed it with his foot.”
 
“and were you pleased to see her struck?” i asked: having my designs in
 encouraging his talk.
 
“i winked,” answered: “i wink to see my father strike dog or a
 horse, does it so hard. yet i was glad at first—she deserved
 punishing for pushing me: but when papa was gone, she made come to
 the window and showed her cheek cut on the inside, against her
 teeth, and her mouth filling with blood; and then she gathered up the
 bits of the picture, and went and sat down with her face to the wall,
 and she has never spoken to since: and i sometimes think she can’t
 speak for pain. i don’t like to think so; but she’s naughty thing for
 crying continually; and she looks so pale and wild, i’m afraid of her.”
 
“and you can get the key if you choose?” i said.
 
“yes, when i am upstairs,” answered; “but i can’t walk upstairs
 now.”
 
“in what apartment is it?” i asked.
 
“oh,” cried, “i shan’t tell _you_ where it is. it is our secret.
 nobody, neither hareton nor zillah, is to know. there! you’ve tired
 me—go away, go away!” and turned his face on to his arm, and shut
 his eyes again.
 
i considered it best to depart without seeing mr. heathcliff, and bring
 rescue for my young lady from the grange. on reaching it, the
 astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
 intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two
 or three were about to hurry up and shout the news at mr. edgar’s door:
 but i bespoke the announcement of it myself. how changed i found him,
 even in those few days! lay an image of sadness and resignation
 awaiting his death. very young looked: though his actual age was
 thirty-nine, one would have called him ten years younger, at least. he
 thought of catherine; for murmured her name. i touched his hand, and
 spoke.
 
“catherine is coming, dear master!” i whispered; “she is alive and
 well; and will be here, i hope, to-night.”
 
i trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: half rose up,
 looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in swoon. as
 soon as recovered, i related our compulsory visit, and detention at
 the heights. i said heathcliff forced to go in: which was not quite
 true. i uttered as little as possible against linton; nor did i
 describe all his father’s brutal conduct—my intentions being to add no
 bitterness, if i could help it, to his already overflowing cup.
 
divined that one of his enemy’s purposes was to secure the personal
 property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather himself; yet why
 did not wait till his decease was puzzle to my master, because
 ignorant how nearly and his nephew would quit the world together.
 however, felt that his will had better be altered: instead of
 leaving catherine’s fortune at her own disposal, determined to put
 it in the hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her
 children, if she had any, after her. by that means, it could not fall
 to mr. heathcliff should linton die.
 
having received his orders, i despatched man to fetch the attorney,
 and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young
 lady of her jailor. both parties were delayed very late. the single
 servant returned first. said mr. green, the lawyer, was out when he
 arrived at his house, and had to wait two hours for his re-entrance;
 and then mr. green told him had little business in the village
 that must be done; but would be at thrushcross grange before
 morning. the four men came back unaccompanied also. they brought word
 that catherine was ill: too ill to quit her room; and heathcliff would
 not suffer them to see her. i scolded the stupid fellows well for
 listening to that tale, which i would not carry to my master; resolving
 to take whole bevy up to the heights, at daylight, and storm it
 literally, unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us. her
 father _shall_ see her, i vowed, and vowed again, if that devil be
 killed on his own door-stones in trying to prevent it!
 
happily, i was spared the journey and the trouble. i had gone
 downstairs at three o’clock to fetch jug of water; and was passing
 through the hall with it in my hand, when sharp knock at the front
 door made jump. “oh! it is green,” i said, recollecting myself—“only
 green,” and i went on, intending to send somebody else to open it; but
 the knock was repeated: not loud, and still importunately. i put the
 jug on the banister and hastened to admit him myself. the harvest moon
 shone clear outside. it was not the attorney. my own sweet little
 mistress sprang on my neck sobbing, “ellen, ellen! is papa alive?”
 
“yes,” i cried: “yes, my angel, is, god be thanked, you are safe
 with us again!”
 
she wanted to run, breathless as she was, upstairs to mr. linton’s
 room; but i compelled her to sit down on chair, and made her drink,
 and washed her pale face, chafing it into faint colour with my apron.
 then i said i must go first, and tell of her arrival; imploring her to
 say, she should be happy with young heathcliff. she stared, but soon
 comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured
 she would not complain.
 
i couldn’t abide to be present at their meeting. i stood outside the
 chamber-door quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
 then. all was composed, however: catherine’s despair was as silent as
 her father’s joy. she supported him calmly, in appearance; and fixed
 on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.
 
died blissfully, mr. lockwood: died so. kissing her cheek, he
 murmured,—“i am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to
 us!” and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant
 gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed. none
 could have noticed the exact minute of his death, it was so entirely
 without struggle.
 
whether catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too
 weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she
 sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that
 deathbed, but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose. it
 was well i succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the
 lawyer, having called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how
 to behave. had sold himself to mr. heathcliff: that was the cause of
 his delay in obeying my master’s summons. fortunately, thought of
 worldly affairs crossed the latter’s mind, to disturb him, after his
 daughter’s arrival.
 
mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
 place. gave all the servants but me, notice to quit. would have
 carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
 linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with
 his family. there was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
 protestations against any infringement of its directions. the funeral
 was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered
 to stay at the grange till her father’s corpse had quitted it.
 
she told that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the
 risk of liberating her. she heard the men i sent disputing at the door,
 and she gathered the sense of heathcliff’s answer. it drove her
 desperate. linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon
 after i left, was terrified into fetching the key before his father
 re-ascended. had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
 shutting it; and when should have gone to bed, begged to sleep
 with hareton, and his petition was granted for once. catherine stole
 out before break of day. she dared not try the doors lest the dogs
 should raise an alarm; she visited the empty chambers and examined
 their windows; and, luckily, lighting on her mother’s, she got easily
 out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the fir-tree
 close by. her accomplice suffered for his share in the escape,
 notwithstanding his timid contrivances.
 



chapter xxix
 

the evening after the funeral, my young lady and i were seated in the
 library; now musing mournfully—one of us despairingly—on our loss, now
 venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.
 
we had just agreed the best destiny which could await catherine would
 be permission to continue resident at the grange; at least during
 linton’s life: being allowed to join her there, and i to remain as
 housekeeper. that seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be
 hoped for; and yet i did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect
 of retaining my home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved
 young mistress; when servant—one of the discarded ones, not yet
 departed—rushed hastily in, and said “that devil heathcliff” was coming
 through the court: should fasten the door in his face?
 
if we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time. he
 made ceremony of knocking or announcing his name: was master, and
 availed himself of the master’s privilege to walk straight in, without
 saying word. the sound of our informant’s voice directed him to the
 library; entered and motioning him out, shut the door.
 
it was the same room into which had been ushered, as guest,
 eighteen years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the
 same autumn landscape lay outside. we had not yet lighted candle, but
 all the apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the
 splendid head of mrs. linton, and the graceful one of her husband.
 heathcliff advanced to the hearth. time had little altered his person
 either. there was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more
 composed, his frame stone or two heavier, perhaps, and other
 difference. catherine had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she
 saw him.
 
“stop!” said, arresting her by the arm. “no more runnings away!
 where would you go? i’m come to fetch you home; and i hope you’ll be a
 dutiful daughter and not encourage my to further disobedience. i
 was embarrassed how to punish him when i discovered his part in the
 business: he’s such cobweb, pinch would annihilate him; but you’ll
 see by his look that has received his due! i brought him down one
 evening, the day before yesterday, and just set him in chair, and
 never touched him afterwards. i sent hareton out, and we had the room
 to ourselves. in two hours, i called joseph to carry him up again; and
 since then my presence is as potent on his nerves as ghost; and i
 fancy sees often, though i am not near. hareton says wakes and
 shrieks in the night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him
 from me; and, whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must
 come: he’s your concern now; i yield all my interest in him to you.”
 
“why not let catherine continue here,” i pleaded, “and send master
 linton to her? as you hate them both, you’d not miss them: they _can_
 only be daily plague to your unnatural heart.”
 
“i’m seeking tenant for the grange,” answered; “and i want my
 children about me, to be sure. besides, that lass owes her services
 for her bread. i’m not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness
 after linton is gone. make haste and get ready, now; and don’t oblige
 to compel you.”
 
“i shall,” said catherine. “linton is all i have to love in the world,
 and though you have done what you could to make him hateful to me, and
 to him, you _cannot_ make us hate each other. and i defy you to hurt
 him when i am by, and i defy you to frighten me!”
 
“you are boastful champion,” replied heathcliff; “but i don’t like
 you well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the
 torment, as long as it lasts. it is not i who will make him hateful to
 you—it is his own sweet spirit. he’s as bitter as gall at your
 desertion and its consequences: don’t expect thanks for this noble
 devotion. i heard him draw pleasant picture to zillah of what he
 would do if were as strong as i: the inclination is there, and his
 very weakness will sharpen his wits to find substitute for strength.”
 
“i know has bad nature,” said catherine: “he’s your son. but i’m
 glad i’ve better, to forgive it; and i know loves me, and for that
 reason i love him. mr. heathcliff, _you_ have _nobody_ to love you;
 and, however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
 thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery. you _are_
 miserable, are you not? lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
 _nobody_ loves you—_nobody_ will cry for you when you die! i wouldn’t
 be you!”
 
catherine spoke with kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made
 up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw
 pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.
 
“you shall be sorry to be yourself presently,” said her father-in-law,
 “if you stand there another minute. begone, witch, and get your
 things!”
 
she scornfully withdrew. in her absence i began to beg for zillah’s
 place at the heights, offering to resign mine to her; but would
 suffer it on account. bid be silent; and then, for the first
 time, allowed himself glance round the room and look at the
 pictures. having studied mrs. linton’s, said—“i shall have that
 home. not because i need it, but—” turned abruptly to the fire, and
 continued, with what, for lack of better word, i must call a
 smile—“i’ll tell you what i did yesterday! i got the sexton, who was
 digging linton’s grave, to remove the earth off her coffin lid, and i
 opened it. i thought, once, i would have stayed there: when i saw her
 face again—it is hers yet!—he had hard work to stir me; but said it
 would change if the air blew on it, and so i struck one side of the
 coffin loose, and covered it up: not linton’s side, damn him! i wish
 he’d been soldered in lead. and i bribed the sexton to pull it away
 when i’m laid there, and slide mine out too; i’ll have it made so: and
 then by the time linton gets to us he’ll not know which is which!”
 
“you were very wicked, mr. heathcliff!” i exclaimed; “were you not
 ashamed to disturb the dead?”
 
“i disturbed nobody, nelly,” replied; “and i gave some ease to
 myself. i shall be great deal more comfortable now; and you’ll have a
 better chance of keeping underground, when i get there. disturbed
 her? no! she has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen
 years—incessantly—remorselessly—till yesternight; and yesternight i was
 tranquil. i dreamt i was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with
 my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers.”
 
“and if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what would you
 have dreamt of then?” i said.
 
“of dissolving with her, and being more happy still!” answered. “do
 you suppose i dread any change of that sort? i expected such a
 transformation on raising the lid, but i’m better pleased that it should
 not commence till i share it. besides, unless i had received distinct
 impression of her passionless features, that strange feeling would
 hardly have been removed. it began oddly. you know i was wild after she
 died; and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her to return to her
 spirit! i have strong faith in ghosts: i have conviction that they
 can, and do, exist among us! the day she was buried, there came fall
 of snow. in the evening i went to the churchyard. it blew bleak as
 winter—all round was solitary. i didn’t fear that her fool of husband
 would wander up the glen so late; and one else had business to bring
 them there. being alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the
 sole barrier between us, i said to myself—‘i’ll have her in my arms
 again! if she be cold, i’ll think it is this north wind that chills
 _me_; and if she be motionless, it is sleep.’ i got spade from the
 tool-house, and began to delve with all my might—it scraped the coffin;
 i fell to work with my hands; the wood commenced cracking about the
 screws; i was on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that
 i heard sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, and
 bending down. ‘if i can only get this off,’ i muttered, ‘i wish they
 may shovel in the earth over us both!’ and i wrenched at it more
 desperately still. there was another sigh, close at my ear. i appeared
 to feel the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. i knew
 living thing in flesh and blood was by; but, as certainly as you
 perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though it
 cannot be discerned, so certainly i felt that cathy was there: not
 under me, but on the earth. sudden sense of relief flowed from my
 heart through every limb. i relinquished my labour of agony, and turned
 consoled at once: unspeakably consoled. her presence was with me: it
 remained while i re-filled the grave, and led home. you may laugh,
 if you will; but i was sure i should see her there. i was sure she was
 with me, and i could not help talking to her. having reached the
 heights, i rushed eagerly to the door. it was fastened; and, i
 remember, that accursed earnshaw and my wife opposed my entrance. i
 remember stopping to kick the breath out of him, and then hurrying
 upstairs, to my room and hers. i looked round impatiently—i felt her by
 me—i could _almost_ see her, and yet i _could not_! i ought to have
 sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning—from the fervour of
 my supplications to have but one glimpse! i had not one. she showed
 herself, as she often was in life, devil to me! and, since then,
 sometimes more and sometimes less, i’ve been the sport of that
 intolerable torture! infernal! keeping my nerves at such stretch
 that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would long ago have
 relaxed to the feebleness of linton’s. when i sat in the house with
 hareton, it seemed that on going out i should meet her; when i walked
 on the moors i should meet her coming in. when i went from home i
 hastened to return; she _must_ be somewhere at the heights, i was
 certain! and when i slept in her chamber—i was beaten out of that. i
 couldn’t lie there; for the moment i closed my eyes, she was either
 outside the window, or sliding back the panels, or entering the room,
 or even resting her darling head on the same pillow as she did when a
 child; and i must open my lids to see. and so i opened and closed them
 hundred times night—to be always disappointed! it racked me! i’ve
 often groaned aloud, till that old rascal joseph doubt believed that
 my conscience was playing the fiend inside of me. now, since i’ve seen
 her, i’m pacified—a little. it was strange way of killing: not by
 inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths, to beguile with the
 spectre of hope through eighteen years!”
 
mr. heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead; his hair clung to it, wet
 with perspiration; his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire,
 the brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the
 grim aspect of his countenance, but imparting peculiar look of
 trouble, and painful appearance of mental tension towards one
 absorbing subject. only half addressed me, and i maintained silence.
 i didn’t like to hear him talk! after short period resumed his
 meditation on the picture, took it down and leant it against the sofa
 to contemplate it at better advantage; and while so occupied catherine
 entered, announcing that she was ready, when her pony should be
 saddled.
 
“send that over to-morrow,” said heathcliff to me; then turning to her,
 added: “you may do without your pony: it is fine evening, and
 you’ll need ponies at wuthering heights; for what journeys you take,
 your own feet will serve you. come along.”
 
“good-bye, ellen!” whispered my dear little mistress. as she kissed me,
 her lips felt like ice. “come and see me, ellen; don’t forget.”
 
“take care you do such thing, mrs. dean!” said her new father. “when
 i wish to speak to you i’ll come here. i want none of your prying at my
 house!”
 
signed her to precede him; and casting back look that cut my
 heart, she obeyed. i watched them, from the window, walk down the
 garden. heathcliff fixed catherine’s arm under his: though she disputed
 the act at first evidently; and with rapid strides hurried her into
 the alley, whose trees concealed them.
 



chapter xxx
 

i have paid visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
 left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
 and wouldn’t let pass. said mrs. linton was “thrang,” and the
 master was not in. zillah has told something of the way they go on,
 otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who living. she thinks
 catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk. my
 young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr.
 heathcliff told her to follow her own business, and let his
 daughter-in-law look after herself; and zillah willingly acquiesced,
 being narrow-minded, selfish woman. catherine evinced child’s
 annoyance at this neglect; repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted
 my informant among her enemies, as securely as if she had done her some
 great wrong. i had long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a
 little before you came, one day when we foregathered on the moor; and
 this is what she told me.
 
“the first thing mrs. linton did,” she said, “on her arrival at the
 heights, was to run upstairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
 and joseph; she shut herself into linton’s room, and remained till
 morning. then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
 entered the house, and asked all in quiver if the doctor might be
 sent for? her cousin was very ill.
 
“‘we know that!’ answered heathcliff; ‘but his life is not worth a
 farthing, and i won’t spend farthing on him.’
 
“‘but i cannot tell how to do,’ she said; ‘and if nobody will help me,
 he’ll die!’
 
“‘walk out of the room,’ cried the master, ‘and let never hear a
 word more about him! none here care what becomes of him; if you do, act
 the nurse; if you do not, lock him up and leave him.’
 
“then she began to bother me, and i said i’d had enough plague with the
 tiresome thing; we each had our tasks, and hers was to wait on linton:
 mr. heathcliff bid leave that labour to her.
 
“how they managed together, i can’t tell. i fancy fretted great
 deal, and moaned hisseln night and day; and she had precious little
 rest: one could guess by her white face and heavy eyes. she sometimes
 came into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if she would
 fain beg assistance; but i was not going to disobey the master: i never
 dare disobey him, mrs. dean; and, though i thought it wrong that
 kenneth should not be sent for, it was concern of mine either to
 advise or complain, and i always refused to meddle. once or twice,
 after we had gone to bed, i’ve happened to open my door again and seen
 her sitting crying on the stairs’-top; and then i’ve shut myself in
 quick, for fear of being moved to interfere. i did pity her then, i’m
 sure: still i didn’t wish to lose my place, you know.
 
“at last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and frightened me
 out of my wits, by saying, ‘tell mr. heathcliff that his is
 dying—i’m sure is, this time. get up, instantly, and tell him.’
 
“having uttered this speech, she vanished again. i lay quarter of an
 hour listening and trembling. nothing stirred—the house was quiet.
 
“she’s mistaken, i said to myself. he’s got over it. i needn’t disturb
 them; and i began to doze. but my sleep was marred second time by a
 sharp ringing of the bell—the only bell we have, put up on purpose for
 linton; and the master called to to see what was the matter, and
 inform them that wouldn’t have that noise repeated.
 
“i delivered catherine’s message. cursed to himself, and in few
 minutes came out with lighted candle, and proceeded to their room. i
 followed. mrs. heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with her hands
 folded on her knees. her father-in-law went up, held the light to
 linton’s face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards turned to
 her.
 
“‘now—catherine,’ said, ‘how do you feel?’
 
“she was dumb.
 
“‘how do you feel, catherine?’ repeated.
 
“‘he’s safe, and i’m free,’ she answered: ‘i should feel well—but,’ she
 continued, with bitterness she couldn’t conceal, ‘you have left so
 long to struggle against death alone, that i feel and see only death! i
 feel like death!’
 
“and she looked like it, too! i gave her little wine. hareton and
 joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
 heard our talk from outside, now entered. joseph was fain, i believe,
 of the lad’s removal; hareton seemed thought bothered: though was
 more taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton. but
 the master bid him get off to bed again: we didn’t want his help. he
 afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told to
 return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.
 
“in the morning, sent to tell her she must come down to
 breakfast: she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she
 was ill; at which i hardly wondered. i informed mr. heathcliff, and he
 replied,—‘well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now and
 then to get her what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell
 me.’”
 
cathy stayed upstairs fortnight, according to zillah; who visited her
 twice day, and would have been rather more friendly, but her attempts
 at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.
 
heathcliff went up once, to show her linton’s will. had bequeathed
 the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his
 father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act
 during her week’s absence, when his uncle died. the lands, being a
 minor, could not meddle with. however, mr. heathcliff has claimed
 and kept them in his wife’s right and his also: i suppose legally; at
 any rate, catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his
 possession.
 
“nobody,” said zillah, “ever approached her door, except that once, but
 i; and nobody asked anything about her. the first occasion of her
 coming down into the house was on sunday afternoon. she had cried
 out, when i carried up her dinner, that she couldn’t bear any longer
 being in the cold; and i told her the master was going to thrushcross
 grange, and earnshaw and i needn’t hinder her from descending; so, as
 soon as she heard heathcliff’s horse trot off, she made her appearance,
 donned in black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears as
 plain as quaker: she couldn’t comb them out.
 
“joseph and i generally go to chapel on sundays:” the kirk, (you know,
 has minister now, explained mrs. dean; and they call the methodists’
 or baptists’ place, i can’t say which it is, at gimmerton, chapel.)
 “joseph had gone,” she continued, “but i thought proper to bide at
 home. young folks are always the better for an elder’s over-looking;
 and hareton, with all his bashfulness, isn’t model of nice behaviour.
 i let him know that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and she
 had been always used to see the sabbath respected; so had as good
 leave his guns and bits of indoor work alone, while she stayed. he
 coloured up at the news, and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes.
 the train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in minute. i saw
 meant to give her his company; and i guessed, by his way, wanted
 to be presentable; so, laughing, as i durst not laugh when the master
 is by, i offered to help him, if would, and joked at his confusion.
 grew sullen, and began to swear.
 
“now, mrs. dean,” zillah went on, seeing not pleased by her manner,
 “you happen think your young lady too fine for mr. hareton; and happen
 you’re right: but i own i should love well to bring her pride peg
 lower. and what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her,
 now? she’s as poor as you or i: poorer, i’ll be bound: you’re saving,
 and i’m doing my little all that road.”
 
hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into
 good humour; so, when catherine came, half forgetting her former
 insults, tried to make himself agreeable, by the housekeeper’s
 account.
 
“missis walked in,” she said, “as chill as an icicle, and as high as a
 princess. i got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair. no, she
 turned up her nose at my civility. earnshaw rose, too, and bid her come
 to the settle, and sit close by the fire: was sure she was starved.
 
“‘i’ve been starved month and more,’ she answered, resting on the
 word as scornful as she could.
 
“and she got chair for herself, and placed it at distance from both
 of us. having sat till she was warm, she began to look round, and
 discovered number of books on the dresser; she was instantly upon her
 feet again, stretching to reach them: but they were too high up. her
 cousin, after watching her endeavours while, at last summoned courage
 to help her; she held her frock, and filled it with the first that
 came to hand.
 
“that was great advance for the lad. she didn’t thank him; still, he
 felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance, and ventured to
 stand behind as she examined them, and even to stoop and point out what
 struck his fancy in certain old pictures which they contained; nor was
 daunted by the saucy style in which she jerked the page from his
 finger: contented himself with going bit farther back and looking
 at her instead of the book. she continued reading, or seeking for
 something to read. his attention became, by degrees, quite centred in
 the study of her thick silky curls: her face couldn’t see, and she
 couldn’t see him. and, perhaps, not quite awake to what did, but
 attracted like child to candle, at last proceeded from staring
 to touching; put out his hand and stroked one curl, as gently as if
 it were bird. might have stuck knife into her neck, she started
 round in such taking.
 
“‘get away this moment! how dare you touch me? why are you stopping
 there?’ she cried, in tone of disgust. ‘i can’t endure you! i’ll go
 upstairs again, if you come near me.’
 
“mr. hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as could do: sat down
 in the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over her volumes
 another half hour; finally, earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.
 
“‘will you ask her to read to us, zillah? i’m stalled of doing naught;
 and i do like—i could like to hear her! dunnot say i wanted it, but ask
 of yourseln.’
 
“‘mr. hareton wishes you would read to us, ma’am,’ i said, immediately.
 ‘he’d take it very kind—he’d be much obliged.’
 
“she frowned; and looking up, answered—
 
“‘mr. hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
 understand that i reject any pretence at kindness you have the
 hypocrisy to offer! i despise you, and will have nothing to say to any
 of you! when i would have given my life for one kind word, even to see
 one of your faces, you all kept off. but i won’t complain to you! i’m
 driven down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your
 society.’
 
“‘what could i ha’ done?’ began earnshaw. ‘how was i to blame?’
 
“‘oh! you are an exception,’ answered mrs. heathcliff. ‘i never missed
 such concern as you.’
 
“‘but i offered more than once, and asked,’ said, kindling up at her
 pertness, ‘i asked mr. heathcliff to let wake for you—’
 
“‘be silent! i’ll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your
 disagreeable voice in my ear!’ said my lady.
 
“hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him! and unslinging his
 gun, restrained himself from his sunday occupations longer. he
 talked now, freely enough; and she presently saw fit to retreat to her
 solitude: but the frost had set in, and, in spite of her pride, she was
 forced to condescend to our company, more and more. however, i took
 care there should be further scorning at my good nature: ever since,
 i’ve been as stiff as herself; and she has lover or liker among us:
 and she does not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her,
 and she’ll curl back without respect of any one. she’ll snap at the
 master himself, and as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more
 hurt she gets, the more venomous she grows.”
 
at first, on hearing this account from zillah, i determined to leave my
 situation, take cottage, and get catherine to come and live with me:
 but mr. heathcliff would as soon permit that as would set up hareton
 in an independent house; and i can see remedy, at present, unless
 she could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my
 province to arrange.
 
* * * * *
 

thus ended mrs. dean’s story. notwithstanding the doctor’s prophecy, i
 am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week
 in january, i propose getting out on horseback in day or two, and
 riding over to wuthering heights, to inform my landlord that i shall
 spend the next six months in london; and, if likes, may look out
 for another tenant to take the place after october. i would not pass
 another winter here for much.
 



chapter xxxi
 

yesterday was bright, calm, and frosty. i went to the heights as i
 proposed: my housekeeper entreated to bear little note from her to
 her young lady, and i did not refuse, for the worthy woman was not
 conscious of anything odd in her request. the front door stood open,
 but the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit; i knocked and
 invoked earnshaw from among the garden-beds; unchained it, and i
 entered. the fellow is as handsome rustic as need be seen. i took
 particular notice of him this time; but then does his best
 apparently to make the least of his advantages.
 
i asked if mr. heathcliff were at home? answered, no; but would
 be in at dinner-time. it was eleven o’clock, and i announced my
 intention of going in and waiting for him; at which immediately
 flung down his tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not
 as substitute for the host.
 
we entered together; catherine was there, making herself useful in
 preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; she looked more
 sulky and less spirited than when i had seen her first. she hardly
 raised her eyes to notice me, and continued her employment with the
 same disregard to common forms of politeness as before; never returning
 my bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.
 
“she does not seem so amiable,” i thought, “as mrs. dean would persuade
 to believe. she’s beauty, it is true; but not an angel.”
 
earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen. “remove them
 yourself,” she said, pushing them from her as soon as she had done; and
 retiring to stool by the window, where she began to carve figures of
 birds and beasts out of the turnip-parings in her lap. i approached
 her, pretending to desire view of the garden; and, as i fancied,
 adroitly dropped mrs. dean’s note on to her knee, unnoticed by
 hareton—but she asked aloud, “what is that?” and chucked it off.
 
“a letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the grange,” i
 answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it
 should be imagined missive of my own. she would gladly have gathered
 it up at this information, but hareton beat her; seized and put it
 in his waistcoat, saying mr. heathcliff should look at it first.
 thereat, catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very
 stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her
 eyes; and her cousin, after struggling awhile to keep down his softer
 feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor beside her,
 as ungraciously as could. catherine caught and perused it eagerly;
 then she put few questions to concerning the inmates, rational and
 irrational, of her former home; and gazing towards the hills, murmured
 in soliloquy:
 
“i should like to be riding minny down there! i should like to be
 climbing up there! oh! i’m tired—i’m _stalled_, hareton!” and she leant
 her pretty head back against the sill, with half yawn and half a
 sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring
 nor knowing whether we remarked her.
 
“mrs. heathcliff,” i said, after sitting some time mute, “you are not
 aware that i am an acquaintance of yours? so intimate that i think it
 strange you won’t come and speak to me. my housekeeper never wearies of
 talking about and praising you; and she’ll be greatly disappointed if i
 return with news of or from you, except that you received her letter
 and said nothing!”
 
she appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked,—
 
“does ellen like you?”
 
“yes, very well,” i replied, hesitatingly.
 
“you must tell her,” she continued, “that i would answer her letter,
 but i have materials for writing: not even book from which i might
 tear leaf.”
 
“no books!” i exclaimed. “how do you contrive to live here without
 them? if i may take the liberty to inquire. though provided with a
 large library, i’m frequently very dull at the grange; take my books
 away, and i should be desperate!”
 
“i was always reading, when i had them,” said catherine; “and mr.
 heathcliff never reads; so took it into his head to destroy my
 books. i have not had glimpse of one for weeks. only once, i searched
 through joseph’s store of theology, to his great irritation; and once,
 hareton, i came upon secret stock in your room—some latin and greek,
 and some tales and poetry: all old friends. i brought the last here—and
 you gathered them, as magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love
 of stealing! they are of use to you; or else you concealed them in
 the bad spirit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.
 perhaps _your_ envy counselled mr. heathcliff to rob of my
 treasures? but i’ve most of them written on my brain and printed in my
 heart, and you cannot deprive of those!”
 
earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his
 private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of
 her accusations.
 
“mr. hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge,” i
 said, coming to his rescue. “he is not _envious_, but _emulous_ of your
 attainments. he’ll be clever scholar in few years.”
 
“and wants to sink into dunce, meantime,” answered catherine.
 “yes, i hear him trying to spell and read to himself, and pretty
 blunders makes! i wish you would repeat chevy chase as you did
 yesterday: it was extremely funny. i heard you; and i heard you turning
 over the dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing
 because you couldn’t read their explanations!”
 
the young man evidently thought it too bad that should be laughed at
 for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it. i had a
 similar notion; and, remembering mrs. dean’s anecdote of his first
 attempt at enlightening the darkness in which had been reared, i
 observed,—“but, mrs. heathcliff, we have each had commencement, and
 each stumbled and tottered on the threshold; had our teachers scorned
 instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter yet.”
 
“oh!” she replied, “i don’t wish to limit his acquirements: still, he
 has right to appropriate what is mine, and make it ridiculous to me
 with his vile mistakes and mispronunciations! those books, both prose
 and verse, are consecrated to by other associations; and i hate to
 have them debased and profaned in his mouth! besides, of all, has
 selected my favourite pieces that i love the most to repeat, as if out
 of deliberate malice.”
 
hareton’s chest heaved in silence minute: laboured under severe
 sense of mortification and wrath, which it was easy task to
 suppress. i rose, and, from gentlemanly idea of relieving his
 embarrassment, took up my station in the doorway, surveying the
 external prospect as i stood. followed my example, and left the
 room; but presently reappeared, bearing half dozen volumes in his
 hands, which threw into catherine’s lap, exclaiming,—“take them! i
 never want to hear, or read, or think of them again!”
 
“i won’t have them now,” she answered. “i shall connect them with you,
 and hate them.”
 
she opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and read a
 portion in the drawling tone of beginner; then laughed, and threw it
 from her. “and listen,” she continued, provokingly, commencing verse
 of an old ballad in the same fashion.
 
but his self-love would endure further torment: i heard, and not
 altogether disapprovingly, manual check given to her saucy tongue.
 the little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her cousin’s sensitive
 though uncultivated feelings, and physical argument was the only mode
 had of balancing the account, and repaying its effects on the
 inflictor. afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the
 fire. i read in his countenance what anguish it was to offer that
 sacrifice to spleen. i fancied that as they consumed, recalled the
 pleasure they had already imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing
 pleasure had anticipated from them; and i fancied i guessed the
 incitement to his secret studies also. had been content with daily
 labour and rough animal enjoyments, till catherine crossed his path.
 shame at her scorn, and hope of her approval, were his first prompters
 to higher pursuits; and instead of guarding him from one and winning
 him to the other, his endeavours to raise himself had produced just the
 contrary result.
 
“yes, that’s all the good that such brute as you can get from them!”
 cried catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching the
 conflagration with indignant eyes.
 
“you’d _better_ hold your tongue, now,” answered fiercely.
 
and his agitation precluded further speech; advanced hastily to the
 entrance, where i made way for him to pass. but ere had crossed the
 door-stones, mr. heathcliff, coming up the causeway, encountered him,
 and laying hold of his shoulder asked,—“what’s to do now, my lad?”
 
“naught, naught,” said, and broke away to enjoy his grief and anger
 in solitude.
 
heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.
 
“it will be odd if i thwart myself,” muttered, unconscious that i
 was behind him. “but when i look for his father in his face, i find
 _her_ every day more! how the devil is so like? i can hardly bear to
 see him.”
 
bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in. there was a
 restless, anxious expression in his countenance, i had never remarked
 there before; and looked sparer in person. his daughter-in-law, on
 perceiving him through the window, immediately escaped to the kitchen,
 so that i remained alone.
 
“i’m glad to see you out of doors again, mr. lockwood,” said, in
 reply to my greeting; “from selfish motives partly: i don’t think i
 could readily supply your loss in this desolation. i’ve wondered more
 than once what brought you here.”
 
“an idle whim, i fear, sir,” was my answer; “or else an idle whim is
 going to spirit away. i shall set out for london next week; and i
 must give you warning that i feel disposition to retain thrushcross
 grange beyond the twelve months i agreed to rent it. i believe i shall
 not live there any more.”
 
“oh, indeed; you’re tired of being banished from the world, are you?”
 said. “but if you be coming to plead off paying for place you
 won’t occupy, your journey is useless: i never relent in exacting my
 due from any one.”
 
“i’m coming to plead off nothing about it,” i exclaimed, considerably
 irritated. “should you wish it, i’ll settle with you now,” and i drew
 my note-book from my pocket.
 
“no, no,” replied, coolly; “you’ll leave sufficient behind to cover
 your debts, if you fail to return: i’m not in such hurry. sit down
 and take your dinner with us; guest that is safe from repeating his
 visit can generally be made welcome. catherine! bring the things in:
 where are you?”
 
catherine reappeared, bearing tray of knives and forks.
 
“you may get your dinner with joseph,” muttered heathcliff, aside, “and
 remain in the kitchen till is gone.”
 
she obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no
 temptation to transgress. living among clowns and misanthropists, she
 probably cannot appreciate better class of people when she meets
 them.
 
with mr. heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and hareton,
 absolutely dumb, on the other, i made somewhat cheerless meal, and
 bade adieu early. i would have departed by the back way, to get last
 glimpse of catherine and annoy old joseph; but hareton received orders
 to lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted to the door, so i
 could not fulfil my wish.
 
“how dreary life gets over in that house!” i reflected, while riding
 down the road. “what realisation of something more romantic than a
 fairy tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i
 struck up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated
 together into the stirring atmosphere of the town!”
 



chapter xxxii
 

1802.—this september i was invited to devastate the moors of friend
 in the north, and on my journey to his abode, i unexpectedly came
 within fifteen miles of gimmerton. the ostler at roadside
 public-house was holding pail of water to refresh my horses, when a
 cart of very green oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he
 remarked,—“yon’s frough gimmerton, nah! they’re allas three wick’ after
 other folk wi’ ther harvest.”
 
“gimmerton?” i repeated—my residence in that locality had already grown
 dim and dreamy. “ah! i know. how far is it from this?”
 
“happen fourteen mile o’er th’ hills; and rough road,” answered.
 
sudden impulse seized to visit thrushcross grange. it was scarcely
 noon, and i conceived that i might as well pass the night under my own
 roof as in an inn. besides, i could spare day easily to arrange
 matters with my landlord, and thus save myself the trouble of invading
 the neighbourhood again. having rested awhile, i directed my servant to
 inquire the way to the village; and, with great fatigue to our beasts,
 we managed the distance in some three hours.
 
i left him there, and proceeded down the valley alone. the grey church
 looked greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier. i distinguished a
 moor-sheep cropping the short turf on the graves. it was sweet, warm
 weather—too warm for travelling; but the heat did not hinder from
 enjoying the delightful scenery above and below: had i seen it nearer
 august, i’m sure it would have tempted to waste month among its
 solitudes. in winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more
 divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold swells
 of heath.
 
i reached the grange before sunset, and knocked for admittance; but the
 family had retreated into the back premises, i judged, by one thin,
 blue wreath, curling from the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear. i
 rode into the court. under the porch, girl of nine or ten sat
 knitting, and an old woman reclined on the housesteps, smoking a
 meditative pipe.
 
“is mrs. dean within?” i demanded of the dame.
 
“mistress dean? nay!” she answered, “she doesn’t bide here: shoo’s up
 at th’ heights.”
 
“are you the housekeeper, then?” i continued.
 
“eea, aw keep th’ hause,” she replied.
 
“well, i’m mr. lockwood, the master. are there any rooms to lodge me
 in, i wonder? i wish to stay all night.”
 
“t’ maister!” she cried in astonishment. “whet, whoiver knew yah wur
 coming? yah sud ha’ send word. they’s nowt norther dry nor mensful
 abaht t’ place: nowt there isn’t!”
 
she threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed, and i
 entered too; soon perceiving that her report was true, and, moreover,
 that i had almost upset her wits by my unwelcome apparition, i bade her
 be composed. i would go out for walk; and, meantime she must try to
 prepare corner of sitting-room for to sup in, and bedroom to
 sleep in. sweeping and dusting, only good fire and dry sheets were
 necessary. she seemed willing to do her best; though she thrust the
 hearth-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker, and
 malappropriated several other articles of her craft: but i retired,
 confiding in her energy for resting-place against my return.
 wuthering heights was the goal of my proposed excursion. an
 after-thought brought back, when i had quitted the court.
 
“all well at the heights?” i inquired of the woman.
 
“eea, f’r owt ee knaw!” she answered, skurrying away with pan of hot
 cinders.
 
i would have asked why mrs. dean had deserted the grange, but it was
 impossible to delay her at such crisis, so i turned away and made my
 exit, rambling leisurely along, with the glow of sinking sun behind,
 and the mild glory of rising moon in front—one fading, and the other
 brightening—as i quitted the park, and climbed the stony by-road
 branching off to mr. heathcliff’s dwelling. before i arrived in sight
 of it, all that remained of day was beamless amber light along the
 west: but i could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of
 grass, by that splendid moon. i had neither to climb the gate nor to
 knock—it yielded to my hand. that is an improvement, i thought. and i
 noticed another, by the aid of my nostrils; fragrance of stocks and
 wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees.
 
both doors and lattices were open; and yet, as is usually the case in a
 coal-district, fine red fire illumined the chimney: the comfort which
 the eye derives from it renders the extra heat endurable. but the house
 of wuthering heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of space
 for withdrawing out of its influence; and accordingly what inmates
 there were had stationed themselves not far from one of the windows. i
 could both see them and hear them talk before i entered, and looked and
 listened in consequence; being moved thereto by mingled sense of
 curiosity and envy, that grew as i lingered.
 
“con-_trary_!” said voice as sweet as silver bell. “that for the
 third time, you dunce! i’m not going to tell you again. recollect, or
 i’ll pull your hair!”
 
“contrary, then,” answered another, in deep but softened tones. “and
 now, kiss me, for minding so well.”
 
“no, read it over first correctly, without single mistake.”
 
the male speaker began to read: was young man, respectably dressed
 and seated at table, having book before him. his handsome features
 glowed with pleasure, and his eyes kept impatiently wandering from the
 page to small white hand over his shoulder, which recalled him by a
 smart slap on the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of
 inattention. its owner stood behind; her light, shining ringlets
 blending, at intervals, with his brown locks, as she bent to
 superintend his studies; and her face—it was lucky could not see her
 face, or would never have been so steady. i could; and i bit my lip
 in spite, at having thrown away the chance i might have had of doing
 something besides staring at its smiting beauty.
 
the task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil
 claimed reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, he
 generously returned. then they came to the door, and from their
 conversation i judged they were about to issue out and have walk on
 the moors. i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw’s
 heart, if not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions
 if i showed my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and
 feeling very mean and malignant, i skulked round to seek refuge in the
 kitchen. there was unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at
 the door sat my old friend nelly dean, sewing and singing song; which
 was often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and
 intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.
 
“i’d rayther, by th’ haulf, hev’ ’em swearing i’ my lugs fro’h morn to
 neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!” said the tenant of the kitchen, in
 answer to an unheard speech of nelly’s. “it’s blazing shame, that i
 cannot oppen t’ blessed book, but yah set up them glories to sattan,
 and all t’ flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th’ warld!
 oh! ye’re raight nowt; and shoo’s another; and that poor lad ’ll be
 lost atween ye. poor lad!” added, with groan; “he’s witched: i’m
 sartin on’t. oh, lord, judge ’em, for there’s norther law nor justice
 among wer rullers!”
 
“no! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, i suppose,” retorted
 the singer. “but wisht, old man, and read your bible like christian,
 and never mind me. this is ‘fairy annie’s wedding’—a bonny tune—it goes
 to dance.”
 
mrs. dean was about to recommence, when i advanced; and recognising me
 directly, she jumped to her feet, crying—“why, bless you, mr. lockwood!
 how could you think of returning in this way? all’s shut up at
 thrushcross grange. you should have given us notice!”
 
“i’ve arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as i shall stay,”
 i answered. “i depart again to-morrow. and how are you transplanted
 here, mrs. dean? tell that.”
 
“zillah left, and mr. heathcliff wished to come, soon after you went
 to london, and stay till you returned. but, step in, pray! have you
 walked from gimmerton this evening?”
 
“from the grange,” i replied; “and while they make lodging room
 there, i want to finish my business with your master; because i don’t
 think of having another opportunity in hurry.”
 
“what business, sir?” said nelly, conducting into the house. “he’s
 gone out at present, and won’t return soon.”
 
“about the rent,” i answered.
 
“oh! then it is with mrs. heathcliff you must settle,” she observed;
 “or rather with me. she has not learnt to manage her affairs yet, and i
 act for her: there’s nobody else.”
 
i looked surprised.
 
“ah! you have not heard of heathcliff’s death, i see,” she continued.
 
“heathcliff dead!” i exclaimed, astonished. “how long ago?”
 
“three months since: but sit down, and let take your hat, and i’ll
 tell you all about it. stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?”
 
“i want nothing: i have ordered supper at home. you sit down too. i
 never dreamt of his dying! let hear how it came to pass. you say you
 don’t expect them back for some time—the young people?”
 
“no—i have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they
 don’t care for me. at least, have drink of our old ale; it will do
 you good: you seem weary.”
 
she hastened to fetch it before i could refuse, and i heard joseph
 asking whether “it warn’t crying scandal that she should have
 followers at her time of life? and then, to get them jocks out o’ t’
 maister’s cellar! fair shaamed to ’bide still and see it.”
 
she did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in minute, bearing a
 reaming silver pint, whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness.
 and afterwards she furnished with the sequel of heathcliff’s
 history. had “queer” end, as she expressed it.
 
* * * * *
 

i was summoned to wuthering heights, within fortnight of your leaving
 us, she said; and i obeyed joyfully, for catherine’s sake. my first
 interview with her grieved and shocked me: she had altered so much
 since our separation. mr. heathcliff did not explain his reasons for
 taking new mind about my coming here; only told wanted me,
 and was tired of seeing catherine: i must make the little parlour my
 sitting-room, and keep her with me. it was enough if were obliged to
 see her once or twice day. she seemed pleased at this arrangement;
 and, by degrees, i smuggled over great number of books, and other
 articles, that had formed her amusement at the grange; and flattered
 myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. the delusion did not last
 long. catherine, contented at first, in brief space grew irritable
 and restless. for one thing, she was forbidden to move out of the
 garden, and it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as
 spring drew on; for another, in following the house, i was forced to
 quit her frequently, and she complained of loneliness: she preferred
 quarrelling with joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her
 solitude. i did not mind their skirmishes: but hareton was often
 obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the
 house to himself; and though in the beginning she either left it at his
 approach, or quietly joined in my occupations, and shunned remarking or
 addressing him—and though was always as sullen and silent as
 possible—after while, she changed her behaviour, and became incapable
 of letting him alone: talking at him; commenting on his stupidity and
 idleness; expressing her wonder how could endure the life he
 lived—how could sit whole evening staring into the fire, and
 dozing.
 
“he’s just like dog, is not, ellen?” she once observed, “or a
 cart-horse? does his work, eats his food, and sleeps eternally! what
 blank, dreary mind must have! do you ever dream, hareton? and, if
 you do, what is it about? but you can’t speak to me!”
 
then she looked at him; but would neither open his mouth nor look
 again.
 
“he’s, perhaps, dreaming now,” she continued. “he twitched his shoulder
 as juno twitches hers. ask him, ellen.”
 
“mr. hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs, if you don’t
 behave!” i said. had not only twitched his shoulder but clenched his
 fist, as if tempted to use it.
 
“i know why hareton never speaks, when i am in the kitchen,” she
 exclaimed, on another occasion. “he is afraid i shall laugh at him.
 ellen, what do you think? began to teach himself to read once; and,
 because i laughed, burned his books, and dropped it: was not a
 fool?”
 
“were not you naughty?” i said; “answer that.”
 
“perhaps i was,” she went on; “but i did not expect him to be so silly.
 hareton, if i gave you book, would you take it now? i’ll try!”
 
she placed one she had been perusing on his hand; flung it off, and
 muttered, if she did not give over, would break her neck.
 
“well, i shall put it here,” she said, “in the table-drawer; and i’m
 going to bed.”
 
then she whispered to watch whether touched it, and departed. but
 would not come near it; and so i informed her in the morning, to her
 great disappointment. i saw she was sorry for his persevering sulkiness
 and indolence: her conscience reproved her for frightening him off
 improving himself: she had done it effectually. but her ingenuity was
 at work to remedy the injury: while i ironed, or pursued other such
 stationary employments as i could not well do in the parlour, she would
 bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to me. when hareton was
 there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book
 lying about: that she did repeatedly; but was as obstinate as a
 mule, and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather took to
 smoking with joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of
 the fire, the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense,
 as would have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to
 disregard it. on fine evenings the latter followed his shooting
 expeditions, and catherine yawned and sighed, and teased to talk to
 her, and ran off into the court or garden the moment i began; and, as a
 last resource, cried, and said she was tired of living: her life was
 useless.
 
mr. heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had
 almost banished earnshaw from his apartment. owing to an accident at
 the commencement of march, became for some days fixture in the
 kitchen. his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; splinter
 cut his arm, and lost good deal of blood before could reach
 home. the consequence was that, perforce, was condemned to the
 fireside and tranquillity, till made it up again. it suited
 catherine to have him there: at any rate, it made her hate her room
 upstairs more than ever: and she would compel to find out business
 below, that she might accompany me.
 
on easter monday, joseph went to gimmerton fair with some cattle; and,
 in the afternoon, i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen. earnshaw
 sat, morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
 beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes,
 varying her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered
 ejaculations, and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the
 direction of her cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the
 grate. at notice that i could do with her longer intercepting my
 light, she removed to the hearthstone. i bestowed little attention on
 her proceedings, but, presently, i heard her begin—“i’ve found out,
 hareton, that i want—that i’m glad—that i should like you to be my
 cousin now, if you had not grown so cross to me, and so rough.”
 
hareton returned answer.
 
“hareton, hareton, hareton! do you hear?” she continued.
 
“get off wi’ ye!” growled, with uncompromising gruffness.
 
“let take that pipe,” she said, cautiously advancing her hand and
 abstracting it from his mouth.
 
before could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and behind the
 fire. swore at her and seized another.
 
“stop,” she cried, “you must listen to first; and i can’t speak
 while those clouds are floating in my face.”
 
“will you go to the devil!” exclaimed, ferociously, “and let be!”
 
“no,” she persisted, “i won’t: i can’t tell what to do to make you talk
 to me; and you are determined not to understand. when i call you
 stupid, i don’t mean anything: i don’t mean that i despise you. come,
 you shall take notice of me, hareton: you are my cousin, and you shall
 own me.”
 
“i shall have naught to do wi’ you and your mucky pride, and your
 damned mocking tricks!” answered. “i’ll go to hell, body and soul,
 before i look sideways after you again. side out o’ t’ gate, now, this
 minute!”
 
catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing her lip,
 and endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to conceal growing
 tendency to sob.
 
“you should be friends with your cousin, mr. hareton,” i interrupted,
 “since she repents of her sauciness. it would do you great deal of
 good: it would make you another man to have her for companion.”
 
“a companion!” cried; “when she hates me, and does not think fit
 to wipe her shoon! nay, if it made king, i’d not be scorned for
 seeking her good-will any more.”
 
“it is not i who hate you, it is you who hate me!” wept cathy, no
 longer disguising her trouble. “you hate as much as mr. heathcliff
 does, and more.”
 
“you’re damned liar,” began earnshaw: “why have i made him angry, by
 taking your part, then, hundred times? and that when you sneered at
 and despised me, and—go on plaguing me, and i’ll step in yonder, and
 say you worried out of the kitchen!”
 
“i didn’t know you took my part,” she answered, drying her eyes; “and i
 was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now i thank you, and beg you
 to forgive me: what can i do besides?”
 
she returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand. blackened
 and scowled like thunder-cloud, and kept his fists resolutely
 clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground. catherine, by instinct,
 must have divined it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that
 prompted this dogged conduct; for, after remaining an instant
 undecided, she stooped and impressed on his cheek gentle kiss. the
 little rogue thought i had not seen her, and, drawing back, she took
 her former station by the window, quite demurely. i shook my head
 reprovingly, and then she blushed and whispered—“well! what should i
 have done, ellen? wouldn’t shake hands, and wouldn’t look: i must
 show him some way that i like him—that i want to be friends.”
 
whether the kiss convinced hareton, i cannot tell: was very careful,
 for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when did
 raise it, was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.
 
catherine employed herself in wrapping handsome book neatly in white
 paper, and having tied it with bit of ribbon, and addressed it to
 “mr. hareton earnshaw,” she desired to be her ambassadress, and
 convey the present to its destined recipient.
 
“and tell him, if he’ll take it, i’ll come and teach him to read it
 right,” she said; “and, if refuse it, i’ll go upstairs, and never
 tease him again.”
 
i carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my
 employer. hareton would not open his fingers, so i laid it on his knee.
 did not strike it off, either. i returned to my work. catherine
 leaned her head and arms on the table, till she heard the slight rustle
 of the covering being removed; then she stole away, and quietly seated
 herself beside her cousin. trembled, and his face glowed: all his
 rudeness and all his surly harshness had deserted him: could not
 summon courage, at first, to utter syllable in reply to her
 questioning look, and her murmured petition.
 
“say you forgive me, hareton, do. you can make so happy by speaking
 that little word.”
 
muttered something inaudible.
 
“and you’ll be my friend?” added catherine, interrogatively.
 
“nay, you’ll be ashamed of every day of your life,” answered;
 “and the more ashamed, the more you know me; and i cannot bide it.”
 
“so you won’t be my friend?” she said, smiling as sweet as honey, and
 creeping close up.
 
i overheard further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round
 again, i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of
 the accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on
 both sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.
 
the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
 position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.
 he, poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated
 on the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his
 shoulder; and confounded at his favourite’s endurance of her proximity:
 it affected him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that
 night. his emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs drew, as
 solemnly spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with
 dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day’s
 transactions. at length summoned hareton from his seat.
 
“tak’ these in to t’ maister, lad,” said, “and bide there. i’s gang
 up to my own rahm. this hoile’s neither mensful nor seemly for us: we
 mun side out and seearch another.”
 
“come, catherine,” i said, “we must ‘side out’ too: i’ve done my
 ironing. are you ready to go?”
 
“it is not eight o’clock!” she answered, rising unwillingly. “hareton,
 i’ll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and i’ll bring some more
 to-morrow.”
 
“ony books that yah leave, i shall tak’ into th’ hahse,” said joseph,
 “and it’ll be mitch if yah find ’em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!”
 
cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
 she passed hareton, went singing upstairs: lighter of heart, i venture
 to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
 during her earliest visits to linton.
 
the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered
 temporary interruptions. earnshaw was not to be civilized with wish,
 and my young lady was philosopher, and paragon of patience; but
 both their minds tending to the same point—one loving and desiring to
 esteem, and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed—they contrived
 in the end to reach it.
 
you see, mr. lockwood, it was easy enough to win mrs. heathcliff’s
 heart. but now, i’m glad you did not try. the crown of all my wishes
 will be the union of those two. i shall envy one on their wedding
 day: there won’t be happier woman than myself in england!
 



chapter xxxiii
 

on the morrow of that monday, earnshaw being still unable to follow his
 ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, i
 speedily found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me,
 as heretofore. she got downstairs before me, and out into the garden,
 where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work; and when i
 went to bid them come to breakfast, i saw she had persuaded him to
 clear large space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and
 they were busy planning together an importation of plants from the
 grange.
 
i was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a
 brief half-hour; the black-currant trees were the apple of joseph’s
 eye, and she had just fixed her choice of flower-bed in the midst of
 them.
 
“there! that will be all shown to the master,” i exclaimed, “the minute
 it is discovered. and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
 liberties with the garden? we shall have fine explosion on the head
 of it: see if we don’t! mr. hareton, i wonder you should have more
 wit than to go and make that mess at her bidding!”
 
“i’d forgotten they were joseph’s,” answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
 “but i’ll tell him i did it.”
 
we always ate our meals with mr. heathcliff. i held the mistress’s post
 in making tea and carving; so i was indispensable at table. catherine
 usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to hareton; and i
 presently saw she would have more discretion in her friendship than
 she had in her hostility.
 
“now, mind you don’t talk with and notice your cousin too much,” were
 my whispered instructions as we entered the room. “it will certainly
 annoy mr. heathcliff, and he’ll be mad at you both.”
 
“i’m not going to,” she answered.
 
the minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking primroses in
 his plate of porridge.
 
dared not speak to her there: dared hardly look; and yet she went
 on teasing, till was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.
 i frowned, and then she glanced towards the master: whose mind was
 occupied on other subjects than his company, as his countenance
 evinced; and she grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with
 deep gravity. afterwards she turned, and recommenced her nonsense; at
 last, hareton uttered smothered laugh. mr. heathcliff started; his
 eye rapidly surveyed our faces. catherine met it with her accustomed
 look of nervousness and yet defiance, which abhorred.
 
“it is well you are out of my reach,” exclaimed. “what fiend
 possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal
 eyes? down with them! and don’t remind of your existence again. i
 thought i had cured you of laughing.”
 
“it was me,” muttered hareton.
 
“what do you say?” demanded the master.
 
hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession. mr.
 heathcliff looked at him bit, and then silently resumed his breakfast
 and his interrupted musing. we had nearly finished, and the two young
 people prudently shifted wider asunder, so i anticipated further
 disturbance during that sitting: when joseph appeared at the door,
 revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage
 committed on his precious shrubs was detected. must have seen cathy
 and her cousin about the spot before examined it, for while his jaws
 worked like those of cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech
 difficult to understand, began:—
 
“i mun hev’ my wage, and i mun goa! i _hed_ aimed to dee wheare i’d
 sarved fur sixty year; and i thowt i’d lug my books up into t’ garret,
 and all my bits o’ stuff, and they sud hev’ t’ kitchen to theirseln;
 for t’ sake o’ quietness. it wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but
 i thowt i _could_ do that! but nah, shoo’s taan my garden fro’ me, and
 by th’ heart, maister, i cannot stand it! yah may bend to th’ yoak an
 ye will—i noan used to ’t, and an old man doesn’t sooin get used to new
 barthens. i’d rayther arn my bite an’ my sup wi’ hammer in th’ road!”
 
“now, now, idiot!” interrupted heathcliff, “cut it short! what’s your
 grievance? i’ll interfere in quarrels between you and nelly. she may
 thrust you into the coal-hole for anything i care.”
 
“it’s noan nelly!” answered joseph. “i sudn’t shift for nelly—nasty ill
 nowt as shoo is. thank god! _shoo_ cannot stale t’ sowl o’ nob’dy! shoo
 wer niver soa handsome, but what body mud look at her ’bout winking.
 it’s yon flaysome, graceless quean, that’s witched our lad, wi’ her
 bold een and her forrard ways—till—nay! it fair brusts my heart! he’s
 forgotten all i’ve done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up
 whole row o’ t’ grandest currant-trees i’ t’ garden!” and here he
 lamented outright; unmanned by sense of his bitter injuries, and
 earnshaw’s ingratitude and dangerous condition.
 
“is the fool drunk?” asked mr. heathcliff. “hareton, is it you he’s
 finding fault with?”
 
“i’ve pulled up two or three bushes,” replied the young man; “but i’m
 going to set ’em again.”
 
“and why have you pulled them up?” said the master.
 
catherine wisely put in her tongue.
 
“we wanted to plant some flowers there,” she cried. “i’m the only
 person to blame, for i wished him to do it.”
 
“and who the devil gave _you_ leave to touch stick about the place?”
 demanded her father-in-law, much surprised. “and who ordered _you_ to
 obey her?” added, turning to hareton.
 
the latter was speechless; his cousin replied—“you shouldn’t grudge a
 few yards of earth for to ornament, when you have taken all my
 land!”
 
“your land, insolent slut! you never had any,” said heathcliff.
 
“and my money,” she continued; returning his angry glare, and meantime
 biting piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.
 
“silence!” exclaimed. “get done, and begone!”
 
“and hareton’s land, and his money,” pursued the reckless thing.
 “hareton and i are friends now; and i shall tell him all about you!”
 
the master seemed confounded moment: grew pale, and rose up,
 eyeing her all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.
 
“if you strike me, hareton will strike you,” she said; “so you may as
 well sit down.”
 
“if hareton does not turn you out of the room, i’ll strike him to
 hell,” thundered heathcliff. “damnable witch! dare you pretend to rouse
 him against me? off with her! do you hear? fling her into the kitchen!
 i’ll kill her, ellen dean, if you let her come into my sight again!”
 
hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.
 
“drag her away!” cried, savagely. “are you staying to talk?” and he
 approached to execute his own command.
 
“he’ll not obey you, wicked man, any more,” said catherine; “and he’ll
 soon detest you as much as i do.”
 
“wisht! wisht!” muttered the young man, reproachfully; “i will not hear
 you speak so to him. have done.”
 
“but you won’t let him strike me?” she cried.
 
“come, then,” whispered earnestly.
 
it was too late: heathcliff had caught hold of her.
 
“now, _you_ go!” said to earnshaw. “accursed witch! this time she
 has provoked when i could not bear it; and i’ll make her repent it
 for ever!”
 
had his hand in her hair; hareton attempted to release her locks,
 entreating him not to hurt her that once. heathcliff’s black eyes
 flashed; seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces, and i was just
 worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of sudden his fingers
 relaxed; shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
 intently in her face. then drew his hand over his eyes, stood a
 moment to collect himself apparently, and turning anew to catherine,
 said, with assumed calmness—“you must learn to avoid putting in a
 passion, or i shall really murder you some time! go with mrs. dean, and
 keep with her; and confine your insolence to her ears. as to hareton
 earnshaw, if i see him listen to you, i’ll send him seeking his bread
 where can get it! your love will make him an outcast and beggar.
 nelly, take her; and leave me, all of you! leave me!”
 
i led my young lady out: she was too glad of her escape to resist; the
 other followed, and mr. heathcliff had the room to himself till dinner.
 i had counselled catherine to dine upstairs; but, as soon as he
 perceived her vacant seat, sent to call her. spoke to none of
 us, ate very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that
 should not return before evening.
 
the two new friends established themselves in the house during his
 absence; where i heard hareton sternly check his cousin, on her
 offering revelation of her father-in-law’s conduct to his father. he
 said wouldn’t suffer word to be uttered in his disparagement: if
 were the devil, it didn’t signify; would stand by him; and he’d
 rather she would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on mr.
 heathcliff. catherine was waxing cross at this; but found means to
 make her hold her tongue, by asking how she would like _him_ to speak
 ill of her father? then she comprehended that earnshaw took the
 master’s reputation home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger
 than reason could break—chains, forged by habit, which it would be
 cruel to attempt to loosen. she showed good heart, thenceforth, in
 avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning
 heathcliff; and confessed to her sorrow that she had endeavoured to
 raise bad spirit between him and hareton: indeed, i don’t believe she
 has ever breathed syllable, in the latter’s hearing, against her
 oppressor since.
 
when this slight disagreement was over, they were friends again, and as
 busy as possible in their several occupations of pupil and teacher. i
 came in to sit with them, after i had done my work; and i felt so
 soothed and comforted to watch them, that i did not notice how time got
 on. you know, they both appeared in measure my children: i had long
 been proud of one; and now, i was sure, the other would be source of
 equal satisfaction. his honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off
 rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had been
 bred; and catherine’s sincere commendations acted as spur to his
 industry. his brightening mind brightened his features, and added
 spirit and nobility to their aspect: i could hardly fancy it the same
 individual i had beheld on the day i discovered my little lady at
 wuthering heights, after her expedition to the crags. while i admired
 and they laboured, dusk drew on, and with it returned the master. he
 came upon us quite unexpectedly, entering by the front way, and had a
 full view of the whole three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at
 him. well, i reflected, there was never pleasanter, or more harmless
 sight; and it will be burning shame to scold them. the red fire-light
 glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed their faces animated with
 the eager interest of children; for, though was twenty-three and she
 eighteen, each had so much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither
 experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
 
they lifted their eyes together, to encounter mr. heathcliff: perhaps
 you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they
 are those of catherine earnshaw. the present catherine has other
 likeness to her, except breadth of forehead, and certain arch of
 the nostril that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or
 not. with hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at
 all times, _then_ it was particularly striking; because his senses were
 alert, and his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity. i suppose
 this resemblance disarmed mr. heathcliff: walked to the hearth in
 evident agitation; but it quickly subsided as looked at the young
 man: or, i should say, altered its character; for it was there yet. he
 took the book from his hand, and glanced at the open page, then
 returned it without any observation; merely signing catherine away: her
 companion lingered very little behind her, and i was about to depart
 also, but bid sit still.
 
“it is poor conclusion, is it not?” observed, having brooded
 while on the scene had just witnessed: “an absurd termination to
 my violent exertions? i get levers and mattocks to demolish the two
 houses, and train myself to be capable of working like hercules, and
 when everything is ready and in my power, i find the will to lift a
 slate off either roof has vanished! my old enemies have not beaten me;
 now would be the precise time to revenge myself on their
 representatives: i could do it; and none could hinder me. but where is
 the use? i don’t care for striking: i can’t take the trouble to raise
 my hand! that sounds as if i had been labouring the whole time only to
 exhibit fine trait of magnanimity. it is far from being the case: i
 have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and i am too idle
 to destroy for nothing.
 
“nelly, there is strange change approaching; i’m in its shadow at
 present. i take so little interest in my daily life that i hardly
 remember to eat and drink. those two who have left the room are the
 only objects which retain distinct material appearance to me; and
 that appearance causes pain, amounting to agony. about _her_ i won’t
 speak; and i don’t desire to think; but i earnestly wish she were
 invisible: her presence invokes only maddening sensations. _he_ moves
 differently: and yet if i could do it without seeming insane, i’d
 never see him again! you’ll perhaps think rather inclined to become
 so,” added, making an effort to smile, “if i try to describe the
 thousand forms of past associations and ideas awakens or embodies.
 but you’ll not talk of what i tell you; and my mind is so eternally
 secluded in itself, it is tempting at last to turn it out to another.
 
“five minutes ago hareton seemed personification of my youth, not a
 human being; i felt to him in such variety of ways, that it would
 have been impossible to have accosted him rationally. in the first
 place, his startling likeness to catherine connected him fearfully with
 her. that, however, which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my
 imagination, is actually the least: for what is not connected with her
 to me? and what does not recall her? i cannot look down to this floor,
 but her features are shaped in the flags! in every cloud, in every
 tree—filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every object
 by day—i am surrounded with her image! the most ordinary faces of men
 and women—my own features—mock with resemblance. the entire world
 is dreadful collection of memoranda that she did exist, and that i
 have lost her! well, hareton’s aspect was the ghost of my immortal
 love; of my wild endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride,
 my happiness, and my anguish—
 
“but it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you: only it will let you
 know why, with reluctance to be always alone, his society is no
 benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment i suffer: and it
 partly contributes to render regardless how and his cousin go on
 together. i can give them attention any more.”
 
“but what do you mean by _change_, mr. heathcliff?” i said, alarmed
 at his manner: though was neither in danger of losing his senses,
 nor dying, according to my judgment: was quite strong and healthy;
 and, as to his reason, from childhood had delight in dwelling on
 dark things, and entertaining odd fancies. might have had a
 monomania on the subject of his departed idol; but on every other point
 his wits were as sound as mine.
 
“i shall not know that till it comes,” said; “i’m only half
 conscious of it now.”
 
“you have feeling of illness, have you?” i asked.
 
“no, nelly, i have not,” answered.
 
“then you are not afraid of death?” i pursued.
 
“afraid? no!” replied. “i have neither fear, nor presentiment,
 nor hope of death. why should i? with my hard constitution and
 temperate mode of living, and unperilous occupations, i ought to, and
 probably _shall_, remain above ground till there is scarcely black
 hair on my head. and yet i cannot continue in this condition! i have to
 remind myself to breathe—almost to remind my heart to beat! and it is
 like bending back stiff spring: it is by compulsion that i do the
 slightest act not prompted by one thought; and by compulsion that i
 notice anything alive or dead, which is not associated with one
 universal idea. i have single wish, and my whole being and faculties
 are yearning to attain it. they have yearned towards it so long, and so
 unwaveringly, that i’m convinced it _will_ be reached—and
 _soon_—because it has devoured my existence: i am swallowed up in the
 anticipation of its fulfilment. my confessions have not relieved me;
 but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour
 which i show. god! it is long fight; i wish it were over!”
 
began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to himself, till i
 was inclined to believe, as said joseph did, that conscience had
 turned his heart to an earthly hell. i wondered greatly how it would
 end. though seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
 looks, it was his habitual mood, i had doubt: asserted it
 himself; but not soul, from his general bearing, would have
 conjectured the fact. you did not when you saw him, mr. lockwood: and
 at the period of which i speak, was just the same as then; only
 fonder of continued solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in
 company.
 



chapter xxxiv
 

for some days after that evening, mr. heathcliff shunned meeting us at
 meals; yet would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy.
 had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing
 rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
 sufficient sustenance for him.
 
one night, after the family were in bed, i heard him go downstairs, and
 out at the front door. i did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning
 i found was still away. we were in april then: the weather was sweet
 and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
 two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom. after
 breakfast, catherine insisted on my bringing chair and sitting with
 my work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
 hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
 arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
 influence of joseph’s complaints. i was comfortably revelling in the
 spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
 young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose
 roots for border, returned only half laden, and informed us that mr.
 heathcliff was coming in. “and spoke to me,” she added, with a
 perplexed countenance.
 
“what did say?” asked hareton.
 
“he told to begone as fast as i could,” she answered. “but looked
 so different from his usual look that i stopped moment to stare at
 him.”
 
“how?” inquired.
 
“why, almost bright and cheerful. no, _almost_ nothing—_very much_
 excited, and wild, and glad!” she replied.
 
“night-walking amuses him, then,” i remarked, affecting careless
 manner: in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious to ascertain
 the truth of her statement; for to see the master looking glad would
 not be an every-day spectacle. i framed an excuse to go in. heathcliff
 stood at the open door; was pale, and trembled: yet, certainly,
 had strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of
 his whole face.
 
“will you have some breakfast?” i said. “you must be hungry, rambling
 about all night!” i wanted to discover where had been, but i did not
 like to ask directly.
 
“no, i’m not hungry,” answered, averting his head, and speaking
 rather contemptuously, as if guessed i was trying to divine the
 occasion of his good humour.
 
i felt perplexed: i didn’t know whether it were not proper
 opportunity to offer bit of admonition.
 
“i don’t think it right to wander out of doors,” i observed, “instead
 of being in bed: it is not wise, at any rate this moist season. i
 daresay you’ll catch bad cold, or fever: you have something the
 matter with you now!”
 
“nothing but what i can bear,” replied; “and with the greatest
 pleasure, provided you’ll leave alone: get in, and don’t annoy me.”
 
i obeyed: and, in passing, i noticed breathed as fast as cat.
 
“yes!” i reflected to myself, “we shall have fit of illness. i cannot
 conceive what has been doing.”
 
that noon sat down to dinner with us, and received heaped-up plate
 from my hands, as if intended to make amends for previous fasting.
 
“i’ve neither cold nor fever, nelly,” remarked, in allusion to my
 morning’s speech; “and i’m ready to do justice to the food you give
 me.”
 
took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the
 inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct. laid them on the
 table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out. we
 saw him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal,
 and earnshaw said he’d go and ask why would not dine: thought we
 had grieved him some way.
 
“well, is coming?” cried catherine, when her cousin returned.
 
“nay,” answered; “but he’s not angry: seemed rarely pleased
 indeed; only i made him impatient by speaking to him twice; and then he
 bid be off to you: wondered how i could want the company of
 anybody else.”
 
i set his plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or two he
 re-entered, when the room was clear, in degree calmer: the same
 unnatural—it was unnatural—appearance of joy under his black brows; the
 same bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in kind of
 smile; his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness,
 but as tight-stretched cord vibrates—a strong thrilling, rather than
 trembling.
 
i will ask what is the matter, i thought; or who should? and i
 exclaimed—“have you heard any good news, mr. heathcliff? you look
 uncommonly animated.”
 
“where should good news come from to me?” said. “i’m animated with
 hunger; and, seemingly, i must not eat.”
 
“your dinner is here,” i returned; “why won’t you get it?”
 
“i don’t want it now,” muttered, hastily: “i’ll wait till supper.
 and, nelly, once for all, let beg you to warn hareton and the other
 away from me. i wish to be troubled by nobody: i wish to have this
 place to myself.”
 
“is there some new reason for this banishment?” i inquired. “tell me
 why you are so queer, mr. heathcliff? where were you last night? i’m
 not putting the question through idle curiosity, but—”
 
“you are putting the question through very idle curiosity,” he
 interrupted, with laugh. “yet i’ll answer it. last night i was on the
 threshold of hell. to-day, i am within sight of my heaven. i have my
 eyes on it: hardly three feet to sever me! and now you’d better go!
 you’ll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain
 from prying.”
 
having swept the hearth and wiped the table, i departed; more perplexed
 than ever.
 
did not quit the house again that afternoon, and one intruded on
 his solitude; till, at eight o’clock, i deemed it proper, though
 unsummoned, to carry candle and his supper to him. was leaning
 against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out: his face was
 turned to the interior gloom. the fire had smouldered to ashes; the
 room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening; and so
 still, that not only the murmur of the beck down gimmerton was
 distinguishable, but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or
 through the large stones which it could not cover. i uttered an
 ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced
 shutting the casements, one after another, till i came to his.
 
“must i close this?” i asked, in order to rouse him; for would not
 stir.
 
the light flashed on his features as i spoke. oh, mr. lockwood, i
 cannot express what terrible start i got by the momentary view! those
 deep black eyes! that smile, and ghastly paleness! it appeared to me,
 not mr. heathcliff, but goblin; and, in my terror, i let the candle
 bend towards the wall, and it left in darkness.
 
“yes, close it,” replied, in his familiar voice. “there, that is
 pure awkwardness! why did you hold the candle horizontally? be quick,
 and bring another.”
 
i hurried out in foolish state of dread, and said to joseph—“the
 master wishes you to take him light and rekindle the fire.” for i
 dared not go in myself again just then.
 
joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but brought it
 back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand, explaining
 that mr. heathcliff was going to bed, and wanted nothing to eat till
 morning. we heard him mount the stairs directly; did not proceed to
 his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its
 window, as i mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get
 through; and it struck that plotted another midnight excursion,
 of which had rather we had suspicion.
 
“is ghoul or vampire?” i mused. i had read of such hideous
 incarnate demons. and then i set myself to reflect how i had tended him
 in infancy, and watched him grow to youth, and followed him almost
 through his whole course; and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to
 that sense of horror. “but where did come from, the little dark
 thing, harboured by good man to his bane?” muttered superstition, as
 i dozed into unconsciousness. and i began, half dreaming, to weary
 myself with imagining some fit parentage for him; and, repeating my
 waking meditations, i tracked his existence over again, with grim
 variations; at last, picturing his death and funeral: of which, all i
 can remember is, being exceedingly vexed at having the task of
 dictating an inscription for his monument, and consulting the sexton
 about it; and, as had surname, and we could not tell his age, we
 were obliged to content ourselves with the single word, “heathcliff.”
 that came true: we were. if you enter the kirkyard, you’ll read, on his
 headstone, only that, and the date of his death.
 
dawn restored to common sense. i rose, and went into the garden, as
 soon as i could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his
 window. there were none. “he has stayed at home,” i thought, “and he’ll
 be all right to-day.” i prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
 usual custom, but told hareton and catherine to get theirs ere the
 master came down, for lay late. they preferred taking it out of
 doors, under the trees, and i set little table to accommodate them.
 
on my re-entrance, i found mr. heathcliff below. and joseph were
 conversing about some farming business; gave clear, minute
 directions concerning the matter discussed, but spoke rapidly, and
 turned his head continually aside, and had the same excited expression,
 even more exaggerated. when joseph quitted the room took his seat in
 the place generally chose, and i put basin of coffee before him.
 drew it nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at
 the opposite wall, as i supposed, surveying one particular portion, up
 and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest
 that stopped breathing during half minute together.
 
“come now,” i exclaimed, pushing some bread against his hand, “eat and
 drink that, while it is hot: it has been waiting near an hour.”
 
didn’t notice me, and yet smiled. i’d rather have seen him gnash
 his teeth than smile so.
 
“mr. heathcliff! master!” i cried, “don’t, for god’s sake, stare as if
 you saw an unearthly vision.”
 
“don’t, for god’s sake, shout so loud,” replied. “turn round, and
 tell me, are we by ourselves?”
 
“of course,” was my answer; “of course we are.”
 
still, i involuntarily obeyed him, as if i was not quite sure. with a
 sweep of his hand cleared vacant space in front among the
 breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease.
 
now, i perceived was not looking at the wall; for when i regarded
 him alone, it seemed exactly that gazed at something within two
 yards’ distance. and whatever it was, it communicated, apparently, both
 pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes: at least the anguished, yet
 raptured, expression of his countenance suggested that idea. the
 fancied object was not fixed, either: his eyes pursued it with
 unwearied diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never weaned
 away. i vainly reminded him of his protracted abstinence from food: if
 stirred to touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if he
 stretched his hand out to get piece of bread, his fingers clenched
 before they reached it, and remained on the table, forgetful of their
 aim.
 
i sat, model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed attention
 from its engrossing speculation; till grew irritable, and got up,
 asking why i would not allow him to have his own time in taking his
 meals? and saying that on the next occasion i needn’t wait: i might set
 the things down and go. having uttered these words left the house,
 slowly sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the
 gate.
 
the hours crept anxiously by: another evening came. i did not retire to
 rest till late, and when i did, i could not sleep. returned after
 midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room
 beneath. i listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and
 descended. it was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a
 hundred idle misgivings.
 
i distinguished mr. heathcliff’s step, restlessly measuring the floor,
 and frequently broke the silence by deep inspiration, resembling a
 groan. muttered detached words also; the only one i could catch was
 the name of catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
 suffering; and spoken as one would speak to person present; low and
 earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul. i had not courage to
 walk straight into the apartment; but i desired to divert him from his
 reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and
 began to scrape the cinders. it drew him forth sooner than i expected.
 opened the door immediately, and said—“nelly, come here—is it
 morning? come in with your light.”
 
“it is striking four,” i answered. “you want candle to take upstairs:
 you might have lit one at this fire.”
 
“no, i don’t wish to go upstairs,” said. “come in, and kindle _me_ a
 fire, and do anything there is to do about the room.”
 
“i must blow the coals red first, before i can carry any,” i replied,
 getting chair and the bellows.
 
roamed to and fro, meantime, in state approaching distraction; his
 heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave space for
 common breathing between.
 
“when day breaks i’ll send for green,” said; “i wish to make some
 legal inquiries of him while i can bestow thought on those matters,
 and while i can act calmly. i have not written my will yet; and how to
 leave my property i cannot determine. i wish i could annihilate it from
 the face of the earth.”
 
“i would not talk so, mr. heathcliff,” i interposed. “let your will be
 while: you’ll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet! i
 never expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at
 present, marvellously so, however; and almost entirely through your own
 fault. the way you’ve passed these three last days might knock up a
 titan. do take some food, and some repose. you need only look at
 yourself in glass to see how you require both. your cheeks are
 hollow, and your eyes blood-shot, like person starving with hunger
 and going blind with loss of sleep.”
 
“it is not my fault that i cannot eat or rest,” replied. “i assure
 you it is through settled designs. i’ll do both, as soon as i
 possibly can. but you might as well bid man struggling in the water
 rest within arms’ length of the shore! i must reach it first, and then
 i’ll rest. well, never mind mr. green: as to repenting of my
 injustices, i’ve done injustice, and i repent of nothing. i’m too
 happy; and yet i’m not happy enough. my soul’s bliss kills my body, but
 does not satisfy itself.”
 
“happy, master?” i cried. “strange happiness! if you would hear me
 without being angry, i might offer some advice that would make you
 happier.”
 
“what is that?” asked. “give it.”
 
“you are aware, mr. heathcliff,” i said, “that from the time you were
 thirteen years old you have lived selfish, unchristian life; and
 probably hardly had bible in your hands during all that period. you
 must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have
 space to search it now. could it be hurtful to send for some one—some
 minister of any denomination, it does not matter which—to explain it,
 and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts; and how
 unfit you will be for its heaven, unless change takes place before
 you die?”
 
“i’m rather obliged than angry, nelly,” said, “for you remind of
 the manner in which i desire to be buried. it is to be carried to the
 churchyard in the evening. you and hareton may, if you please,
 accompany me: and mind, particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys
 my directions concerning the two coffins! minister need come; nor
 need anything be said over me.—i tell you i have nearly attained _my_
 heaven; and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me.”
 
“and supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that
 means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk?” i
 said, shocked at his godless indifference. “how would you like it?”
 
“they won’t do that,” replied: “if they did, you must have me
 removed secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically,
 that the dead are not annihilated!”
 
as soon as heard the other members of the family stirring retired
 to his den, and i breathed freer. but in the afternoon, while joseph
 and hareton were at their work, came into the kitchen again, and,
 with wild look, bid come and sit in the house: wanted somebody
 with him. i declined; telling him plainly that his strange talk and
 manner frightened me, and i had neither the nerve nor the will to be
 his companion alone.
 
“i believe you think fiend,” said, with his dismal laugh:
 “something too horrible to live under decent roof.” then turning to
 catherine, who was there, and who drew behind at his approach, he
 added, half sneeringly,—“will _you_ come, chuck? i’ll not hurt you. no!
 to you i’ve made myself worse than the devil. well, there is _one_ who
 won’t shrink from my company! by god! she’s relentless. oh, damn it!
 it’s unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear—even mine.”
 
solicited the society of one more. at dusk went into his
 chamber. through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard
 him groaning and murmuring to himself. hareton was anxious to enter;
 but i bid him fetch mr. kenneth, and should go in and see him. when
 came, and i requested admittance and tried to open the door, i found
 it locked; and heathcliff bid us be damned. was better, and would be
 left alone; so the doctor went away.
 
the following evening was very wet: indeed, it poured down till
 day-dawn; and, as i took my morning walk round the house, i observed
 the master’s window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in. he
 cannot be in bed, i thought: those showers would drench him through. he
 must either be up or out. but i’ll make more ado, i’ll go boldly and
 look.
 
having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, i ran to
 unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant; quickly pushing them
 aside, i peeped in. mr. heathcliff was there—laid on his back. his eyes
 met mine so keen and fierce, i started; and then seemed to smile. i
 could not think him dead: but his face and throat were washed with
 rain; the bed-clothes dripped, and was perfectly still. the lattice,
 flapping to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill; no
 blood trickled from the broken skin, and when i put my fingers to it, i
 could doubt more: was dead and stark!
 
i hasped the window; i combed his black long hair from his forehead; i
 tried to close his eyes: to extinguish, if possible, that frightful,
 life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it. they would
 not shut: they seemed to sneer at my attempts; and his parted lips and
 sharp white teeth sneered too! taken with another fit of cowardice, i
 cried out for joseph. joseph shuffled up and made noise, but
 resolutely refused to meddle with him.
 
“th’ divil’s harried off his soul,” cried, “and may hev’ his
 carcass into t’ bargin, for aught i care! ech! what wicked ’un he
 looks, girning at death!” and the old sinner grinned in mockery. i
 thought intended to cut caper round the bed; but suddenly
 composing himself, fell on his knees, and raised his hands, and
 returned thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock were
 restored to their rights.
 
i felt stunned by the awful event; and my memory unavoidably recurred
 to former times with sort of oppressive sadness. but poor hareton,
 the most wronged, was the only one who really suffered much. sat by
 the corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest. pressed its hand,
 and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one else shrank from
 contemplating; and bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs
 naturally from generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.
 
mr. kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master
 died. i concealed the fact of his having swallowed nothing for four
 days, fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, i am persuaded, he
 did not abstain on purpose: it was the consequence of his strange
 illness, not the cause.
 
we buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as wished.
 earnshaw and i, the sexton, and six men to carry the coffin,
 comprehended the whole attendance. the six men departed when they had
 let it down into the grave: we stayed to see it covered. hareton, with
 streaming face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould
 himself: at present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion
 mounds—and i hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. but the country folks,
 if you ask them, would swear on the bible that _walks_: there are
 those who speak to having met him near the church, and on the moor, and
 even within this house. idle tales, you’ll say, and so say i. yet that
 old man by the kitchen fire affirms has seen two on ’em looking out
 of his chamber window on every rainy night since his death:—and an odd
 thing happened to about month ago. i was going to the grange one
 evening—a dark evening, threatening thunder—and, just at the turn of
 the heights, i encountered little boy with sheep and two lambs
 before him; was crying terribly; and i supposed the lambs were
 skittish, and would not be guided.
 
“what is the matter, my little man?” i asked.
 
“there’s heathcliff and woman yonder, under t’ nab,” blubbered,
 “un’ i darnut pass ’em.”
 
i saw nothing; but neither the sheep nor would go on, so i bid him
 take the road lower down. probably raised the phantoms from
 thinking, as traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense had heard
 his parents and companions repeat. yet, still, i don’t like being out
 in the dark now; and i don’t like being left by myself in this grim
 house: i cannot help it; i shall be glad when they leave it, and shift
 to the grange.
 
“they are going to the grange, then?” i said.
 
“yes,” answered mrs. dean, “as soon as they are married, and that will
 be on new year’s day.”
 
“and who will live here then?”
 
“why, joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, lad to keep
 him company. they will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut
 up.”
 
“for the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?” i observed.
 
“no, mr. lockwood,” said nelly, shaking her head. “i believe the dead
 are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity.”
 
at that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.
 
“_they_ are afraid of nothing,” i grumbled, watching their approach
 through the window. “together, they would brave satan and all his
 legions.”
 
as they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take last look
 at the moon—or, more correctly, at each other by her light—i felt
 irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and, pressing remembrance
 into the hand of mrs. dean, and disregarding her expostulations at my
 rudeness, i vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house-door;
 and so should have confirmed joseph in his opinion of his
 fellow-servant’s gay indiscretions, had not fortunately recognised
 for respectable character by the sweet ring of sovereign at his
 feet.
 
my walk home was lengthened by diversion in the direction of the
 kirk. when beneath its walls, i perceived decay had made progress, even
 in seven months: many window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
 slates jutted off, here and there, beyond the right line of the roof,
 to be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.
 
i sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next
 the moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in heath; edgar linton’s
 only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot; heathcliff’s
 still bare.
 
i lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths
 fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind
 breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever
 imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook wuthering heights ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 the project gutenberg ebook of wuthering heights
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
 most other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
 you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this ebook.
 
title: wuthering heights
 
author: emily brontë
 
release date: december 1, 1996 [ebook #768]
 most recently updated: january 18, 2022
 
language: english
 
credits: david price
 

*** start of the project gutenberg ebook wuthering heights ***
 



wuthering heights
 
by emily brontë
 



chapter i
 

1801—i have just returned from visit to my landlord—the solitary
 neighbour that i shall be troubled with. this is certainly beautiful
 country! in all england, i do not believe that i could have fixed on a
 situation so completely removed from the stir of society. perfect
 misanthropist’s heaven—and mr. heathcliff and i are such suitable
 pair to divide the desolation between us. capital fellow! little
 imagined how my heart warmed towards him when i beheld his black eyes
 withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as i rode up, and when his
 fingers sheltered themselves, with jealous resolution, still further
 in his waistcoat, as i announced my name.
 
“mr. heathcliff?” i said.
 
nod was the answer.
 
“mr. lockwood, your new tenant, sir. i do myself the honour of calling
 as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope that i have
 not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation
 of thrushcross grange: i heard yesterday you had had some thoughts—”
 
“thrushcross grange is my own, sir,” interrupted, wincing. “i should
 not allow any one to inconvenience me, if i could hinder it—walk in!”
 
the “walk in” was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the
 sentiment, “go to the deuce!” even the gate over which leant
 manifested sympathising movement to the words; and i think that
 circumstance determined to accept the invitation: i felt interested
 in man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.
 
when saw my horse’s breast fairly pushing the barrier, did put
 out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded up the
 causeway, calling, as we entered the court,—“joseph, take mr.
 lockwood’s horse; and bring up some wine.”
 
“here we have the whole establishment of domestics, i suppose,” was the
 reflection suggested by this compound order. “no wonder the grass grows
 up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.”
 
joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man, very old, perhaps, though hale
 and sinewy. “the lord help us!” soliloquised in an undertone of
 peevish displeasure, while relieving of my horse: looking, meantime,
 in my face so sourly that i charitably conjectured must have need of
 divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious ejaculation had no
 reference to my unexpected advent.
 
wuthering heights is the name of mr. heathcliff’s dwelling. “wuthering”
 being significant provincial adjective, descriptive of the
 atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather.
 pure, bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed:
 one may guess the power of the north wind, blowing over the edge, by
 the excessive slant of few stunted firs at the end of the house; and
 by range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if
 craving alms of the sun. happily, the architect had foresight to build
 it strong: the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and the
 corners defended with large jutting stones.
 
before passing the threshold, i paused to admire quantity of
 grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially about the
 principal door; above which, among wilderness of crumbling griffins
 and shameless little boys, i detected the date “1500,” and the name
 “hareton earnshaw.” i would have made few comments, and requested a
 short history of the place from the surly owner; but his attitude at
 the door appeared to demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure,
 and i had desire to aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting
 the penetralium.
 
one step brought us into the family sitting-room, without any
 introductory lobby or passage: they call it here “the house”
 pre-eminently. it includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but i
 believe at wuthering heights the kitchen is forced to retreat
 altogether into another quarter: at least i distinguished chatter of
 tongues, and clatter of culinary utensils, deep within; and i
 observed signs of roasting, boiling, or baking, about the huge
 fireplace; nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on
 the walls. one end, indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat
 from ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver jugs and
 tankards, towering row after row, on vast oak dresser, to the very
 roof. the latter had never been under-drawn: its entire anatomy lay
 bare to an inquiring eye, except where frame of wood laden with
 oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
 above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and couple of
 horse-pistols: and, by way of ornament, three gaudily painted canisters
 disposed along its ledge. the floor was of smooth, white stone; the
 chairs, high-backed, primitive structures, painted green: one or two
 heavy black ones lurking in the shade. in an arch under the dresser
 reposed huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by swarm of
 squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other recesses.
 
the apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as
 belonging to homely, northern farmer, with stubborn countenance,
 and stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.
 such an individual seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on
 the round table before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six
 miles among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner. but
 mr. heathcliff forms singular contrast to his abode and style of
 living. is dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and manners a
 gentleman: that is, as much gentleman as many country squire:
 rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss with his negligence,
 because has an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.
 possibly, some people might suspect him of degree of under-bred
 pride; i have sympathetic chord within that tells it is nothing of
 the sort: i know, by instinct, his reserve springs from an aversion to
 showy displays of feeling—to manifestations of mutual kindliness. he’ll
 love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it species of
 impertinence to be loved or hated again. no, i’m running on too fast: i
 bestow my own attributes over-liberally on him. mr. heathcliff may have
 entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he
 meets would-be acquaintance, to those which actuate me. let hope
 my constitution is almost peculiar: my dear mother used to say i should
 never have comfortable home; and only last summer i proved myself
 perfectly unworthy of one.
 
while enjoying month of fine weather at the sea-coast, i was thrown
 into the company of most fascinating creature: real goddess in my
 eyes, as long as she took notice of me. i “never told my love”
 vocally; still, if looks have language, the merest idiot might have
 guessed i was over head and ears: she understood at last, and looked
 return—the sweetest of all imaginable looks. and what did i do? i
 confess it with shame—shrunk icily into myself, like snail; at every
 glance retired colder and farther; till finally the poor innocent was
 led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed with confusion at her
 supposed mistake, persuaded her mamma to decamp.
 
by this curious turn of disposition i have gained the reputation of
 deliberate heartlessness; how undeserved, i alone can appreciate.
 
i took seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which
 my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence by
 attempting to caress the canine mother, who had left her nursery, and
 was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs, her lip curled up, and
 her white teeth watering for snatch. my caress provoked long,
 guttural gnarl.
 
“you’d better let the dog alone,” growled mr. heathcliff in unison,
 checking fiercer demonstrations with punch of his foot. “she’s not
 accustomed to be spoiled—not kept for pet.” then, striding to side
 door, shouted again, “joseph!”
 
joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no
 intimation of ascending; so his master dived down to him, leaving me
 _vis-à-vis_ the ruffianly bitch and pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs,
 who shared with her jealous guardianship over all my movements. not
 anxious to come in contact with their fangs, i sat still; but,
 imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, i unfortunately
 indulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and some turn of my
 physiognomy so irritated madam, that she suddenly broke into fury and
 leapt on my knees. i flung her back, and hastened to interpose the
 table between us. this proceeding aroused the whole hive: half-a-dozen
 four-footed fiends, of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden dens
 to the common centre. i felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects
 of assault; and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually as i
 could with the poker, i was constrained to demand, aloud, assistance
 from some of the household in re-establishing peace.
 
mr. heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with vexatious
 phlegm: i don’t think they moved one second faster than usual, though
 the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping. happily, an
 inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch; lusty dame, with
 tucked-up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the
 midst of us flourishing frying-pan: and used that weapon, and her
 tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically, and she
 only remained, heaving like after high wind, when her master
 entered on the scene.
 
“what the devil is the matter?” asked, eyeing in manner that i
 could ill endure after this inhospitable treatment.
 
“what the devil, indeed!” i muttered. “the herd of possessed swine
 could have had worse spirits in them than those animals of yours,
 sir. you might as well leave stranger with brood of tigers!”
 
“they won’t meddle with persons who touch nothing,” remarked,
 putting the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table. “the
 dogs do right to be vigilant. take glass of wine?”
 
“no, thank you.”
 
“not bitten, are you?”
 
“if i had been, i would have set my signet on the biter.” heathcliff’s
 countenance relaxed into grin.
 
“come, come,” said, “you are flurried, mr. lockwood. here, take a
 little wine. guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that i and my
 dogs, i am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them. your
 health, sir?”
 
i bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be
 foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of pack of curs; besides,
 i felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since
 his humour took that turn. he—probably swayed by prudential
 consideration of the folly of offending good tenant—relaxed little
 in the laconic style of chipping off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs,
 and introduced what supposed would be subject of interest to me,—a
 discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my present place of
 retirement. i found him very intelligent on the topics we touched; and
 before i went home, i was encouraged so far as to volunteer another
 visit to-morrow. evidently wished repetition of my intrusion. i
 shall go, notwithstanding. it is astonishing how sociable i feel myself
 compared with him.
 



chapter ii
 

yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. i had half mind to spend
 it by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to
 wuthering heights. on coming up from dinner, however, (n.b.—i dine
 between twelve and one o’clock; the housekeeper, matronly lady, taken
 as fixture along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend
 my request that i might be served at five)—on mounting the stairs with
 this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, i saw servant-girl
 on her knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an
 infernal dust as she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.
 this spectacle drove back immediately; i took my hat, and, after a
 four-miles’ walk, arrived at heathcliff’s garden-gate just in time to
 escape the first feathery flakes of snow shower.
 
on that bleak hill top the earth was hard with black frost, and the
 air made shiver through every limb. being unable to remove the
 chain, i jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered
 with straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till
 my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.
 
“wretched inmates!” i ejaculated, mentally, “you deserve perpetual
 isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality. at least,
 i would not keep my doors barred in the day-time. i don’t care—i will
 get in!” so resolved, i grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.
 vinegar-faced joseph projected his head from round window of the
 barn.
 
“what are ye for?” shouted. “t’ maister’s down i’ t’ fowld. go round
 by th’ end o’ t’ laith, if ye went to spake to him.”
 
“is there nobody inside to open the door?” i hallooed, responsively.
 
“there’s nobbut t’ missis; and shoo’ll not oppen ’t an ye mak’ yer
 flaysome dins till neeght.”
 
“why? cannot you tell her whom i am, eh, joseph?”
 
“nor-ne me! i’ll hae hend wi’t,” muttered the head, vanishing.
 
the snow began to drive thickly. i seized the handle to essay another
 trial; when young man without coat, and shouldering pitchfork,
 appeared in the yard behind. hailed to follow him, and, after
 marching through wash-house, and paved area containing coal-shed,
 pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful
 apartment where i was formerly received. it glowed delightfully in the
 radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and
 near the table, laid for plentiful evening meal, i was pleased to
 observe the “missis,” an individual whose existence i had never
 previously suspected. i bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me
 take seat. she looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained
 motionless and mute.
 
“rough weather!” i remarked. “i’m afraid, mrs. heathcliff, the door
 must bear the consequence of your servants’ leisure attendance: i had
 hard work to make them hear me.”
 
she never opened her mouth. i stared—she stared also: at any rate, she
 kept her eyes on in cool, regardless manner, exceedingly
 embarrassing and disagreeable.
 
“sit down,” said the young man, gruffly. “he’ll be in soon.”
 
i obeyed; and hemmed, and called the villain juno, who deigned, at this
 second interview, to move the extreme tip of her tail, in token of
 owning my acquaintance.
 
“a beautiful animal!” i commenced again. “do you intend parting with
 the little ones, madam?”
 
“they are not mine,” said the amiable hostess, more repellingly than
 heathcliff himself could have replied.
 
“ah, your favourites are among these?” i continued, turning to an
 obscure cushion full of something like cats.
 
“a strange choice of favourites!” she observed scornfully.
 
unluckily, it was heap of dead rabbits. i hemmed once more, and drew
 closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on the wildness of the
 evening.
 
“you should not have come out,” she said, rising and reaching from the
 chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.
 
her position before was sheltered from the light; now, i had distinct
 view of her whole figure and countenance. she was slender, and
 apparently scarcely past girlhood: an admirable form, and the most
 exquisite little face that i have ever had the pleasure of beholding;
 small features, very fair; flaxen ringlets, or rather golden, hanging
 loose on her delicate neck; and eyes, had they been agreeable in
 expression, that would have been irresistible: fortunately for my
 susceptible heart, the only sentiment they evinced hovered between
 scorn and kind of desperation, singularly unnatural to be detected
 there. the canisters were almost out of her reach; i made motion to
 aid her; she turned upon as miser might turn if any one attempted
 to assist him in counting his gold.
 
“i don’t want your help,” she snapped; “i can get them for myself.”
 
“i beg your pardon!” i hastened to reply.
 
“were you asked to tea?” she demanded, tying an apron over her neat
 black frock, and standing with spoonful of the leaf poised over the
 pot.
 
“i shall be glad to have cup,” i answered.
 
“were you asked?” she repeated.
 
“no,” i said, half smiling. “you are the proper person to ask me.”
 
she flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed her chair in pet;
 her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip pushed out, like a
 child’s ready to cry.
 
meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person decidedly shabby
 upper garment, and, erecting himself before the blaze, looked down on
 from the corner of his eyes, for all the world as if there were some
 mortal feud unavenged between us. i began to doubt whether were a
 servant or not: his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of
 the superiority observable in mr. and mrs. heathcliff; his thick brown
 curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers encroached bearishly
 over his cheeks, and his hands were embrowned like those of common
 labourer: still his bearing was free, almost haughty, and showed
 none of domestic’s assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
 in the absence of clear proofs of his condition, i deemed it best to
 abstain from noticing his curious conduct; and, five minutes
 afterwards, the entrance of heathcliff relieved me, in some measure,
 from my uncomfortable state.
 
“you see, sir, i am come, according to promise!” i exclaimed, assuming
 the cheerful; “and i fear i shall be weather-bound for half an hour, if
 you can afford shelter during that space.”
 
“half an hour?” said, shaking the white flakes from his clothes; “i
 wonder you should select the thick of snow-storm to ramble about in.
 do you know that you run risk of being lost in the marshes? people
 familiar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings; and i
 can tell you there is chance of change at present.”
 
“perhaps i can get guide among your lads, and might stay at the
 grange till morning—could you spare one?”
 
“no, i could not.”
 
“oh, indeed! well, then, i must trust to my own sagacity.”
 
“umph!”
 
“are you going to mak’ the tea?” demanded of the shabby coat,
 shifting his ferocious gaze from to the young lady.
 
“is _he_ to have any?” she asked, appealing to heathcliff.
 
“get it ready, will you?” was the answer, uttered so savagely that i
 started. the tone in which the words were said revealed genuine bad
 nature. i longer felt inclined to call heathcliff capital fellow.
 when the preparations were finished, invited with—“now, sir,
 bring forward your chair.” and we all, including the rustic youth, drew
 round the table: an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our
 meal.
 
i thought, if i had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make an effort
 to dispel it. they could not every day sit so grim and taciturn; and it
 was impossible, however ill-tempered they might be, that the universal
 scowl they wore was their every-day countenance.
 
“it is strange,” i began, in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea
 and receiving another—“it is strange how custom can mould our tastes
 and ideas: many could not imagine the existence of happiness in life
 of such complete exile from the world as you spend, mr. heathcliff;
 yet, i’ll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with
 your amiable lady as the presiding genius over your home and heart—”
 
“my amiable lady!” interrupted, with an almost diabolical sneer on
 his face. “where is she—my amiable lady?”
 
“mrs. heathcliff, your wife, i mean.”
 
“well, yes—oh, you would intimate that her spirit has taken the post of
 ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of wuthering heights, even
 when her body is gone. is that it?”
 
perceiving myself in blunder, i attempted to correct it. i might have
 seen there was too great disparity between the ages of the parties to
 make it likely that they were man and wife. one was about forty: a
 period of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delusion of
 being married for love by girls: that dream is reserved for the solace
 of our declining years. the other did not look seventeen.
 
then it flashed upon me—“the clown at my elbow, who is drinking his tea
 out of basin and eating his bread with unwashed hands, may be her
 husband: heathcliff junior, of course. here is the consequence of being
 buried alive: she has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer
 ignorance that better individuals existed! sad pity—i must beware how
 i cause her to regret her choice.” the last reflection may seem
 conceited; it was not. my neighbour struck as bordering on
 repulsive; i knew, through experience, that i was tolerably attractive.
 
“mrs. heathcliff is my daughter-in-law,” said heathcliff, corroborating
 my surmise. turned, as spoke, peculiar look in her direction: a
 look of hatred; unless has most perverse set of facial muscles
 that will not, like those of other people, interpret the language of
 his soul.
 
“ah, certainly—i see now: you are the favoured possessor of the
 beneficent fairy,” i remarked, turning to my neighbour.
 
this was worse than before: the youth grew crimson, and clenched his
 fist, with every appearance of meditated assault. but seemed to
 recollect himself presently, and smothered the storm in brutal curse,
 muttered on my behalf: which, however, i took care not to notice.
 
“unhappy in your conjectures, sir,” observed my host; “we neither of us
 have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead. i said
 she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.”
 
“and this young man is—”
 
“not my son, assuredly.”
 
heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold jest to
 attribute the paternity of that bear to him.
 
“my name is hareton earnshaw,” growled the other; “and i’d counsel you
 to respect it!”
 
“i’ve shown disrespect,” was my reply, laughing internally at the
 dignity with which announced himself.
 
fixed his eye on longer than i cared to return the stare, for
 fear i might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity
 audible. i began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant
 family circle. the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than
 neutralised, the glowing physical comforts round me; and i resolved to
 be cautious how i ventured under those rafters third time.
 
the business of eating being concluded, and one uttering word of
 sociable conversation, i approached window to examine the weather. a
 sorrowful sight i saw: dark night coming down prematurely, and sky and
 hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.
 
“i don’t think it possible for to get home now without guide,” i
 could not help exclaiming. “the roads will be buried already; and, if
 they were bare, i could scarcely distinguish foot in advance.”
 
“hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch. they’ll be
 covered if left in the fold all night: and put plank before them,”
 said heathcliff.
 
“how must i do?” i continued, with rising irritation.
 
there was reply to my question; and on looking round i saw only
 joseph bringing in pail of porridge for the dogs, and mrs. heathcliff
 leaning over the fire, diverting herself with burning bundle of
 matches which had fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the
 tea-canister to its place. the former, when had deposited his
 burden, took critical survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated
 out—“aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i’ idleness war,
 when all on ’ems goan out! bud yah’re nowt, and it’s use
 talking—yah’ll niver mend o’yer ill ways, but goa raight to t’ divil,
 like yer mother afore ye!”
 
i imagined, for moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to
 me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an
 intention of kicking him out of the door. mrs. heathcliff, however,
 checked by her answer.
 
“you scandalous old hypocrite!” she replied. “are you not afraid of
 being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil’s name? i
 warn you to refrain from provoking me, or i’ll ask your abduction as a
 special favour! stop! look here, joseph,” she continued, taking long,
 dark book from shelf; “i’ll show you how far i’ve progressed in the
 black art: i shall soon be competent to make clear house of it. the
 red cow didn’t die by chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be
 reckoned among providential visitations!”
 
“oh, wicked, wicked!” gasped the elder; “may the lord deliver us from
 evil!”
 
“no, reprobate! you are castaway—be off, or i’ll hurt you seriously!
 i’ll have you all modelled in wax and clay! and the first who passes
 the limits i fix shall—i’ll not say what shall be done to—but,
 you’ll see! go, i’m looking at you!”
 
the little witch put mock malignity into her beautiful eyes, and
 joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and
 ejaculating “wicked” as went. i thought her conduct must be prompted
 by species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, i endeavoured
 to interest her in my distress.
 
“mrs. heathcliff,” i said earnestly, “you must excuse for troubling
 you. i presume, because, with that face, i’m sure you cannot help being
 good-hearted. do point out some landmarks by which i may know my way
 home: i have more idea how to get there than you would have how to
 get to london!”
 
“take the road you came,” she answered, ensconcing herself in chair,
 with candle, and the long book open before her. “it is brief advice,
 but as sound as i can give.”
 
“then, if you hear of being discovered dead in bog or pit full
 of snow, your conscience won’t whisper that it is partly your fault?”
 
“how so? i cannot escort you. they wouldn’t let go to the end of the
 garden wall.”
 
“_you_! i should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
 convenience, on such night,” i cried. “i want you to _tell_ my
 way, not to _show_ it: or else to persuade mr. heathcliff to give a
 guide.”
 
“who? there is himself, earnshaw, zillah, joseph and i. which would you
 have?”
 
“are there boys at the farm?”
 
“no; those are all.”
 
“then, it follows that i am compelled to stay.”
 
“that you may settle with your host. i have nothing to do with it.”
 
“i hope it will be lesson to you to make more rash journeys on
 these hills,” cried heathcliff’s stern voice from the kitchen entrance.
 “as to staying here, i don’t keep accommodations for visitors: you must
 share bed with hareton or joseph, if you do.”
 
“i can sleep on chair in this room,” i replied.
 
“no, no! stranger is stranger, be rich or poor: it will not suit
 to permit any one the range of the place while i am off guard!” said
 the unmannerly wretch.
 
with this insult my patience was at an end. i uttered an expression of
 disgust, and pushed past him into the yard, running against earnshaw in
 my haste. it was so dark that i could not see the means of exit; and,
 as i wandered round, i heard another specimen of their civil behaviour
 amongst each other. at first the young man appeared about to befriend
 me.
 
“i’ll go with him as far as the park,” said.
 
“you’ll go with him to hell!” exclaimed his master, or whatever
 relation bore. “and who is to look after the horses, eh?”
 
“a man’s life is of more consequence than one evening’s neglect of the
 horses: somebody must go,” murmured mrs. heathcliff, more kindly than i
 expected.
 
“not at your command!” retorted hareton. “if you set store on him,
 you’d better be quiet.”
 
“then i hope his ghost will haunt you; and i hope mr. heathcliff will
 never get another tenant till the grange is ruin,” she answered,
 sharply.
 
“hearken, hearken, shoo’s cursing on ’em!” muttered joseph, towards
 whom i had been steering.
 
sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of lantern,
 which i seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that i would send it
 back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.
 
“maister, maister, he’s staling t’ lanthern!” shouted the ancient,
 pursuing my retreat. “hey, gnasher! hey, dog! hey wolf, holld him,
 holld him!”
 
on opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat,
 bearing down, and extinguishing the light; while mingled guffaw
 from heathcliff and hareton put the copestone on my rage and
 humiliation. fortunately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretching
 their paws, and yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me
 alive; but they would suffer resurrection, and i was forced to lie
 till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me: then, hatless and
 trembling with wrath, i ordered the miscreants to let out—on their
 peril to keep one minute longer—with several incoherent threats of
 retaliation that, in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of
 king lear.
 
the vehemence of my agitation brought on copious bleeding at the
 nose, and still heathcliff laughed, and still i scolded. i don’t know
 what would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at
 hand rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my
 entertainer. this was zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued
 forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar. she thought that some
 of them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack
 her master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger
 scoundrel.
 
“well, mr. earnshaw,” she cried, “i wonder what you’ll have agait next?
 are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones? i see this house
 will never do for me—look at t’ poor lad, he’s fair choking! wisht,
 wisht; you mun’n’t go on so. come in, and i’ll cure that: there now,
 hold ye still.”
 
with these words she suddenly splashed pint of icy water down my
 neck, and pulled into the kitchen. mr. heathcliff followed, his
 accidental merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.
 
i was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled
 perforce to accept lodgings under his roof. told zillah to give a
 glass of brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while she
 condoled with on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders,
 whereby i was somewhat revived, ushered to bed.
 



chapter iii
 

while leading the way upstairs, she recommended that i should hide the
 candle, and not make noise; for her master had an odd notion about
 the chamber she would put in, and never let anybody lodge there
 willingly. i asked the reason. she did not know, she answered: she had
 only lived there year or two; and they had so many queer goings on,
 she could not begin to be curious.
 
too stupefied to be curious myself, i fastened my door and glanced
 round for the bed. the whole furniture consisted of chair, a
 clothes-press, and large oak case, with squares cut out near the top
 resembling coach windows. having approached this structure, i looked
 inside, and perceived it to be singular sort of old-fashioned couch,
 very conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of
 the family having room to himself. in fact, it formed little
 closet, and the ledge of window, which it enclosed, served as a
 table.
 
i slid back the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them
 together again, and felt secure against the vigilance of heathcliff,
 and every one else.
 
the ledge, where i placed my candle, had few mildewed books piled up
 in one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.
 this writing, however, was nothing but name repeated in all kinds of
 characters, large and small—_catherine earnshaw_, here and there varied
 to _catherine heathcliff_, and then again to _catherine linton_.
 
in vapid listlessness i leant my head against the window, and continued
 spelling over catherine earnshaw—heathcliff—linton, till my eyes
 closed; but they had not rested five minutes when glare of white
 letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres—the air swarmed
 with catherines; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, i
 discovered my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and
 perfuming the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.
 
i snuffed it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold and
 lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee.
 it was testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a
 fly-leaf bore the inscription—“catherine earnshaw, her book,” and a
 date some quarter of century back.
 
i shut it, and took up another and another, till i had examined all.
 catherine’s library was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it
 to have been well used, though not altogether for legitimate purpose:
 scarcely one chapter had escaped pen-and-ink commentary—at least the
 appearance of one—covering every morsel of blank that the printer had
 left. some were detached sentences; other parts took the form of a
 regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand. at the top of an
 extra page (quite treasure, probably, when first lighted on) i was
 greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my friend
 joseph,—rudely, yet powerfully sketched. an immediate interest kindled
 within for the unknown catherine, and i began forthwith to decipher
 her faded hieroglyphics.
 
“an awful sunday,” commenced the paragraph beneath. “i wish my father
 were back again. hindley is detestable substitute—his conduct to
 heathcliff is atrocious—h. and i are going to rebel—we took our
 initiatory step this evening.
 
“all day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so
 joseph must needs get up congregation in the garret; and, while
 hindley and his wife basked downstairs before comfortable fire—doing
 anything but reading their bibles, i’ll answer for it—heathcliff,
 myself, and the unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our
 prayer-books, and mount: we were ranged in row, on sack of corn,
 groaning and shivering, and hoping that joseph would shiver too, so
 that might give us short homily for his own sake. vain idea! the
 service lasted precisely three hours; and yet my brother had the face
 to exclaim, when saw us descending, ‘what, done already?’ on sunday
 evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we did not make much
 noise; now mere titter is sufficient to send us into corners.
 
“‘you forget you have master here,’ says the tyrant. ‘i’ll demolish
 the first who puts out of temper! i insist on perfect sobriety and
 silence. oh, boy! was that you? frances darling, pull his hair as you
 go by: i heard him snap his fingers.’ frances pulled his hair heartily,
 and then went and seated herself on her husband’s knee, and there they
 were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour—foolish
 palaver that we should be ashamed of. we made ourselves as snug as our
 means allowed in the arch of the dresser. i had just fastened our
 pinafores together, and hung them up for curtain, when in comes
 joseph, on an errand from the stables. tears down my handiwork,
 boxes my ears, and croaks:
 
“‘t’ maister nobbut just buried, and sabbath not o’ered, und t’ sound
 o’ t’ gospel still i’ yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking! shame on ye!
 sit ye down, ill childer! there’s good books eneugh if ye’ll read ’em:
 sit ye down, and think o’ yer sowls!’
 
“saying this, compelled us so to square our positions that we might
 receive from the far-off fire dull ray to show us the text of the
 lumber thrust upon us. i could not bear the employment. i took my
 dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing i
 hated good book. heathcliff kicked his to the same place. then there
 was hubbub!
 
“‘maister hindley!’ shouted our chaplain. ‘maister, coom hither! miss
 cathy’s riven th’ back off “th’ helmet o’ salvation,” un’ heathcliff’s
 pawsed his fit into t’ first part o’ “t’ brooad way to destruction!”
 it’s fair flaysome that ye let ’em go on this gait. ech! th’ owd man
 wad ha’ laced ’em properly—but he’s goan!’
 
“hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of
 us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled both into the
 back-kitchen; where, joseph asseverated, ‘owd nick’ would fetch us as
 sure as we were living: and, so comforted, we each sought separate
 nook to await his advent. i reached this book, and pot of ink from a
 shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give light, and i have got
 the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is
 impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman’s
 cloak, and have scamper on the moors, under its shelter. pleasant
 suggestion—and then, if the surly old man come in, may believe his
 prophecy verified—we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we
 are here.”
 
* * * * * *
 

i suppose catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence took
 up another subject: she waxed lachrymose.
 
“how little did i dream that hindley would ever make cry so!” she
 wrote. “my head aches, till i cannot keep it on the pillow; and still i
 can’t give over. poor heathcliff! hindley calls him vagabond, and
 won’t let him sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, says, he
 and i must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the
 house if we break his orders. has been blaming our father (how dared
 he?) for treating h. too liberally; and swears will reduce him to
 his right place—”
 
* * * * * *
 

i began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wandered from
 manuscript to print. i saw red ornamented title—“seventy times seven,
 and the first of the seventy-first. pious discourse delivered by the
 reverend jabez branderham, in the chapel of gimmerden sough.” and while
 i was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess what jabez
 branderham would make of his subject, i sank back in bed, and fell
 asleep. alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper! what else
 could it be that made pass such terrible night? i don’t remember
 another that i can at all compare with it since i was capable of
 suffering.
 
i began to dream, almost before i ceased to be sensible of my locality.
 i thought it was morning; and i had set out on my way home, with joseph
 for guide. the snow lay yards deep in our road; and, as we floundered
 on, my companion wearied with constant reproaches that i had not
 brought pilgrim’s staff: telling that i could never get into the
 house without one, and boastfully flourishing heavy-headed cudgel,
 which i understood to be so denominated. for moment i considered it
 absurd that i should need such weapon to gain admittance into my own
 residence. then new idea flashed across me. i was not going there: we
 were journeying to hear the famous jabez branderham preach, from the
 text—“seventy times seven;” and either joseph, the preacher, or i had
 committed the “first of the seventy-first,” and were to be publicly
 exposed and excommunicated.
 
we came to the chapel. i have passed it really in my walks, twice or
 thrice; it lies in hollow, between two hills: an elevated hollow,
 near swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes
 of embalming on the few corpses deposited there. the roof has been kept
 whole hitherto; but as the clergyman’s stipend is only twenty pounds
 per annum, and house with two rooms, threatening speedily to
 determine into one, clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor:
 especially as it is currently reported that his flock would rather let
 him starve than increase the living by one penny from their own
 pockets. however, in my dream, jabez had full and attentive
 congregation; and preached—good god! what sermon; divided into
 _four hundred and ninety_ parts, each fully equal to an ordinary
 address from the pulpit, and each discussing separate sin! where he
 searched for them, i cannot tell. had his private manner of
 interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the brother should sin
 different sins on every occasion. they were of the most curious
 character: odd transgressions that i never imagined previously.
 
oh, how weary i grew. how i writhed, and yawned, and nodded, and
 revived! how i pinched and pricked myself, and rubbed my eyes, and
 stood up, and sat down again, and nudged joseph to inform if he
 would _ever_ have done. i was condemned to hear all out: finally, he
 reached the “_first of the seventy-first_.” at that crisis, sudden
 inspiration descended on me; i was moved to rise and denounce jabez
 branderham as the sinner of the that christian need pardon.
 
“sir,” i exclaimed, “sitting here within these four walls, at one
 stretch, i have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads
 of your discourse. seventy times seven times have i plucked up my hat
 and been about to depart—seventy times seven times have you
 preposterously forced to resume my seat. the four hundred and
 ninety-first is too much. fellow-martyrs, have at him! drag him down,
 and crush him to atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no
 more!”
 
“_thou art the man!_” cried jabez, after solemn pause, leaning over
 his cushion. “seventy times seven times didst thou gapingly contort thy
 visage—seventy times seven did i take counsel with my soul—lo, this is
 human weakness: this also may be absolved! the first of the
 seventy-first is come. brethren, execute upon him the judgment written.
 such honour have all his saints!”
 
with that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting their pilgrim’s
 staves, rushed round in body; and i, having weapon to raise in
 self-defence, commenced grappling with joseph, my nearest and most
 ferocious assailant, for his. in the confluence of the multitude,
 several clubs crossed; blows, aimed at me, fell on other sconces.
 presently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter
 rappings: every man’s hand was against his neighbour; and branderham,
 unwilling to remain idle, poured forth his zeal in shower of loud
 taps on the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at
 last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me. and what was it that had
 suggested the tremendous tumult? what had played jabez’s part in the
 row? merely the branch of fir-tree that touched my lattice as the
 blast wailed by, and rattled its dry cones against the panes! i
 listened doubtingly an instant; detected the disturber, then turned and
 dozed, and dreamt again: if possible, still more disagreeably than
 before.
 
this time, i remembered i was lying in the oak closet, and i heard
 distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow; i heard, also,
 the fir bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it to the right
 cause: but it annoyed so much, that i resolved to silence it, if
 possible; and, i thought, i rose and endeavoured to unhasp the
 casement. the hook was soldered into the staple: circumstance
 observed by when awake, but forgotten. “i must stop it,
 nevertheless!” i muttered, knocking my knuckles through the glass, and
 stretching an arm out to seize the importunate branch; instead of
 which, my fingers closed on the fingers of little, ice-cold hand!
 
the intense horror of nightmare came over me: i tried to draw back my
 arm, but the hand clung to it, and most melancholy voice sobbed,
 
“let in—let in!”
 
“who are you?” i asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.
 
“catherine linton,” it replied, shiveringly (why did i think of
 _linton_? i had read _earnshaw_ twenty times for linton)—“i’m come
 home: i’d lost my way on the moor!”
 
as it spoke, i discerned, obscurely, child’s face looking through the
 window. terror made cruel; and, finding it useless to attempt
 shaking the creature off, i pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and
 rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes:
 still it wailed, “let in!” and maintained its tenacious gripe,
 almost maddening with fear.
 
“how can i!” i said at length. “let _me_ go, if you want to let you
 in!”
 
the fingers relaxed, i snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly piled
 the books up in pyramid against it, and stopped my ears to exclude
 the lamentable prayer.
 
i seemed to keep them closed above quarter of an hour; yet, the
 instant i listened again, there was the doleful cry moaning on!
 
“begone!” i shouted. “i’ll never let you in, not if you beg for twenty
 years.”
 
“it is twenty years,” mourned the voice: “twenty years. i’ve been a
 waif for twenty years!”
 
thereat began feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved
 as if thrust forward.
 
i tried to jump up; but could not stir limb; and so yelled aloud, in
 frenzy of fright.
 
to my confusion, i discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty footsteps
 approached my chamber door; somebody pushed it open, with vigorous
 hand, and light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed.
 i sat shuddering, yet, and wiping the perspiration from my forehead:
 the intruder appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself.
 
at last, said, in half-whisper, plainly not expecting an answer,
 
“is any one here?”
 
i considered it best to confess my presence; for i knew heathcliff’s
 accents, and feared might search further, if i kept quiet.
 
with this intention, i turned and opened the panels. i shall not soon
 forget the effect my action produced.
 
heathcliff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and trousers; with a
 candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white as the wall
 behind him. the first creak of the oak startled him like an electric
 shock: the light leaped from his hold to distance of some feet, and
 his agitation was so extreme, that could hardly pick it up.
 
“it is only your guest, sir,” i called out, desirous to spare him the
 humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. “i had the misfortune to
 scream in my sleep, owing to frightful nightmare. i’m sorry i
 disturbed you.”
 
“oh, god confound you, mr. lockwood! i wish you were at the—” commenced
 my host, setting the candle on chair, because found it impossible
 to hold it steady. “and who showed you up into this room?” he
 continued, crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to
 subdue the maxillary convulsions. “who was it? i’ve good mind to turn
 them out of the house this moment!”
 
“it was your servant zillah,” i replied, flinging myself on to the
 floor, and rapidly resuming my garments. “i should not care if you did,
 mr. heathcliff; she richly deserves it. i suppose that she wanted to
 get another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense. well, it
 is—swarming with ghosts and goblins! you have reason in shutting it up,
 i assure you. one will thank you for doze in such den!”
 
“what do you mean?” asked heathcliff, “and what are you doing? lie down
 and finish out the night, since you _are_ here; but, for heaven’s sake!
 don’t repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you
 were having your throat cut!”
 
“if the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably would have
 strangled me!” i returned. “i’m not going to endure the persecutions of
 your hospitable ancestors again. was not the reverend jabez branderham
 akin to you on the mother’s side? and that minx, catherine linton, or
 earnshaw, or however she was called—she must have been a
 changeling—wicked little soul! she told she had been walking the
 earth these twenty years: just punishment for her mortal
 transgressions, i’ve doubt!”
 
scarcely were these words uttered when i recollected the association of
 heathcliff’s with catherine’s name in the book, which had completely
 slipped from my memory, till thus awakened. i blushed at my
 inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the
 offence, i hastened to add—“the truth is, sir, i passed the first part
 of the night in—” here i stopped afresh—i was about to say “perusing
 those old volumes,” then it would have revealed my knowledge of their
 written, as well as their printed, contents; so, correcting myself, i
 went on—“in spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge. a
 monotonous occupation, calculated to set asleep, like counting, or—”
 
“what _can_ you mean by talking in this way to _me!_” thundered
 heathcliff with savage vehemence. “how—how _dare_ you, under my
 roof?—god! he’s mad to speak so!” and struck his forehead with rage.
 
i did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my
 explanation; but seemed so powerfully affected that i took pity and
 proceeded with my dreams; affirming i had never heard the appellation
 of “catherine linton” before, but reading it often over produced an
 impression which personified itself when i had longer my imagination
 under control. heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the
 bed, as i spoke; finally sitting down almost concealed behind it. i
 guessed, however, by his irregular and intercepted breathing, that he
 struggled to vanquish an excess of violent emotion. not liking to show
 him that i had heard the conflict, i continued my toilette rather
 noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquised on the length of the
 night: “not three o’clock yet! i could have taken oath it had been six.
 time stagnates here: we must surely have retired to rest at eight!”
 
“always at nine in winter, and rise at four,” said my host, suppressing
 groan: and, as i fancied, by the motion of his arm’s shadow, dashing
 tear from his eyes. “mr. lockwood,” added, “you may go into my
 room: you’ll only be in the way, coming downstairs so early: and your
 childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me.”
 
“and for me, too,” i replied. “i’ll walk in the yard till daylight, and
 then i’ll be off; and you need not dread repetition of my intrusion.
 i’m now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or
 town. sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself.”
 
“delightful company!” muttered heathcliff. “take the candle, and go
 where you please. i shall join you directly. keep out of the yard,
 though, the dogs are unchained; and the house—juno mounts sentinel
 there, and—nay, you can only ramble about the steps and passages. but,
 away with you! i’ll come in two minutes!”
 
i obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the
 narrow lobbies led, i stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a
 piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly,
 his apparent sense. got on to the bed, and wrenched open the
 lattice, bursting, as pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion
 of tears. “come in! come in!” sobbed. “cathy, do come. oh, do—_once_
 more! oh! my heart’s darling! hear _this_ time, catherine, at last!”
 the spectre showed spectre’s ordinary caprice: it gave sign of
 being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even reaching my
 station, and blowing out the light.
 
there was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this
 raving, that my compassion made overlook its folly, and i drew off,
 half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at having related my
 ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that agony; though _why_ was
 beyond my comprehension. i descended cautiously to the lower regions,
 and landed in the back-kitchen, where gleam of fire, raked compactly
 together, enabled to rekindle my candle. nothing was stirring except
 brindled, grey cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted with a
 querulous mew.
 
two benches, shaped in sections of circle, nearly enclosed the
 hearth; on one of these i stretched myself, and grimalkin mounted the
 other. we were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat, and
 then it was joseph, shuffling down wooden ladder that vanished in the
 roof, through trap: the ascent to his garret, i suppose. cast a
 sinister look at the little flame which i had enticed to play between
 the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and bestowing himself in
 the vacancy, commenced the operation of stuffing three-inch pipe with
 tobacco. my presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed piece of
 impudence too shameful for remark: silently applied the tube to his
 lips, folded his arms, and puffed away. i let him enjoy the luxury
 unannoyed; and after sucking out his last wreath, and heaving a
 profound sigh, got up, and departed as solemnly as came.
 
more elastic footstep entered next; and now i opened my mouth for a
 “good-morning,” but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for
 hareton earnshaw was performing his orison _sotto voce_, in series of
 curses directed against every object touched, while rummaged a
 corner for spade or shovel to dig through the drifts. glanced over
 the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of
 exchanging civilities with as with my companion the cat. i guessed,
 by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard
 couch, made movement to follow him. noticed this, and thrust at an
 inner door with the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticulate
 sound that there was the place where i must go, if i changed my
 locality.
 
it opened into the house, where the females were already astir; zillah
 urging flakes of flame up the chimney with colossal bellows; and mrs.
 heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading book by the aid of the
 blaze. she held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her
 eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation; desisting from it only to
 chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to push away dog,
 now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face. i was
 surprised to see heathcliff there also. stood by the fire, his back
 towards me, just finishing stormy scene with poor zillah; who ever
 and anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron,
 and heave an indignant groan.
 
“and you, you worthless—” broke out as i entered, turning to his
 daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as duck, or
 sheep, but generally represented by dash—. “there you are, at your
 idle tricks again! the rest of them do earn their bread—you live on my
 charity! put your trash away, and find something to do. you shall pay
 for the plague of having you eternally in my sight—do you hear,
 damnable jade?”
 
“i’ll put my trash away, because you can make if i refuse,” answered
 the young lady, closing her book, and throwing it on chair. “but i’ll
 not do anything, though you should swear your tongue out, except what i
 please!”
 
heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to safer distance,
 obviously acquainted with its weight. having desire to be
 entertained by cat-and-dog combat, i stepped forward briskly, as if
 eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and innocent of any
 knowledge of the interrupted dispute. each had enough decorum to
 suspend further hostilities: heathcliff placed his fists, out of
 temptation, in his pockets; mrs. heathcliff curled her lip, and walked
 to seat far off, where she kept her word by playing the part of a
 statue during the remainder of my stay. that was not long. i declined
 joining their breakfast, and, at the first gleam of dawn, took an
 opportunity of escaping into the free air, now clear, and still, and
 cold as impalpable ice.
 
my landlord halloed for to stop ere i reached the bottom of the
 garden, and offered to accompany across the moor. it was well he
 did, for the whole hill-back was one billowy, white ocean; the swells
 and falls not indicating corresponding rises and depressions in the
 ground: many pits, at least, were filled to level; and entire ranges
 of mounds, the refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart which my
 yesterday’s walk left pictured in my mind. i had remarked on one side
 of the road, at intervals of six or seven yards, line of upright
 stones, continued through the whole length of the barren: these were
 erected and daubed with lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark,
 and also when fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps on
 either hand with the firmer path: but, excepting dirty dot pointing
 up here and there, all traces of their existence had vanished: and my
 companion found it necessary to warn frequently to steer to the
 right or left, when i imagined i was following, correctly, the windings
 of the road.
 
we exchanged little conversation, and halted at the entrance of
 thrushcross park, saying, i could make error there. our adieux were
 limited to hasty bow, and then i pushed forward, trusting to my own
 resources; for the porter’s lodge is untenanted as yet. the distance
 from the gate to the grange is two miles; i believe i managed to make
 it four, what with losing myself among the trees, and sinking up to the
 neck in snow: predicament which only those who have experienced it
 can appreciate. at any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the clock
 chimed twelve as i entered the house; and that gave exactly an hour for
 every mile of the usual way from wuthering heights.
 
my human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me; exclaiming,
 tumultuously, they had completely given up: everybody conjectured
 that i perished last night; and they were wondering how they must set
 about the search for my remains. i bid them be quiet, now that they saw
 returned, and, benumbed to my very heart, i dragged upstairs;
 whence, after putting on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or
 forty minutes, to restore the animal heat, i adjourned to my study,
 feeble as kitten: almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and
 smoking coffee which the servant had prepared for my refreshment.
 



chapter iv
 

what vain weather-cocks we are! i, who had determined to hold myself
 independent of all social intercourse, and thanked my stars that, at
 length, i had lighted on spot where it was next to impracticable—i,
 weak wretch, after maintaining till dusk struggle with low spirits
 and solitude, was finally compelled to strike my colours; and under
 pretence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my
 establishment, i desired mrs. dean, when she brought in supper, to sit
 down while i ate it; hoping sincerely she would prove regular gossip,
 and either rouse to animation or lull to sleep by her talk.
 
“you have lived here considerable time,” i commenced; “did you not
 say sixteen years?”
 
“eighteen, sir: i came when the mistress was married, to wait on her;
 after she died, the master retained for his housekeeper.”
 
“indeed.”
 
there ensued pause. she was not gossip, i feared; unless about her
 own affairs, and those could hardly interest me. however, having
 studied for an interval, with fist on either knee, and cloud of
 meditation over her ruddy countenance, she ejaculated—“ah, times are
 greatly changed since then!”
 
“yes,” i remarked, “you’ve seen good many alterations, i suppose?”
 
“i have: and troubles too,” she said.
 
“oh, i’ll turn the talk on my landlord’s family!” i thought to myself.
 “a good subject to start! and that pretty girl-widow, i should like to
 know her history: whether she be native of the country, or, as is
 more probable, an exotic that the surly _indigenae_ will not recognise
 for kin.” with this intention i asked mrs. dean why heathcliff let
 thrushcross grange, and preferred living in situation and residence
 so much inferior. “is not rich enough to keep the estate in good
 order?” i inquired.
 
“rich, sir!” she returned. “he has nobody knows what money, and every
 year it increases. yes, yes, he’s rich enough to live in finer house
 than this: but he’s very near—close-handed; and, if had meant to
 flit to thrushcross grange, as soon as heard of good tenant he
 could not have borne to miss the chance of getting few hundreds more.
 it is strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the
 world!”
 
“he had son, it seems?”
 
“yes, had one—he is dead.”
 
“and that young lady, mrs. heathcliff, is his widow?”
 
“yes.”
 
“where did she come from originally?”
 
“why, sir, she is my late master’s daughter: catherine linton was her
 maiden name. i nursed her, poor thing! i did wish mr. heathcliff would
 remove here, and then we might have been together again.”
 
“what! catherine linton?” i exclaimed, astonished. but minute’s
 reflection convinced it was not my ghostly catherine. “then,” i
 continued, “my predecessor’s name was linton?”
 
“it was.”
 
“and who is that earnshaw: hareton earnshaw, who lives with mr.
 heathcliff? are they relations?”
 
“no; is the late mrs. linton’s nephew.”
 
“the young lady’s cousin, then?”
 
“yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother’s, the
 other on the father’s side: heathcliff married mr. linton’s sister.”
 
“i see the house at wuthering heights has ‘earnshaw’ carved over the
 front door. are they an old family?”
 
“very old, sir; and hareton is the last of them, as our miss cathy is
 of us—i mean, of the lintons. have you been to wuthering heights? i beg
 pardon for asking; but i should like to hear how she is!”
 
“mrs. heathcliff? she looked very well, and very handsome; yet, i
 think, not very happy.”
 
“oh dear, i don’t wonder! and how did you like the master?”
 
“a rough fellow, rather, mrs. dean. is not that his character?”
 
“rough as saw-edge, and hard as whinstone! the less you meddle with
 him the better.”
 
“he must have had some ups and downs in life to make him such churl.
 do you know anything of his history?”
 
“it’s cuckoo’s, sir—i know all about it: except where was born,
 and who were his parents, and how got his money at first. and
 hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock! the unfortunate
 lad is the only one in all this parish that does not guess how has
 been cheated.”
 
“well, mrs. dean, it will be charitable deed to tell something of
 my neighbours: i feel i shall not rest if i go to bed; so be good
 enough to sit and chat an hour.”
 
“oh, certainly, sir! i’ll just fetch little sewing, and then i’ll sit
 as long as you please. but you’ve caught cold: i saw you shivering, and
 you must have some gruel to drive it out.”
 
the worthy woman bustled off, and i crouched nearer the fire; my head
 felt hot, and the rest of chill: moreover, i was excited, almost to
 pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and brain. this caused to
 feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as i am still) of serious
 effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday. she returned
 presently, bringing smoking basin and basket of work; and, having
 placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to
 find so companionable.
 
* * * * *
 

before i came to live here, she commenced—waiting farther invitation
 to her story—i was almost always at wuthering heights; because my
 mother had nursed mr. hindley earnshaw, that was hareton’s father, and
 i got used to playing with the children: i ran errands too, and helped
 to make hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody
 would set to. one fine summer morning—it was the beginning of
 harvest, i remember—mr. earnshaw, the old master, came downstairs,
 dressed for journey; and, after had told joseph what was to be
 done during the day, turned to hindley, and cathy, and me—for i sat
 eating my porridge with them—and said, speaking to his son, “now, my
 bonny man, i’m going to liverpool to-day, what shall i bring you? you
 may choose what you like: only let it be little, for i shall walk there
 and back: sixty miles each way, that is long spell!” hindley named a
 fiddle, and then asked miss cathy; she was hardly six years old, but
 she could ride any horse in the stable, and she chose whip. did
 not forget me; for had kind heart, though was rather severe
 sometimes. promised to bring pocketful of apples and pears, and
 then kissed his children, said good-bye, and set off.
 
it seemed long while to us all—the three days of his absence—and
 often did little cathy ask when would be home. mrs. earnshaw
 expected him by supper-time on the third evening, and she put the meal
 off hour after hour; there were signs of his coming, however, and at
 last the children got tired of running down to the gate to look. then
 it grew dark; she would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to
 be allowed to stay up; and, just about eleven o’clock, the door-latch
 was raised quietly, and in stepped the master. threw himself into a
 chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for was
 nearly killed—he would not have such another walk for the three
 kingdoms.
 
“and at the end of it to be flighted to death!” said, opening his
 great-coat, which held bundled up in his arms. “see here, wife! i
 was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e’en take it
 as gift of god; though it’s as dark almost as if it came from the
 devil.”
 
we crowded round, and over miss cathy’s head i had peep at dirty,
 ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed,
 its face looked older than catherine’s; yet when it was set on its
 feet, it only stared round, and repeated over and over again some
 gibberish that nobody could understand. i was frightened, and mrs.
 earnshaw was ready to fling it out of doors: she did fly up, asking how
 could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had
 their own bairns to feed and fend for? what meant to do with it, and
 whether were mad? the master tried to explain the matter; but was
 really half dead with fatigue, and all that i could make out, amongst
 her scolding, was tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless, and
 as good as dumb, in the streets of liverpool, where picked it up and
 inquired for its owner. not soul knew to whom it belonged, said;
 and his money and time being both limited, thought it better to take
 it home with him at once, than run into vain expenses there: because he
 was determined would not leave it as found it. well, the
 conclusion was, that my mistress grumbled herself calm; and mr.
 earnshaw told to wash it, and give it clean things, and let it sleep
 with the children.
 
hindley and cathy contented themselves with looking and listening till
 peace was restored: then, both began searching their father’s pockets
 for the presents had promised them. the former was boy of
 fourteen, but when drew out what had been fiddle, crushed to
 morsels in the great-coat, blubbered aloud; and cathy, when she
 learned the master had lost her whip in attending on the stranger,
 showed her humour by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing;
 earning for her pains sound blow from her father, to teach her
 cleaner manners. they entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or
 even in their room; and i had more sense, so i put it on the landing
 of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow. by chance, or
 else attracted by hearing his voice, it crept to mr. earnshaw’s door,
 and there found it on quitting his chamber. inquiries were made as
 to how it got there; i was obliged to confess, and in recompense for my
 cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house.
 
this was heathcliff’s first introduction to the family. on coming back
 few days afterwards (for i did not consider my banishment perpetual),
 i found they had christened him “heathcliff”: it was the name of son
 who died in childhood, and it has served him ever since, both for
 christian and surname. miss cathy and were now very thick; but
 hindley hated him: and to say the truth i did the same; and we plagued
 and went on with him shamefully: for i wasn’t reasonable enough to feel
 my injustice, and the mistress never put in word on his behalf when
 she saw him wronged.
 
seemed sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment:
 would stand hindley’s blows without winking or shedding tear, and
 my pinches moved him only to draw in breath and open his eyes, as if
 had hurt himself by accident, and nobody was to blame. this
 endurance made old earnshaw furious, when discovered his son
 persecuting the poor fatherless child, as called him. took to
 heathcliff strangely, believing all said (for that matter, said
 precious little, and generally the truth), and petting him up far above
 cathy, who was too mischievous and wayward for favourite.
 
so, from the very beginning, bred bad feeling in the house; and at
 mrs. earnshaw’s death, which happened in less than two years after, the
 young master had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rather
 than friend, and heathcliff as usurper of his parent’s affections
 and his privileges; and grew bitter with brooding over these
 injuries. i sympathised while; but when the children fell ill of the
 measles, and i had to tend them, and take on the cares of woman at
 once, i changed my idea. heathcliff was dangerously sick; and while he
 lay at the worst would have constantly by his pillow: i suppose
 felt i did good deal for him, and hadn’t wit to guess that i
 was compelled to do it. however, i will say this, was the quietest
 child that ever nurse watched over. the difference between him and the
 others forced to be less partial. cathy and her brother harassed me
 terribly: _he_ was as uncomplaining as lamb; though hardness, not
 gentleness, made him give little trouble.
 
got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in great measure owing
 to me, and praised for my care. i was vain of his commendations, and
 softened towards the being by whose means i earned them, and thus
 hindley lost his last ally: still i couldn’t dote on heathcliff, and i
 wondered often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy;
 who never, to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of
 gratitude. was not insolent to his benefactor, was simply
 insensible; though knowing perfectly the hold had on his heart, and
 conscious had only to speak and all the house would be obliged to
 bend to his wishes. as an instance, i remember mr. earnshaw once bought
 couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
 heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when he
 discovered it, said to hindley—
 
“you must exchange horses with me: i don’t like mine; and if you won’t
 i shall tell your father of the three thrashings you’ve given this
 week, and show him my arm, which is black to the shoulder.” hindley put
 out his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears. “you’d better do it at
 once,” persisted, escaping to the porch (they were in the stable):
 “you will have to: and if i speak of these blows, you’ll get them again
 with interest.” “off, dog!” cried hindley, threatening him with an iron
 weight used for weighing potatoes and hay. “throw it,” replied,
 standing still, “and then i’ll tell how you boasted that you would turn
 out of doors as soon as died, and see whether will not turn
 you out directly.” hindley threw it, hitting him on the breast, and
 down fell, but staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and,
 had not i prevented it, would have gone just so to the master, and
 got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who
 had caused it. “take my colt, gipsy, then!” said young earnshaw. “and i
 pray that may break your neck: take him, and be damned, you beggarly
 interloper! and wheedle my father out of all has: only afterwards
 show him what you are, imp of satan.—and take that, i hope he’ll kick
 out your brains!”
 
heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own stall;
 was passing behind it, when hindley finished his speech by knocking
 him under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether his hopes
 were fulfilled, ran away as fast as could. i was surprised to
 witness how coolly the child gathered himself up, and went on with his
 intention; exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a
 bundle of to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned,
 before entered the house. i persuaded him easily to let lay the
 blame of his bruises on the horse: minded little what tale was told
 since had what wanted. complained so seldom, indeed, of such
 stirs as these, that i really thought him not vindictive: i was
 deceived completely, as you will hear.
 



chapter v
 

in the course of time mr. earnshaw began to fail. had been active
 and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly; and when was
 confined to the chimney-corner grew grievously irritable. nothing
 vexed him; and suspected slights of his authority nearly threw him into
 fits. this was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose
 upon, or domineer over, his favourite: was painfully jealous lest a
 word should be spoken amiss to him; seeming to have got into his head
 the notion that, because liked heathcliff, all hated, and longed to
 do him an ill-turn. it was disadvantage to the lad; for the kinder
 among us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his
 partiality; and that humouring was rich nourishment to the child’s
 pride and black tempers. still it became in manner necessary; twice,
 or thrice, hindley’s manifestation of scorn, while his father was near,
 roused the old man to fury: seized his stick to strike him, and
 shook with rage that could not do it.
 
at last, our curate (we had curate then who made the living answer by
 teaching the little lintons and earnshaws, and farming his bit of land
 himself) advised that the young man should be sent to college; and mr.
 earnshaw agreed, though with heavy spirit, for said—“hindley was
 nought, and would never thrive as where wandered.”
 
i hoped heartily we should have peace now. it hurt to think the
 master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed. i fancied the
 discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements; as
 would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was in his
 sinking frame. we might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for
 two people—miss cathy, and joseph, the servant: you saw him, i daresay,
 up yonder. was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest
 self-righteous pharisee that ever ransacked bible to rake the
 promises to himself and fling the curses to his neighbours. by his
 knack of sermonising and pious discoursing, contrived to make a
 great impression on mr. earnshaw; and the more feeble the master
 became, the more influence gained. was relentless in worrying him
 about his soul’s concerns, and about ruling his children rigidly. he
 encouraged him to regard hindley as reprobate; and, night after
 night, regularly grumbled out long string of tales against
 heathcliff and catherine: always minding to flatter earnshaw’s weakness
 by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.
 
certainly she had ways with her such as i never saw child take up
 before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener
 in day: from the hour she came downstairs till the hour she went to
 bed, we had not minute’s security that she wouldn’t be in mischief.
 her spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always
 going—singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the
 same. wild, wicked slip she was—but she had the bonniest eye, the
 sweetest smile, and lightest foot in the parish: and, after all, i
 believe she meant harm; for when once she made you cry in good
 earnest, it seldom happened that she would not keep you company, and
 oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her. she was much too
 fond of heathcliff. the greatest punishment we could invent for her was
 to keep her separate from him: yet she got chided more than any of us
 on his account. in play, she liked exceedingly to act the little
 mistress; using her hands freely, and commanding her companions: she
 did so to me, but i would not bear slapping and ordering; and so i let
 her know.
 
now, mr. earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: had
 always been strict and grave with them; and catherine, on her part, had
 idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing
 condition than was in his prime. his peevish reproofs wakened in her
 naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we
 were all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy
 look, and her ready words; turning joseph’s religious curses into
 ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most—showing
 how her pretended insolence, which thought real, had more power over
 heathcliff than his kindness: how the boy would do _her_ bidding in
 anything, and _his_ only when it suited his own inclination. after
 behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to
 make it up at night. “nay, cathy,” the old man would say, “i cannot
 love thee, thou’rt worse than thy brother. go, say thy prayers, child,
 and ask god’s pardon. i doubt thy mother and i must rue that we ever
 reared thee!” that made her cry, at first; and then being repulsed
 continually hardened her, and she laughed if i told her to say she was
 sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.
 
but the hour came, at last, that ended mr. earnshaw’s troubles on
 earth. died quietly in his chair one october evening, seated by the
 fire-side. high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the
 chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were
 all together—i, little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting,
 and joseph reading his bible near the table (for the servants generally
 sat in the house then, after their work was done). miss cathy had been
 sick, and that made her still; she leant against her father’s knee, and
 heathcliff was lying on the floor with his head in her lap. i remember
 the master, before fell into doze, stroking her bonny hair—it
 pleased him rarely to see her gentle—and saying, “why canst thou not
 always be good lass, cathy?” and she turned her face up to his, and
 laughed, and answered, “why cannot you always be good man, father?”
 but as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said
 she would sing him to sleep. she began singing very low, till his
 fingers dropped from hers, and his head sank on his breast. then i told
 her to hush, and not stir, for fear she should wake him. we all kept as
 mute as mice full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only
 joseph, having finished his chapter, got up and said that must rouse
 the master for prayers and bed. stepped forward, and called him by
 name, and touched his shoulder; but would not move: so took the
 candle and looked at him. i thought there was something wrong as set
 down the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them
 to “frame upstairs, and make little din—they might pray alone that
 evening—he had summut to do.”
 
“i shall bid father good-night first,” said catherine, putting her arms
 round his neck, before we could hinder her. the poor thing discovered
 her loss directly—she screamed out—“oh, he’s dead, heathcliff! he’s
 dead!” and they both set up heart-breaking cry.
 
i joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but joseph asked what we
 could be thinking of to roar in that way over saint in heaven. he
 told to put on my cloak and run to gimmerton for the doctor and the
 parson. i could not guess the use that either would be of, then.
 however, i went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor,
 back with me; the other said would come in the morning. leaving
 joseph to explain matters, i ran to the children’s room: their door was
 ajar, i saw they had never lain down, though it was past midnight; but
 they were calmer, and did not need to console them. the little souls
 were comforting each other with better thoughts than i could have hit
 on: parson in the world ever pictured heaven so beautifully as they
 did, in their innocent talk; and, while i sobbed and listened, i could
 not help wishing we were all there safe together.
 



chapter vi
 

mr. hindley came home to the funeral; and—a thing that amazed us, and
 set the neighbours gossiping right and left—he brought wife with him.
 what she was, and where she was born, never informed us: probably,
 she had neither money nor name to recommend her, or would scarcely
 have kept the union from his father.
 
she was not one that would have disturbed the house much on her own
 account. every object she saw, the moment she crossed the threshold,
 appeared to delight her; and every circumstance that took place about
 her: except the preparing for the burial, and the presence of the
 mourners. i thought she was half silly, from her behaviour while that
 went on: she ran into her chamber, and made come with her, though i
 should have been dressing the children: and there she sat shivering and
 clasping her hands, and asking repeatedly—“are they gone yet?” then she
 began describing with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on her
 to see black; and started, and trembled, and, at last, fell
 a-weeping—and when i asked what was the matter, answered, she didn’t
 know; but she felt so afraid of dying! i imagined her as little likely
 to die as myself. she was rather thin, but young, and
 fresh-complexioned, and her eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds. i did
 remark, to be sure, that mounting the stairs made her breathe very
 quick; that the least sudden noise set her all in quiver, and that
 she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but i knew nothing of what these
 symptoms portended, and had impulse to sympathise with her. we don’t
 in general take to foreigners here, mr. lockwood, unless they take to
 us first.
 
young earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his
 absence. had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and
 dressed quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, told
 joseph and we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the
 back-kitchen, and leave the house for him. indeed, would have
 carpeted and papered small spare room for parlour; but his wife
 expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing fireplace,
 at the pewter dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space
 there was to move about in where they usually sat, that thought it
 unnecessary to her comfort, and so dropped the intention.
 
she expressed pleasure, too, at finding sister among her new
 acquaintance; and she prattled to catherine, and kissed her, and ran
 about with her, and gave her quantities of presents, at the beginning.
 her affection tired very soon, however, and when she grew peevish,
 hindley became tyrannical. few words from her, evincing dislike to
 heathcliff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy.
 drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of the
 instructions of the curate, and insisted that should labour out of
 doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any other lad on the
 farm.
 
heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because cathy
 taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the
 fields. they both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the
 young master being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they
 did, so they kept clear of him. would not even have seen after their
 going to church on sundays, only joseph and the curate reprimanded his
 carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to
 order heathcliff flogging, and catherine fast from dinner or
 supper. but it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the
 moors in the morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment
 grew mere thing to laugh at. the curate might set as many chapters as
 pleased for catherine to get by heart, and joseph might thrash
 heathcliff till his arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they
 were together again: at least the minute they had contrived some
 naughty plan of revenge; and many time i’ve cried to myself to watch
 them growing more reckless daily, and i not daring to speak syllable,
 for fear of losing the small power i still retained over the unfriended
 creatures. one sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished from
 the sitting-room, for making noise, or light offence of the kind;
 and when i went to call them to supper, i could discover them nowhere.
 we searched the house, above and below, and the yard and stables; they
 were invisible: and, at last, hindley in passion told us to bolt the
 doors, and swore nobody should let them in that night. the household
 went to bed; and i, too anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put
 my head out to hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in
 spite of the prohibition, should they return. in while, i
 distinguished steps coming up the road, and the light of lantern
 glimmered through the gate. i threw shawl over my head and ran to
 prevent them from waking mr. earnshaw by knocking. there was
 heathcliff, by himself: it gave start to see him alone.
 
“where is miss catherine?” i cried hurriedly. “no accident, i hope?”
 “at thrushcross grange,” answered; “and i would have been there too,
 but they had not the manners to ask to stay.” “well, you will catch
 it!” i said: “you’ll never be content till you’re sent about your
 business. what in the world led you wandering to thrushcross grange?”
 “let get off my wet clothes, and i’ll tell you all about it, nelly,”
 replied. i bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he
 undressed and i waited to put out the candle, continued—“cathy and i
 escaped from the wash-house to have ramble at liberty, and getting a
 glimpse of the grange lights, we thought we would just go and see
 whether the lintons passed their sunday evenings standing shivering in
 corners, while their father and mother sat eating and drinking, and
 singing and laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire. do
 you think they do? or reading sermons, and being catechised by their
 man-servant, and set to learn column of scripture names, if they
 don’t answer properly?” “probably not,” i responded. “they are good
 children, doubt, and don’t deserve the treatment you receive, for
 your bad conduct.” “don’t cant, nelly,” said: “nonsense! we ran from
 the top of the heights to the park, without stopping—catherine
 completely beaten in the race, because she was barefoot. you’ll have to
 seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow. we crept through broken
 hedge, groped our way up the path, and planted ourselves on a
 flower-plot under the drawing-room window. the light came from thence;
 they had not put up the shutters, and the curtains were only half
 closed. both of us were able to look in by standing on the basement,
 and clinging to the ledge, and we saw—ah! it was beautiful—a splendid
 place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs and tables, and
 pure white ceiling bordered by gold, shower of glass-drops hanging
 in silver chains from the centre, and shimmering with little soft
 tapers. old mr. and mrs. linton were not there; edgar and his sister
 had it entirely to themselves. shouldn’t they have been happy? we
 should have thought ourselves in heaven! and now, guess what your good
 children were doing? isabella—i believe she is eleven, year younger
 than cathy—lay screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking as
 if witches were running red-hot needles into her. edgar stood on the
 hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the table sat little
 dog, shaking its paw and yelping; which, from their mutual accusations,
 we understood they had nearly pulled in two between them. the idiots!
 that was their pleasure! to quarrel who should hold heap of warm
 hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to get it,
 refused to take it. we laughed outright at the petted things; we did
 despise them! when would you catch wishing to have what catherine
 wanted? or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and
 sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room? i’d not
 exchange, for thousand lives, my condition here, for edgar linton’s
 at thrushcross grange—not if i might have the privilege of flinging
 joseph off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with
 hindley’s blood!”
 
“hush, hush!” i interrupted. “still you have not told me, heathcliff,
 how catherine is left behind?”
 
“i told you we laughed,” answered. “the lintons heard us, and with
 one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and
 then cry, ‘oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma, come here. oh,
 papa, oh!’ they really did howl out something in that way. we made
 frightful noises to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off
 the ledge, because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had
 better flee. i had cathy by the hand, and was urging her on, when all
 at once she fell down. ‘run, heathcliff, run!’ she whispered. ‘they
 have let the bull-dog loose, and holds me!’ the devil had seized her
 ankle, nelly: i heard his abominable snorting. she did not yell out—no!
 she would have scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns
 of mad cow. i did, though: i vociferated curses enough to annihilate
 any fiend in christendom; and i got stone and thrust it between his
 jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down his throat. beast
 of servant came up with lantern, at last, shouting—‘keep fast,
 skulker, keep fast!’ changed his note, however, when saw
 skulker’s game. the dog was throttled off; his huge, purple tongue
 hanging half foot out of his mouth, and his pendent lips streaming
 with bloody slaver. the man took cathy up; she was sick: not from fear,
 i’m certain, but from pain. carried her in; i followed, grumbling
 execrations and vengeance. ‘what prey, robert?’ hallooed linton from
 the entrance. ‘skulker has caught little girl, sir,’ replied; ‘and
 there’s lad here,’ added, making clutch at me, ‘who looks an
 out-and-outer! very like the robbers were for putting them through the
 window to open the doors to the gang after all were asleep, that they
 might murder us at their ease. hold your tongue, you foul-mouthed
 thief, you! you shall go to the gallows for this. mr. linton, sir,
 don’t lay by your gun.’ ‘no, no, robert,’ said the old fool. ‘the
 rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day: they thought to have me
 cleverly. come in; i’ll furnish them reception. there, john, fasten
 the chain. give skulker some water, jenny. to beard magistrate in his
 stronghold, and on the sabbath, too! where will their insolence stop?
 oh, my dear mary, look here! don’t be afraid, it is but boy—yet the
 villain scowls so plainly in his face; would it not be kindness to
 the country to hang him at once, before shows his nature in acts as
 well as features?’ pulled under the chandelier, and mrs. linton
 placed her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in horror. the
 cowardly children crept nearer also, isabella lisping—‘frightful thing!
 put him in the cellar, papa. he’s exactly like the of the
 fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant. isn’t he, edgar?’
 
“while they examined me, cathy came round; she heard the last speech,
 and laughed. edgar linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected
 sufficient wit to recognise her. they see us at church, you know,
 though we seldom meet them elsewhere. ‘that’s miss earnshaw!’ he
 whispered to his mother, ‘and look how skulker has bitten her—how her
 foot bleeds!’
 
“‘miss earnshaw? nonsense!’ cried the dame; ‘miss earnshaw scouring the
 country with gipsy! and yet, my dear, the child is in mourning—surely
 it is—and she may be lamed for life!’
 
“‘what culpable carelessness in her brother!’ exclaimed mr. linton,
 turning from to catherine. ‘i’ve understood from shielders’” (that
 was the curate, sir) “‘that lets her grow up in absolute heathenism.
 but who is this? where did she pick up this companion? oho! i declare
 is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in his journey
 to liverpool—a little lascar, or an american or spanish castaway.’
 
“‘a wicked boy, at all events,’ remarked the old lady, ‘and quite unfit
 for decent house! did you notice his language, linton? i’m shocked
 that my children should have heard it.’
 
“i recommenced cursing—don’t be angry, nelly—and so robert was ordered
 to take off. i refused to go without cathy; dragged into the
 garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured that mr. earnshaw
 should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding march directly,
 secured the door again. the curtains were still looped up at one
 corner, and i resumed my station as spy; because, if catherine had
 wished to return, i intended shattering their great glass panes to a
 million of fragments, unless they let her out. she sat on the sofa
 quietly. mrs. linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we
 had borrowed for our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with
 her, i suppose: she was young lady, and they made distinction
 between her treatment and mine. then the woman-servant brought basin
 of warm water, and washed her feet; and mr. linton mixed tumbler of
 negus, and isabella emptied plateful of cakes into her lap, and edgar
 stood gaping at distance. afterwards, they dried and combed her
 beautiful hair, and gave her pair of enormous slippers, and wheeled
 her to the fire; and i left her, as merry as she could be, dividing her
 food between the little dog and skulker, whose nose she pinched as he
 ate; and kindling spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the
 lintons—a dim reflection from her own enchanting face. i saw they were
 full of stupid admiration; she is so immeasurably superior to them—to
 everybody on earth, is she not, nelly?”
 
“there will more come of this business than you reckon on,” i answered,
 covering him up and extinguishing the light. “you are incurable,
 heathcliff; and mr. hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if
 won’t.” my words came truer than i desired. the luckless adventure
 made earnshaw furious. and then mr. linton, to mend matters, paid us a
 visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such lecture
 on the road guided his family, that was stirred to look about
 him, in earnest. heathcliff received flogging, but was told that
 the first word spoke to miss catherine should ensure dismissal;
 and mrs. earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint
 when she returned home; employing art, not force: with force she would
 have found it impossible.
 



chapter vii
 

cathy stayed at thrushcross grange five weeks: till christmas. by that
 time her ankle was thoroughly cured, and her manners much improved. the
 mistress visited her often in the interval, and commenced her plan of
 reform by trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and
 flattery, which she took readily; so that, instead of wild, hatless
 little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all
 breathless, there lighted from handsome black pony very dignified
 person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover of feathered
 beaver, and long cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with
 both hands that she might sail in. hindley lifted her from her horse,
 exclaiming delightedly, “why, cathy, you are quite beauty! i should
 scarcely have known you: you look like lady now. isabella linton is
 not to be compared with her, is she, frances?” “isabella has not her
 natural advantages,” replied his wife: “but she must mind and not grow
 wild again here. ellen, help miss catherine off with her things—stay,
 dear, you will disarrange your curls—let untie your hat.”
 
i removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath grand plaid silk
 frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes
 sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she
 dared hardly touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid
 garments. she kissed gently: i was all flour making the christmas
 cake, and it would not have done to give hug; and then she looked
 round for heathcliff. mr. and mrs. earnshaw watched anxiously their
 meeting; thinking it would enable them to judge, in some measure, what
 grounds they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.
 
heathcliff was hard to discover, at first. if were careless, and
 uncared for, before catherine’s absence, had been ten times more so
 since. nobody but i even did him the kindness to call him dirty boy,
 and bid him wash himself, once week; and children of his age seldom
 have natural pleasure in soap and water. therefore, not to mention
 his clothes, which had seen three months’ service in mire and dust, and
 his thick uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally
 beclouded. might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a
 bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of rough-headed
 counterpart of himself, as expected. “is heathcliff not here?” she
 demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully
 whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.
 
“heathcliff, you may come forward,” cried mr. hindley, enjoying his
 discomfiture, and gratified to see what forbidding young blackguard
 would be compelled to present himself. “you may come and wish miss
 catherine welcome, like the other servants.”
 
cathy, catching glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to
 embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the
 second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into laugh,
 exclaiming, “why, how very black and cross you look! and how—how funny
 and grim! but that’s because i’m used to edgar and isabella linton.
 well, heathcliff, have you forgotten me?”
 
she had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw
 double gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.
 
“shake hands, heathcliff,” said mr. earnshaw, condescendingly; “once in
 way, that is permitted.”
 
“i shall not,” replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; “i shall
 not stand to be laughed at. i shall not bear it!”
 
and would have broken from the circle, but miss cathy seized him
 again.
 
“i did not mean to laugh at you,” she said; “i could not hinder myself:
 heathcliff, shake hands at least! what are you sulky for? it was only
 that you looked odd. if you wash your face and brush your hair, it will
 be all right: but you are so dirty!”
 
she gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her own, and
 also at her dress; which she feared had gained embellishment from
 its contact with his.
 
“you needn’t have touched me!” answered, following her eye and
 snatching away his hand. “i shall be as dirty as i please: and i like
 to be dirty, and i will be dirty.”
 
with that dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of
 the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of catherine;
 who could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an
 exhibition of bad temper.
 
after playing lady’s-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the
 oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires,
 befitting christmas-eve, i prepared to sit down and amuse myself by
 singing carols, all alone; regardless of joseph’s affirmations that he
 considered the merry tunes i chose as next door to songs. had
 retired to private prayer in his chamber, and mr. and mrs. earnshaw
 were engaging missy’s attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to
 present to the little lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.
 they had invited them to spend the morrow at wuthering heights, and the
 invitation had been accepted, on one condition: mrs. linton begged that
 her darlings might be kept carefully apart from that “naughty swearing
 boy.”
 
under these circumstances i remained solitary. i smelt the rich scent
 of the heating spices; and admired the shining kitchen utensils, the
 polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs ranged on tray ready
 to be filled with mulled ale for supper; and above all, the speckless
 purity of my particular care—the scoured and well-swept floor. i gave
 due inward applause to every object, and then i remembered how old
 earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied, and call cant lass,
 and slip shilling into my hand as christmas-box; and from that i
 went on to think of his fondness for heathcliff, and his dread lest he
 should suffer neglect after death had removed him: and that naturally
 led to consider the poor lad’s situation now, and from singing i
 changed my mind to crying. it struck soon, however, there would be
 more sense in endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding
 tears over them: i got up and walked into the court to seek him. was
 not far; i found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the
 stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.
 
“make haste, heathcliff!” i said, “the kitchen is so comfortable; and
 joseph is upstairs: make haste, and let dress you smart before miss
 cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth
 to yourselves, and have long chatter till bedtime.”
 
proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.
 
“come—are you coming?” i continued. “there’s little cake for each of
 you, nearly enough; and you’ll need half-an-hour’s donning.”
 
i waited five minutes, but getting answer left him. catherine supped
 with her brother and sister-in-law: joseph and i joined at an
 unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on
 the other. his cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the
 fairies. managed to continue work till nine o’clock, and then
 marched dumb and dour to his chamber. cathy sat up late, having world
 of things to order for the reception of her new friends: she came into
 the kitchen once to speak to her old one; but was gone, and she only
 stayed to ask what was the matter with him, and then went back. in the
 morning rose early; and, as it was holiday, carried his ill-humour
 on to the moors; not re-appearing till the family were departed for
 church. fasting and reflection seemed to have brought him to better
 spirit. hung about for while, and having screwed up his
 courage, exclaimed abruptly—“nelly, make decent, i’m going to be
 good.”
 
“high time, heathcliff,” i said; “you _have_ grieved catherine: she’s
 sorry she ever came home, i daresay! it looks as if you envied her,
 because she is more thought of than you.”
 
the notion of _envying_ catherine was incomprehensible to him, but the
 notion of grieving her understood clearly enough.
 
“did she say she was grieved?” inquired, looking very serious.
 
“she cried when i told her you were off again this morning.”
 
“well, _i_ cried last night,” returned, “and i had more reason to
 cry than she.”
 
“yes: you had the reason of going to bed with proud heart and an
 empty stomach,” said i. “proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves.
 but, if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind,
 when she comes in. you must go up and offer to kiss her, and say—you
 know best what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought
 her converted into stranger by her grand dress. and now, though i
 have dinner to get ready, i’ll steal time to arrange you so that edgar
 linton shall look quite doll beside you: and that does. you are
 younger, and yet, i’ll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad
 across the shoulders; you could knock him down in twinkling; don’t
 you feel that you could?”
 
heathcliff’s face brightened moment; then it was overcast afresh, and
 sighed.
 
“but, nelly, if i knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn’t make him
 less handsome or more so. i wish i had light hair and fair skin,
 and was dressed and behaved as well, and had chance of being as rich
 as will be!”
 
“and cried for mamma at every turn,” i added, “and trembled if a
 country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat at home all day for a
 shower of rain. oh, heathcliff, you are showing poor spirit! come to
 the glass, and i’ll let you see what you should wish. do you mark those
 two lines between your eyes; and those thick brows, that, instead of
 rising arched, sink in the middle; and that couple of black fiends, so
 deeply buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting
 under them, like devil’s spies? wish and learn to smooth away the surly
 wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to
 confident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always
 seeing friends where they are not sure of foes. don’t get the
 expression of vicious cur that appears to know the kicks it gets are
 its desert, and yet hates all the world, as well as the kicker, for
 what it suffers.”
 
“in other words, i must wish for edgar linton’s great blue eyes and
 even forehead,” replied. “i do—and that won’t help to them.”
 
“a good heart will help you to bonny face, my lad,” i continued, “if
 you were regular black; and bad one will turn the bonniest into
 something worse than ugly. and now that we’ve done washing, and
 combing, and sulking—tell whether you don’t think yourself rather
 handsome? i’ll tell you, i do. you’re fit for prince in disguise. who
 knows but your father was emperor of china, and your mother an indian
 queen, each of them able to buy up, with one week’s income, wuthering
 heights and thrushcross grange together? and you were kidnapped by
 wicked sailors and brought to england. were i in your place, i would
 frame high notions of my birth; and the thoughts of what i was should
 give courage and dignity to support the oppressions of little
 farmer!”
 
so i chattered on; and heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to
 look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted
 by rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court. ran
 to the window and i to the door, just in time to behold the two lintons
 descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the
 earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in
 winter. catherine took hand of each of the children, and brought them
 into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour
 into their white faces.
 
i urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and he
 willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as opened the
 door leading from the kitchen on one side, hindley opened it on the
 other. they met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean and
 cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to mrs. linton, shoved
 him back with sudden thrust, and angrily bade joseph “keep the fellow
 out of the room—send him into the garret till dinner is over. he’ll be
 cramming his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone
 with them minute.”
 
“nay, sir,” i could not avoid answering, “he’ll touch nothing, not he:
 and i suppose must have his share of the dainties as well as we.”
 
“he shall have his share of my hand, if i catch him downstairs till
 dark,” cried hindley. “begone, you vagabond! what! you are attempting
 the coxcomb, are you? wait till i get hold of those elegant locks—see
 if i won’t pull them bit longer!”
 
“they are long enough already,” observed master linton, peeping from
 the doorway; “i wonder they don’t make his head ache. it’s like a
 colt’s mane over his eyes!”
 
ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but
 heathcliff’s violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance
 of impertinence from one whom seemed to hate, even then, as rival.
 seized tureen of hot apple sauce, the first thing that came under
 his gripe, and dashed it full against the speaker’s face and neck; who
 instantly commenced lament that brought isabella and catherine
 hurrying to the place. mr. earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly
 and conveyed him to his chamber; where, doubtless, administered a
 rough remedy to cool the fit of passion, for appeared red and
 breathless. i got the dish-cloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed
 edgar’s nose and mouth, affirming it served him right for meddling. his
 sister began weeping to go home, and cathy stood by confounded,
 blushing for all.
 
“you should not have spoken to him!” she expostulated with master
 linton. “he was in bad temper, and now you’ve spoilt your visit; and
 he’ll be flogged: i hate him to be flogged! i can’t eat my dinner. why
 did you speak to him, edgar?”
 
“i didn’t,” sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and finishing the
 remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-handkerchief. “i
 promised mamma that i wouldn’t say one word to him, and i didn’t.”
 
“well, don’t cry,” replied catherine, contemptuously; “you’re not
 killed. don’t make more mischief; my brother is coming: be quiet! hush,
 isabella! has anybody hurt _you?_”
 
“there, there, children—to your seats!” cried hindley, bustling in.
 “that brute of lad has warmed nicely. next time, master edgar,
 take the law into your own fists—it will give you an appetite!”
 
the little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant
 feast. they were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no
 real harm had befallen them. mr. earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls,
 and the mistress made them merry with lively talk. i waited behind her
 chair, and was pained to behold catherine, with dry eyes and an
 indifferent air, commence cutting up the wing of goose before her.
 “an unfeeling child,” i thought to myself; “how lightly she dismisses
 her old playmate’s troubles. i could not have imagined her to be so
 selfish.” she lifted mouthful to her lips: then she set it down
 again: her cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them. she slipped
 her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her
 emotion. i did not call her unfeeling long; for i perceived she was in
 purgatory throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of
 getting by herself, or paying visit to heathcliff, who had been
 locked up by the master: as i discovered, on endeavouring to introduce
 to him private mess of victuals.
 
in the evening we had dance. cathy begged that might be liberated
 then, as isabella linton had partner: her entreaties were vain, and
 i was appointed to supply the deficiency. we got rid of all gloom in
 the excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the
 arrival of the gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: trumpet, a
 trombone, clarionets, bassoons, french horns, and bass viol, besides
 singers. they go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive
 contributions every christmas, and we esteemed it first-rate treat to
 hear them. after the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs
 and glees. mrs. earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.
 
catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of
 the steps, and she went up in the dark: i followed. they shut the house
 door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people. she
 made stay at the stairs’-head, but mounted farther, to the garret
 where heathcliff was confined, and called him. stubbornly declined
 answering for while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to
 hold communion with her through the boards. i let the poor things
 converse unmolested, till i supposed the songs were going to cease, and
 the singers to get some refreshment: then i clambered up the ladder to
 warn her. instead of finding her outside, i heard her voice within. the
 little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the roof,
 into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost difficulty i
 could coax her out again. when she did come, heathcliff came with her,
 and she insisted that i should take him into the kitchen, as my
 fellow-servant had gone to neighbour’s, to be removed from the sound
 of our “devil’s psalmody,” as it pleased him to call it. i told them i
 intended by means to encourage their tricks: but as the prisoner had
 never broken his fast since yesterday’s dinner, i would wink at his
 cheating mr. hindley that once. went down: i set him stool by the
 fire, and offered him quantity of good things: but was sick and
 could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away. he
 leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands, and
 remained rapt in dumb meditation. on my inquiring the subject of his
 thoughts, answered gravely—“i’m trying to settle how i shall pay
 hindley back. i don’t care how long i wait, if i can only do it at
 last. i hope will not die before i do!”
 
“for shame, heathcliff!” said i. “it is for god to punish wicked
 people; we should learn to forgive.”
 
“no, god won’t have the satisfaction that i shall,” returned. “i
 only wish i knew the best way! let alone, and i’ll plan it out:
 while i’m thinking of that i don’t feel pain.”
 
but, mr. lockwood, i forget these tales cannot divert you. i’m annoyed
 how i should dream of chattering on at such rate; and your gruel
 cold, and you nodding for bed! i could have told heathcliff’s history,
 all that you need hear, in half dozen words.
 
* * * * *
 

thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded to lay
 aside her sewing; but i felt incapable of moving from the hearth, and i
 was very far from nodding. “sit still, mrs. dean,” i cried; “do sit
 still another half-hour. you’ve done just right to tell the story
 leisurely. that is the method i like; and you must finish it in the
 same style. i am interested in every character you have mentioned, more
 or less.”
 
“the clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir.”
 
“no matter—i’m not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours. one or
 two is early enough for person who lies till ten.”
 
“you shouldn’t lie till ten. there’s the very prime of the morning gone
 long before that time. person who has not done one-half his day’s
 work by ten o’clock, runs chance of leaving the other half undone.”
 
“nevertheless, mrs. dean, resume your chair; because to-morrow i intend
 lengthening the night till afternoon. i prognosticate for myself an
 obstinate cold, at least.”
 
“i hope not, sir. well, you must allow to leap over some three
 years; during that space mrs. earnshaw—”
 
“no, no, i’ll allow nothing of the sort! are you acquainted with the
 mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and the cat licking
 its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the operation so
 intently that puss’s neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of
 temper?”
 
“a terribly lazy mood, i should say.”
 
“on the contrary, tiresomely active one. it is mine, at present; and,
 therefore, continue minutely. i perceive that people in these regions
 acquire over people in towns the value that spider in dungeon does
 over spider in cottage, to their various occupants; and yet the
 deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the
 looker-on. they _do_ live more in earnest, more in themselves, and less
 in surface, change, and frivolous external things. i could fancy love
 for life here almost possible; and i was fixed unbeliever in any love
 of year’s standing. one state resembles setting hungry man down to
 single dish, on which may concentrate his entire appetite and do
 it justice; the other, introducing him to table laid out by french
 cooks: can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole; but
 each part is mere atom in his regard and remembrance.”
 
“oh! here we are the same as anywhere else, when you get to know us,”
 observed mrs. dean, somewhat puzzled at my speech.
 
“excuse me,” i responded; “you, my good friend, are striking evidence
 against that assertion. excepting few provincialisms of slight
 consequence, you have marks of the manners which i am habituated to
 consider as peculiar to your class. i am sure you have thought great
 deal more than the generality of servants think. you have been
 compelled to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions
 for frittering your life away in silly trifles.”
 
mrs. dean laughed.
 
“i certainly esteem myself steady, reasonable kind of body,” she
 said; “not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of
 faces, and one series of actions, from year’s end to year’s end; but i
 have undergone sharp discipline, which has taught wisdom; and then,
 i have read more than you would fancy, mr. lockwood. you could not open
 book in this library that i have not looked into, and got something
 out of also: unless it be that range of greek and latin, and that of
 french; and those i know one from another: it is as much as you can
 expect of poor man’s daughter. however, if i am to follow my story in
 true gossip’s fashion, i had better go on; and instead of leaping three
 years, i will be content to pass to the next summer—the summer of 1778,
 that is nearly twenty-three years ago.”
 



chapter viii
 

on the morning of fine june day my first bonny little nursling, and
 the last of the ancient earnshaw stock, was born. we were busy with the
 in far-away field, when the girl that usually brought our
 breakfasts came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the
 lane, calling as she ran.
 
“oh, such grand bairn!” she panted out. “the finest lad that ever
 breathed! but the doctor says missis must go: says she’s been in a
 consumption these many months. i heard him tell mr. hindley: and now
 she has nothing to keep her, and she’ll be dead before winter. you must
 come home directly. you’re to nurse it, nelly: to feed it with sugar
 and milk, and take care of it day and night. i wish i were you, because
 it will be all yours when there is missis!”
 
“but is she very ill?” i asked, flinging down my rake and tying my
 bonnet.
 
“i guess she is; yet she looks bravely,” replied the girl, “and she
 talks as if she thought of living to see it grow man. she’s out of
 her head for joy, it’s such beauty! if i were her i’m certain i
 should not die: i should get better at the bare sight of it, in spite
 of kenneth. i was fairly mad at him. dame archer brought the cherub
 down to master, in the house, and his face just began to light up, when
 the old croaker steps forward, and says he—‘earnshaw, it’s blessing
 your wife has been spared to leave you this son. when she came, i felt
 convinced we shouldn’t keep her long; and now, i must tell you, the
 winter will probably finish her. don’t take on, and fret about it too
 much: it can’t be helped. and besides, you should have known better
 than to choose such rush of lass!’”
 
“and what did the master answer?” i inquired.
 
“i think swore: but i didn’t mind him, i was straining to see the
 bairn,” and she began again to describe it rapturously. i, as zealous
 as herself, hurried eagerly home to admire, on my part; though i was
 very sad for hindley’s sake. had room in his heart only for two
 idols—his wife and himself: doted on both, and adored one, and i
 couldn’t conceive how would bear the loss.
 
when we got to wuthering heights, there stood at the front door;
 and, as i passed in, i asked, “how was the baby?”
 
“nearly ready to run about, nell!” replied, putting on cheerful
 smile.
 
“and the mistress?” i ventured to inquire; “the doctor says she’s—”
 
“damn the doctor!” interrupted, reddening. “frances is quite right:
 she’ll be perfectly well by this time next week. are you going
 upstairs? will you tell her that i’ll come, if she’ll promise not to
 talk. i left her because she would not hold her tongue; and she
 must—tell her mr. kenneth says she must be quiet.”
 
i delivered this message to mrs. earnshaw; she seemed in flighty
 spirits, and replied merrily, “i hardly spoke word, ellen, and there
 has gone out twice, crying. well, say i promise i won’t speak: but
 that does not bind not to laugh at him!”
 
poor soul! till within week of her death that gay heart never failed
 her; and her husband persisted doggedly, nay, furiously, in affirming
 her health improved every day. when kenneth warned him that his
 medicines were useless at that stage of the malady, and needn’t put
 him to further expense by attending her, retorted, “i know you need
 not—she’s well—she does not want any more attendance from you! she
 never was in consumption. it was fever; and it is gone: her pulse
 is as slow as mine now, and her cheek as cool.”
 
told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe him; but one
 night, while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of saying she thought
 she should be able to get up to-morrow, fit of coughing took her—a
 very slight one—he raised her in his arms; she put her two hands about
 his neck, her face changed, and she was dead.
 
as the girl had anticipated, the child hareton fell wholly into my
 hands. mr. earnshaw, provided saw him healthy and never heard him
 cry, was contented, as far as regarded him. for himself, grew
 desperate: his sorrow was of that kind that will not lament. neither
 wept nor prayed; cursed and defied: execrated god and man, and gave
 himself up to reckless dissipation. the servants could not bear his
 tyrannical and evil conduct long: joseph and i were the only two that
 would stay. i had not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you
 know, i had been his foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more
 readily than stranger would. joseph remained to hector over tenants
 and labourers; and because it was his vocation to be where had
 plenty of wickedness to reprove.
 
the master’s bad ways and bad companions formed pretty example for
 catherine and heathcliff. his treatment of the latter was enough to
 make fiend of saint. and, truly, it appeared as if the lad _were_
 possessed of something diabolical at that period. delighted to
 witness hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily
 more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity. i could not half tell
 what an infernal house we had. the curate dropped calling, and nobody
 decent came near us, at last; unless edgar linton’s visits to miss
 cathy might be an exception. at fifteen she was the queen of the
 country-side; she had peer; and she did turn out haughty,
 headstrong creature! i own i did not like her, after infancy was past;
 and i vexed her frequently by trying to bring down her arrogance: she
 never took an aversion to me, though. she had wondrous constancy to
 old attachments: even heathcliff kept his hold on her affections
 unalterably; and young linton, with all his superiority, found it
 difficult to make an equally deep impression. was my late master:
 that is his portrait over the fireplace. it used to hang on one side,
 and his wife’s on the other; but hers has been removed, or else you
 might see something of what she was. can you make that out?
 
mrs. dean raised the candle, and i discerned soft-featured face,
 exceedingly resembling the young lady at the heights, but more pensive
 and amiable in expression. it formed sweet picture. the long light
 hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious;
 the figure almost too graceful. i did not marvel how catherine earnshaw
 could forget her first friend for such an individual. i marvelled much
 how he, with mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea
 of catherine earnshaw.
 
“a very agreeable portrait,” i observed to the house-keeper. “is it
 like?”
 
“yes,” she answered; “but looked better when was animated; that
 is his everyday countenance: wanted spirit in general.”
 
catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the lintons since her
 five-weeks’ residence among them; and as she had temptation to show
 her rough side in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of
 being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy, she imposed
 unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality;
 gained the admiration of isabella, and the heart and soul of her
 brother: acquisitions that flattered her from the first—for she was
 full of ambition—and led her to adopt double character without
 exactly intending to deceive any one. in the place where she heard
 heathcliff termed “vulgar young ruffian,” and “worse than brute,”
 she took care not to act like him; but at home she had small
 inclination to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and
 restrain an unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor
 praise.
 
mr. edgar seldom mustered courage to visit wuthering heights openly. he
 had terror of earnshaw’s reputation, and shrunk from encountering
 him; and yet was always received with our best attempts at civility:
 the master himself avoided offending him, knowing why came; and if
 could not be gracious, kept out of the way. i rather think his
 appearance there was distasteful to catherine; she was not artful,
 never played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two
 friends meeting at all; for when heathcliff expressed contempt of
 linton in his presence, she could not half coincide, as she did in his
 absence; and when linton evinced disgust and antipathy to heathcliff,
 she dared not treat his sentiments with indifference, as if
 depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely any consequence to her.
 i’ve had many laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles, which
 she vainly strove to hide from my mockery. that sounds ill-natured: but
 she was so proud, it became really impossible to pity her distresses,
 till she should be chastened into more humility. she did bring herself,
 finally, to confess, and to confide in me: there was not soul else
 that she might fashion into an adviser.
 
mr. hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and heathcliff presumed
 to give himself holiday on the strength of it. had reached the age
 of sixteen then, i think, and without having bad features, or being
 deficient in intellect, contrived to convey an impression of inward
 and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains traces of.
 in the first place, had by that time lost the benefit of his early
 education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had
 extinguished any curiosity once possessed in pursuit of knowledge,
 and any love for books or learning. his childhood’s sense of
 superiority, instilled into him by the favours of old mr. earnshaw, was
 faded away. struggled long to keep up an equality with catherine in
 her studies, and yielded with poignant though silent regret: but he
 yielded completely; and there was prevailing on him to take step
 in the way of moving upward, when found must, necessarily, sink
 beneath his former level. then personal appearance sympathised with
 mental deterioration: acquired slouching gait and ignoble look;
 his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into an almost
 idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and took grim pleasure,
 apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of his few
 acquaintance.
 
catherine and were constant companions still at his seasons of
 respite from labour; but had ceased to express his fondness for her
 in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion from her girlish caresses,
 as if conscious there could be gratification in lavishing such marks
 of affection on him. on the before-named occasion came into the
 house to announce his intention of doing nothing, while i was assisting
 miss cathy to arrange her dress: she had not reckoned on his taking it
 into his head to be idle; and imagining she would have the whole place
 to herself, she managed, by some means, to inform mr. edgar of her
 brother’s absence, and was then preparing to receive him.
 
“cathy, are you busy this afternoon?” asked heathcliff. “are you going
 anywhere?”
 
“no, it is raining,” she answered.
 
“why have you that silk frock on, then?” said. “nobody coming here,
 i hope?”
 
“not that i know of,” stammered miss: “but you should be in the field
 now, heathcliff. it is an hour past dinner time; i thought you were
 gone.”
 
“hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,” observed
 the boy. “i’ll not work any more to-day: i’ll stay with you.”
 
“oh, but joseph will tell,” she suggested; “you’d better go!”
 
“joseph is loading lime on the further side of penistone crags; it will
 take him till dark, and he’ll never know.”
 
so saying, lounged to the fire, and sat down. catherine reflected
 an instant, with knitted brows—she found it needful to smooth the way
 for an intrusion. “isabella and edgar linton talked of calling this
 afternoon,” she said, at the conclusion of minute’s silence. “as it
 rains, i hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run
 the risk of being scolded for good.”
 
“order ellen to say you are engaged, cathy,” persisted; “don’t turn
 out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours! i’m on the point,
 sometimes, of complaining that they—but i’ll not—”
 
“that they what?” cried catherine, gazing at him with troubled
 countenance. “oh, nelly!” she added petulantly, jerking her head away
 from my hands, “you’ve combed my hair quite out of curl! that’s enough;
 let alone. what are you on the point of complaining about,
 heathcliff?”
 
“nothing—only look at the almanack on that wall;” pointed to a
 framed sheet hanging near the window, and continued, “the crosses are
 for the evenings you have spent with the lintons, the dots for those
 spent with me. do you see? i’ve marked every day.”
 
“yes—very foolish: as if i took notice!” replied catherine, in a
 peevish tone. “and where is the sense of that?”
 
“to show that i _do_ take notice,” said heathcliff.
 
“and should i always be sitting with you?” she demanded, growing more
 irritated. “what good do i get? what do you talk about? you might be
 dumb, or baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you
 do, either!”
 
“you never told before that i talked too little, or that you
 disliked my company, cathy!” exclaimed heathcliff, in much agitation.
 
“it’s company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing,” she
 muttered.
 
her companion rose up, but hadn’t time to express his feelings
 further, for horse’s feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked
 gently, young linton entered, his face brilliant with delight at the
 unexpected summons had received. doubtless catherine marked the
 difference between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
 the contrast resembled what you see in exchanging bleak, hilly, coal
 country for beautiful fertile valley; and his voice and greeting were
 as opposite as his aspect. had sweet, low manner of speaking, and
 pronounced his words as you do: that’s less gruff than we talk here,
 and softer.
 
“i’m not come too soon, am i?” said, casting look at me: i had
 begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at the far end in the
 dresser.
 
“no,” answered catherine. “what are you doing there, nelly?”
 
“my work, miss,” i replied. (mr. hindley had given directions to
 make third party in any private visits linton chose to pay.)
 
she stepped behind and whispered crossly, “take yourself and your
 dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don’t commence
 scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!”
 
“it’s good opportunity, now that master is away,” i answered aloud:
 “he hates to be fidgeting over these things in his presence. i’m
 sure mr. edgar will excuse me.”
 
“i hate you to be fidgeting in _my_ presence,” exclaimed the young lady
 imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak: she had failed to
 recover her equanimity since the little dispute with heathcliff.
 
“i’m sorry for it, miss catherine,” was my response; and i proceeded
 assiduously with my occupation.
 
she, supposing edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth from my
 hand, and pinched me, with prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the
 arm. i’ve said i did not love her, and rather relished mortifying her
 vanity now and then: besides, she hurt extremely; so i started up
 from my knees, and screamed out, “oh, miss, that’s nasty trick! you
 have right to nip me, and i’m not going to bear it.”
 
“i didn’t touch you, you lying creature!” cried she, her fingers
 tingling to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage. she never had
 power to conceal her passion, it always set her whole complexion in a
 blaze.
 
“what’s that, then?” i retorted, showing decided purple witness to
 refute her.
 
she stamped her foot, wavered moment, and then, irresistibly impelled
 by the naughty spirit within her, slapped on the cheek: stinging
 blow that filled both eyes with water.
 
“catherine, love! catherine!” interposed linton, greatly shocked at the
 double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol had committed.
 
“leave the room, ellen!” she repeated, trembling all over.
 
little hareton, who followed everywhere, and was sitting near on
 the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying himself, and sobbed out
 complaints against “wicked aunt cathy,” which drew her fury on to his
 unlucky head: she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor
 child waxed livid, and edgar thoughtlessly laid hold of her hands to
 deliver him. in an instant one was wrung free, and the astonished young
 man felt it applied over his own ear in way that could not be
 mistaken for jest. drew back in consternation. i lifted hareton in
 my arms, and walked off to the kitchen with him, leaving the door of
 communication open, for i was curious to watch how they would settle
 their disagreement. the insulted visitor moved to the spot where had
 laid his hat, pale and with quivering lip.
 
“that’s right!” i said to myself. “take warning and begone! it’s a
 kindness to let you have glimpse of her genuine disposition.”
 
“where are you going?” demanded catherine, advancing to the door.
 
swerved aside, and attempted to pass.
 
“you must not go!” she exclaimed, energetically.
 
“i must and shall!” replied in subdued voice.
 
“no,” she persisted, grasping the handle; “not yet, edgar linton: sit
 down; you shall not leave in that temper. i should be miserable all
 night, and i won’t be miserable for you!”
 
“can i stay after you have struck me?” asked linton.
 
catherine was mute.
 
“you’ve made afraid and ashamed of you,” continued; “i’ll not
 come here again!”
 
her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle.
 
“and you told deliberate untruth!” said.
 
“i didn’t!” she cried, recovering her speech; “i did nothing
 deliberately. well, go, if you please—get away! and now i’ll cry—i’ll
 cry myself sick!”
 
she dropped down on her knees by chair, and set to weeping in serious
 earnest. edgar persevered in his resolution as far as the court; there
 lingered. i resolved to encourage him.
 
“miss is dreadfully wayward, sir,” i called out. “as bad as any marred
 child: you’d better be riding home, or else she will be sick, only to
 grieve us.”
 
the soft thing looked askance through the window: possessed the
 power to depart as much as cat possesses the power to leave mouse
 half killed, or bird half eaten. ah, i thought, there will be no
 saving him: he’s doomed, and flies to his fate! and so it was: he
 turned abruptly, hastened into the house again, shut the door behind
 him; and when i went in while after to inform them that earnshaw had
 come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears
 (his ordinary frame of mind in that condition), i saw the quarrel had
 merely effected closer intimacy—had broken the outworks of youthful
 timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and
 confess themselves lovers.
 
intelligence of mr. hindley’s arrival drove linton speedily to his
 horse, and catherine to her chamber. i went to hide little hareton, and
 to take the shot out of the master’s fowling-piece, which was fond
 of playing with in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the lives of
 any who provoked, or even attracted his notice too much; and i had hit
 upon the plan of removing it, that might do less mischief if did
 go the length of firing the gun.
 



chapter ix
 

entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear; and caught in the
 act of stowing his away in the kitchen cupboard. hareton was
 impressed with wholesome terror of encountering either his wild
 beast’s fondness or his madman’s rage; for in one ran chance of
 being squeezed and kissed to death, and in the other of being flung
 into the fire, or dashed against the wall; and the poor thing remained
 perfectly quiet wherever i chose to put him.
 
“there, i’ve found it out at last!” cried hindley, pulling back by
 the skin of my neck, like dog. “by heaven and hell, you’ve sworn
 between you to murder that child! i know how it is, now, that is
 always out of my way. but, with the help of satan, i shall make you
 swallow the carving-knife, nelly! you needn’t laugh; for i’ve just
 crammed kenneth, head-downmost, in the black-horse marsh; and two is
 the same as one—and i want to kill some of you: i shall have rest
 till i do!”
 
“but i don’t like the carving-knife, mr. hindley,” i answered; “it has
 been cutting red herrings. i’d rather be shot, if you please.”
 
“you’d rather be damned!” said; “and so you shall. law in england
 can hinder man from keeping his house decent, and mine’s abominable!
 open your mouth.”
 
held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point between my teeth:
 but, for my part, i was never much afraid of his vagaries. i spat out,
 and affirmed it tasted detestably—i would not take it on any account.
 
“oh!” said he, releasing me, “i see that hideous little villain is not
 hareton: i beg your pardon, nell. if it be, deserves flaying alive
 for not running to welcome me, and for screaming as if i were goblin.
 unnatural cub, come hither! i’ll teach thee to impose on a
 good-hearted, deluded father. now, don’t you think the lad would be
 handsomer cropped? it makes dog fiercer, and i love something
 fierce—get scissors—something fierce and trim! besides, it’s
 infernal affectation—devilish conceit it is, to cherish our ears—we’re
 asses enough without them. hush, child, hush! well then, it is my
 darling! wisht, dry thy eyes—there’s joy; kiss me. what! it won’t?
 kiss me, hareton! damn thee, kiss me! by god, as if i would rear such a
 monster! as sure as i’m living, i’ll break the brat’s neck.”
 
poor hareton was squalling and kicking in his father’s arms with all
 his might, and redoubled his yells when carried him upstairs and
 lifted him over the banister. i cried out that would frighten the
 child into fits, and ran to rescue him. as i reached them, hindley
 leant forward on the rails to listen to noise below; almost
 forgetting what had in his hands. “who is that?” asked, hearing
 some one approaching the stairs’-foot. i leant forward also, for the
 purpose of signing to heathcliff, whose step i recognised, not to come
 further; and, at the instant when my eye quitted hareton, gave a
 sudden spring, delivered himself from the careless grasp that held him,
 and fell.
 
there was scarcely time to experience thrill of horror before we saw
 that the little wretch was safe. heathcliff arrived underneath just at
 the critical moment; by natural impulse arrested his descent, and
 setting him on his feet, looked up to discover the author of the
 accident. miser who has parted with lucky lottery ticket for five
 shillings, and finds next day has lost in the bargain five thousand
 pounds, could not show blanker countenance than did on beholding
 the figure of mr. earnshaw above. it expressed, plainer than words
 could do, the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument
 of thwarting his own revenge. had it been dark, i daresay would have
 tried to remedy the mistake by smashing hareton’s skull on the steps;
 but, we witnessed his salvation; and i was presently below with my
 precious charge pressed to my heart. hindley descended more leisurely,
 sobered and abashed.
 
“it is your fault, ellen,” said; “you should have kept him out of
 sight: you should have taken him from me! is injured anywhere?”
 
“injured!” i cried angrily; “if is not killed, he’ll be an idiot!
 oh! i wonder his mother does not rise from her grave to see how you use
 him. you’re worse than heathen—treating your own flesh and blood in
 that manner!”
 
attempted to touch the child, who, on finding himself with me,
 sobbed off his terror directly. at the first finger his father laid on
 him, however, shrieked again louder than before, and struggled as if
 would go into convulsions.
 
“you shall not meddle with him!” i continued. “he hates you—they all
 hate you—that’s the truth! happy family you have; and pretty state
 you’re come to!”
 
“i shall come to prettier, yet, nelly,” laughed the misguided man,
 recovering his hardness. “at present, convey yourself and him away. and
 hark you, heathcliff! clear you too quite from my reach and hearing. i
 wouldn’t murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, i set the house on fire:
 but that’s as my fancy goes.”
 
while saying this took pint bottle of brandy from the dresser, and
 poured some into tumbler.
 
“nay, don’t!” i entreated. “mr. hindley, do take warning. have mercy on
 this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for yourself!”
 
“any one will do better for him than i shall,” answered.
 
“have mercy on your own soul!” i said, endeavouring to snatch the glass
 from his hand.
 
“not i! on the contrary, i shall have great pleasure in sending it to
 perdition to punish its maker,” exclaimed the blasphemer. “here’s to
 its hearty damnation!”
 
drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go; terminating his
 command with sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or
 remember.
 
“it’s pity cannot kill himself with drink,” observed heathcliff,
 muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut. “he’s doing
 his very utmost; but his constitution defies him. mr. kenneth says he
 would wager his mare that he’ll outlive any man on this side gimmerton,
 and go to the grave hoary sinner; unless some happy chance out of the
 common course befall him.”
 
i went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to sleep.
 heathcliff, as i thought, walked through to the barn. it turned out
 afterwards that only got as far as the other side the settle, when
 flung himself on bench by the wall, removed from the fire, and
 remained silent.
 
i was rocking hareton on my knee, and humming song that began,—
 
it was far in the night, and the bairnies grat,
 the mither beneath the mools heard that,
 

when miss cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her room, put her
 head in, and whispered,—“are you alone, nelly?”
 
“yes, miss,” i replied.
 
she entered and approached the hearth. i, supposing she was going to
 say something, looked up. the expression of her face seemed disturbed
 and anxious. her lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and
 she drew breath; but it escaped in sigh instead of sentence. i
 resumed my song; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.
 
“where’s heathcliff?” she said, interrupting me.
 
“about his work in the stable,” was my answer.
 
did not contradict me; perhaps had fallen into doze. there
 followed another long pause, during which i perceived drop or two
 trickle from catherine’s cheek to the flags. is she sorry for her
 shameful conduct?—i asked myself. that will be novelty: but she may
 come to the point as she will—i sha’n’t help her! no, she felt small
 trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.
 
“oh, dear!” she cried at last. “i’m very unhappy!”
 
“a pity,” observed i. “you’re hard to please; so many friends and so
 few cares, and can’t make yourself content!”
 
“nelly, will you keep secret for me?” she pursued, kneeling down by
 me, and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look
 which turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the
 world to indulge it.
 
“is it worth keeping?” i inquired, less sulkily.
 
“yes, and it worries me, and i must let it out! i want to know what i
 should do. to-day, edgar linton has asked to marry him, and i’ve
 given him an answer. now, before i tell you whether it was consent or
 denial, you tell which it ought to have been.”
 
“really, miss catherine, how can i know?” i replied. “to be sure,
 considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this
 afternoon, i might say it would be wise to refuse him: since asked
 you after that, must either be hopelessly stupid or venturesome
 fool.”
 
“if you talk so, i won’t tell you any more,” she returned, peevishly
 rising to her feet. “i accepted him, nelly. be quick, and say whether i
 was wrong!”
 
“you accepted him! then what good is it discussing the matter? you have
 pledged your word, and cannot retract.”
 
“but say whether i should have done so—do!” she exclaimed in an
 irritated tone; chafing her hands together, and frowning.
 
“there are many things to be considered before that question can be
 answered properly,” i said, sententiously. “first and foremost, do you
 love mr. edgar?”
 
“who can help it? of course i do,” she answered.
 
then i put her through the following catechism: for girl of
 twenty-two it was not injudicious.
 
“why do you love him, miss cathy?”
 
“nonsense, i do—that’s sufficient.”
 
“by means; you must say why?”
 
“well, because is handsome, and pleasant to be with.”
 
“bad!” was my commentary.
 
“and because is young and cheerful.”
 
“bad, still.”
 
“and because loves me.”
 
“indifferent, coming there.”
 
“and will be rich, and i shall like to be the greatest woman of the
 neighbourhood, and i shall be proud of having such husband.”
 
“worst of all. and now, say how you love him?”
 
“as everybody loves—you’re silly, nelly.”
 
“not at all—answer.”
 
“i love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head, and
 everything touches, and every word says. i love all his looks,
 and all his actions, and him entirely and altogether. there now!”
 
“and why?”
 
“nay; you are making jest of it: it is exceedingly ill-natured! it’s
 jest to me!” said the young lady, scowling, and turning her face to
 the fire.
 
“i’m very far from jesting, miss catherine,” i replied. “you love mr.
 edgar because is handsome, and young, and cheerful, and rich, and
 loves you. the last, however, goes for nothing: you would love him
 without that, probably; and with it you wouldn’t, unless possessed
 the four former attractions.”
 
“no, to be sure not: i should only pity him—hate him, perhaps, if he
 were ugly, and clown.”
 
“but there are several other handsome, rich young men in the world:
 handsomer, possibly, and richer than is. what should hinder you from
 loving them?”
 
“if there be any, they are out of my way: i’ve seen none like edgar.”
 
“you may see some; and won’t always be handsome, and young, and may
 not always be rich.”
 
“he is now; and i have only to do with the present. i wish you would
 speak rationally.”
 
“well, that settles it: if you have only to do with the present, marry
 mr. linton.”
 
“i don’t want your permission for that—i _shall_ marry him: and yet you
 have not told whether i’m right.”
 
“perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present. and
 now, let us hear what you are unhappy about. your brother will be
 pleased; the old lady and gentleman will not object, i think; you will
 escape from disorderly, comfortless home into wealthy, respectable
 one; and you love edgar, and edgar loves you. all seems smooth and
 easy: where is the obstacle?”
 
“_here_! and _here_!” replied catherine, striking one hand on her
 forehead, and the other on her breast: “in whichever place the soul
 lives. in my soul and in my heart, i’m convinced i’m wrong!”
 
“that’s very strange! i cannot make it out.”
 
“it’s my secret. but if you will not mock at me, i’ll explain it: i
 can’t do it distinctly; but i’ll give you feeling of how i feel.”
 
she seated herself by again: her countenance grew sadder and graver,
 and her clasped hands trembled.
 
“nelly, do you never dream queer dreams?” she said, suddenly, after
 some minutes’ reflection.
 
“yes, now and then,” i answered.
 
“and so do i. i’ve dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me
 ever after, and changed my ideas: they’ve gone through and through me,
 like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind. and this is
 one: i’m going to tell it—but take care not to smile at any part of
 it.”
 
“oh! don’t, miss catherine!” i cried. “we’re dismal enough without
 conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us. come, come, be merry and
 like yourself! look at little hareton! _he’s_ dreaming nothing dreary.
 how sweetly smiles in his sleep!”
 
“yes; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude! you remember
 him, i daresay, when was just such another as that chubby thing:
 nearly as young and innocent. however, nelly, i shall oblige you to
 listen: it’s not long; and i’ve power to be merry to-night.”
 
“i won’t hear it, i won’t hear it!” i repeated, hastily.
 
i was superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and catherine had
 an unusual gloom in her aspect, that made dread something from which
 i might shape prophecy, and foresee fearful catastrophe. she was
 vexed, but she did not proceed. apparently taking up another subject,
 she recommenced in short time.
 
“if i were in heaven, nelly, i should be extremely miserable.”
 
“because you are not fit to go there,” i answered. “all sinners would
 be miserable in heaven.”
 
“but it is not for that. i dreamt once that i was there.”
 
“i tell you i won’t hearken to your dreams, miss catherine! i’ll go to
 bed,” i interrupted again.
 
she laughed, and held down; for i made motion to leave my chair.
 
“this is nothing,” cried she: “i was only going to say that heaven did
 not seem to be my home; and i broke my heart with weeping to come back
 to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung out into the
 middle of the heath on the top of wuthering heights; where i woke
 sobbing for joy. that will do to explain my secret, as well as the
 other. i’ve more business to marry edgar linton than i have to be in
 heaven; and if the wicked man in there had not brought heathcliff so
 low, i shouldn’t have thought of it. it would degrade to marry
 heathcliff now; so shall never know how i love him: and that, not
 because he’s handsome, nelly, but because he’s more myself than i am.
 whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same; and linton’s
 is as different as moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.”
 
ere this speech ended i became sensible of heathcliff’s presence.
 having noticed slight movement, i turned my head, and saw him rise
 from the bench, and steal out noiselessly. had listened till he
 heard catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he
 stayed to hear further. my companion, sitting on the ground, was
 prevented by the back of the settle from remarking his presence or
 departure; but i started, and bade her hush!
 
“why?” she asked, gazing nervously round.
 
“joseph is here,” i answered, catching opportunely the roll of his
 cartwheels up the road; “and heathcliff will come in with him. i’m not
 sure whether were not at the door this moment.”
 
“oh, couldn’t overhear at the door!” said she. “give hareton,
 while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask to sup with you.
 i want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that
 heathcliff has notion of these things. has not, has he? does
 not know what being in love is!”
 
“i see reason that should not know, as well as you,” i returned;
 “and if _you_ are his choice, he’ll be the most unfortunate creature
 that ever was born! as soon as you become mrs. linton, loses friend,
 and love, and all! have you considered how you’ll bear the separation,
 and how he’ll bear to be quite deserted in the world? because, miss
 catherine—”
 
“he quite deserted! we separated!” she exclaimed, with an accent of
 indignation. “who is to separate us, pray? they’ll meet the fate of
 milo! not as long as i live, ellen: for mortal creature. every
 linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before i could
 consent to forsake heathcliff. oh, that’s not what i intend—that’s not
 what i mean! i shouldn’t be mrs. linton were such price demanded!
 he’ll be as much to as has been all his lifetime. edgar must
 shake off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least. will, when he
 learns my true feelings towards him. nelly, i see now you think a
 selfish wretch; but did it never strike you that if heathcliff and i
 married, we should be beggars? whereas, if i marry linton i can aid
 heathcliff to rise, and place him out of my brother’s power.”
 
“with your husband’s money, miss catherine?” i asked. “you’ll find him
 not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though i’m hardly judge, i
 think that’s the worst motive you’ve given yet for being the wife of
 young linton.”
 
“it is not,” retorted she; “it is the best! the others were the
 satisfaction of my whims: and for edgar’s sake, too, to satisfy him.
 this is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings
 to edgar and myself. i cannot express it; but surely you and everybody
 have notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond
 you. what were the use of my creation, if i were entirely contained
 here? my great miseries in this world have been heathcliff’s miseries,
 and i watched and felt each from the beginning: my great thought in
 living is himself. if all else perished, and _he_ remained, _i_ should
 still continue to be; and if all else remained, and were
 annihilated, the universe would turn to mighty stranger: i should not
 seem part of it. my love for linton is like the foliage in the woods:
 time will change it, i’m well aware, as winter changes the trees. my
 love for heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath: source of
 little visible delight, but necessary. nelly, i _am_ heathcliff! he’s
 always, always in my mind: not as pleasure, any more than i am always
 pleasure to myself, but as my own being. so don’t talk of our
 separation again: it is impracticable; and—”
 
she paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown; but i jerked it
 forcibly away. i was out of patience with her folly!
 
“if i can make any sense of your nonsense, miss,” i said, “it only goes
 to convince that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in
 marrying; or else that you are wicked, unprincipled girl. but trouble
 with more secrets: i’ll not promise to keep them.”
 
“you’ll keep that?” she asked, eagerly.
 
“no, i’ll not promise,” i repeated.
 
she was about to insist, when the entrance of joseph finished our
 conversation; and catherine removed her seat to corner, and nursed
 hareton, while i made the supper. after it was cooked, my
 fellow-servant and i began to quarrel who should carry some to mr.
 hindley; and we didn’t settle it till all was nearly cold. then we came
 to the agreement that we would let him ask, if wanted any; for we
 feared particularly to go into his presence when had been some time
 alone.
 
“and how isn’t that nowt comed in fro’ th’ field, be this time? what is
 about? girt idle seeght!” demanded the old man, looking round for
 heathcliff.
 
“i’ll call him,” i replied. “he’s in the barn, i’ve doubt.”
 
i went and called, but got answer. on returning, i whispered to
 catherine that had heard good part of what she said, i was sure;
 and told how i saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her
 brother’s conduct regarding him. she jumped up in fine fright, flung
 hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not
 taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk
 would have affected him. she was absent such while that joseph
 proposed we should wait longer. cunningly conjectured they were
 staying away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing. they
 were “ill eneugh for ony fahl manners,” affirmed. and on their
 behalf added that night special prayer to the usual
 quarter-of-an-hour’s supplication before meat, and would have tacked
 another to the end of the grace, had not his young mistress broken in
 upon him with hurried command that must run down the road, and,
 wherever heathcliff had rambled, find and make him re-enter directly!
 
“i want to speak to him, and i _must_, before i go upstairs,” she said.
 “and the gate is open: is somewhere out of hearing; for would not
 reply, though i shouted at the top of the fold as loud as i could.”
 
joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to
 suffer contradiction; and at last placed his hat on his head, and
 walked grumbling forth. meantime, catherine paced up and down the
 floor, exclaiming—“i wonder where is—i wonder where _can_ be!
 what did i say, nelly? i’ve forgotten. was vexed at my bad humour
 this afternoon? dear! tell what i’ve said to grieve him? i do wish
 he’d come. i do wish would!”
 
“what noise for nothing!” i cried, though rather uneasy myself. “what
 trifle scares you! it’s surely great cause of alarm that
 heathcliff should take moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie
 too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft. i’ll engage he’s lurking
 there. see if i don’t ferret him out!”
 
i departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and
 joseph’s quest ended in the same.
 
“yon lad gets war und war!” observed on re-entering. “he’s left th’
 gate at t’ full swing, and miss’s pony has trodden dahn two rigs o’
 corn, and plottered through, raight o’er into t’ meadow! hahsomdiver,
 t’ maister ’ull play t’ devil to-morn, and he’ll do weel. he’s patience
 itsseln wi’ sich careless, offald craters—patience itsseln is! bud
 he’ll not be soa allus—yah’s see, all on ye! yah mun’n’t drive him out
 of his heead for nowt!”
 
“have you found heathcliff, you ass?” interrupted catherine. “have you
 been looking for him, as i ordered?”
 
“i sud more likker look for th’ horse,” replied. “it ’ud be to more
 sense. bud i can look for norther horse nur man of neeght loike
 this—as black as t’ chimbley! und heathcliff’s noan t’ chap to coom at
 _my_ whistle—happen he’ll be less hard o’ hearing wi’ _ye_!”
 
it _was_ very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined
 to thunder, and i said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain
 would be certain to bring him home without further trouble. however,
 catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity. she kept wandering
 to and fro, from the gate to the door, in state of agitation which
 permitted repose; and at length took up permanent situation on one
 side of the wall, near the road: where, heedless of my expostulations
 and the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash
 around her, she remained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and
 then crying outright. she beat hareton, or any child, at good
 passionate fit of crying.
 
about midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the
 heights in full fury. there was violent wind, as well as thunder, and
 either one or the other split tree off at the corner of the building:
 huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down portion of the
 east chimney-stack, sending clatter of stones and soot into the
 kitchen-fire. we thought bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and
 joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the lord to remember the
 patriarchs noah and lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous,
 though smote the ungodly. i felt some sentiment that it must be a
 judgment on us also. the jonah, in my mind, was mr. earnshaw; and i
 shook the handle of his den that i might ascertain if were yet
 living. replied audibly enough, in fashion which made my companion
 vociferate, more clamorously than before, that wide distinction might
 be drawn between saints like himself and sinners like his master. but
 the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed;
 excepting cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in
 refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawlless to
 catch as much water as she could with her hair and clothes. she came in
 and lay down on the settle, all soaked as she was, turning her face to
 the back, and putting her hands before it.
 
“well, miss!” i exclaimed, touching her shoulder; “you are not bent on
 getting your death, are you? do you know what o’clock it is? half-past
 twelve. come, come to bed! there’s use waiting any longer on that
 foolish boy: he’ll be gone to gimmerton, and he’ll stay there now. he
 guesses we shouldn’t wait for him till this late hour: at least, he
 guesses that only mr. hindley would be up; and he’d rather avoid having
 the door opened by the master.”
 
“nay, nay, he’s noan at gimmerton,” said joseph. “i’s niver wonder but
 he’s at t’ bothom of bog-hoile. this visitation worn’t for nowt, and
 i wod hev’ ye to look out, miss—yah muh be t’ next. thank hivin for
 all! all warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked out
 fro’ th’ rubbidge! yah knaw whet t’ scripture ses.” and began
 quoting several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we
 might find them.
 
i, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet
 things, left him preaching and her shivering, and betook myself to bed
 with little hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping
 round him. i heard joseph read on while afterwards; then i
 distinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then i dropped asleep.
 
coming down somewhat later than usual, i saw, by the sunbeams piercing
 the chinks of the shutters, miss catherine still seated near the
 fireplace. the house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its
 unclosed windows; hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen
 hearth, haggard and drowsy.
 
“what ails you, cathy?” was saying when i entered: “you look as
 dismal as drowned whelp. why are you so damp and pale, child?”
 
“i’ve been wet,” she answered reluctantly, “and i’m cold, that’s all.”
 
“oh, she is naughty!” i cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably
 sober. “she got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there
 she has sat the night through, and i couldn’t prevail on her to stir.”
 
mr. earnshaw stared at us in surprise. “the night through,” he
 repeated. “what kept her up? not fear of the thunder, surely? that was
 over hours since.”
 
neither of us wished to mention heathcliff’s absence, as long as we
 could conceal it; so i replied, i didn’t know how she took it into her
 head to sit up; and she said nothing. the morning was fresh and cool; i
 threw back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents
 from the garden; but catherine called peevishly to me, “ellen, shut the
 window. i’m starving!” and her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to
 the almost extinguished embers.
 
“she’s ill,” said hindley, taking her wrist; “i suppose that’s the
 reason she would not go to bed. damn it! i don’t want to be troubled
 with more sickness here. what took you into the rain?”
 
“running after t’ lads, as usuald!” croaked joseph, catching an
 opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue. “if i war
 yah, maister, i’d just slam t’ boards i’ their faces all on ’em, gentle
 and simple! never day ut yah’re off, but yon cat o’ linton comes
 sneaking hither; and miss nelly, shoo’s fine lass! shoo sits watching
 for ye i’ t’ kitchen; and as yah’re in at one door, he’s out at
 t’other; and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side! it’s
 bonny behaviour, lurking amang t’ fields, after twelve o’ t’ night, wi’
 that fahl, flaysome divil of gipsy, heathcliff! they think _i’m_
 blind; but i’m noan: nowt ut t’ soart!—i seed young linton boath coming
 and going, and i seed _yah_” (directing his discourse to me), “yah
 gooid fur nowt, slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th’ house, t’
 minute yah heard t’ maister’s horse-fit clatter up t’ road.”
 
“silence, eavesdropper!” cried catherine; “none of your insolence
 before me! edgar linton came yesterday by chance, hindley; and it was
 _i_ who told him to be off: because i knew you would not like to have
 met him as you were.”
 
“you lie, cathy, doubt,” answered her brother, “and you are a
 confounded simpleton! but never mind linton at present: tell me, were
 you not with heathcliff last night? speak the truth, now. you need not
 be afraid of harming him: though i hate him as much as ever, did me
 good turn short time since that will make my conscience tender of
 breaking his neck. to prevent it, i shall send him about his business
 this very morning; and after he’s gone, i’d advise you all to look
 sharp: i shall only have the more humour for you.”
 
“i never saw heathcliff last night,” answered catherine, beginning to
 sob bitterly: “and if you do turn him out of doors, i’ll go with him.
 but, perhaps, you’ll never have an opportunity: perhaps, he’s gone.”
 here she burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her
 words were inarticulate.
 
hindley lavished on her torrent of scornful abuse, and bade her get
 to her room immediately, or she shouldn’t cry for nothing! i obliged
 her to obey; and i shall never forget what scene she acted when we
 reached her chamber: it terrified me. i thought she was going mad, and
 i begged joseph to run for the doctor. it proved the commencement of
 delirium: mr. kenneth, as soon as saw her, pronounced her
 dangerously ill; she had fever. bled her, and told to let
 her live on whey and water-gruel, and take care she did not throw
 herself downstairs or out of the window; and then left: for had
 enough to do in the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary
 distance between cottage and cottage.
 
though i cannot say i made gentle nurse, and joseph and the master
 were better, and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong
 as patient could be, she weathered it through. old mrs. linton paid
 us several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded
 and ordered us all; and when catherine was convalescent, she insisted
 on conveying her to thrushcross grange: for which deliverance we were
 very grateful. but the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness:
 she and her husband both took the fever, and died within few days of
 each other.
 
our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and
 haughtier than ever. heathcliff had never been heard of since the
 evening of the thunder-storm; and, one day, i had the misfortune, when
 she had provoked exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance
 on her: where indeed it belonged, as she well knew. from that period,
 for several months, she ceased to hold any communication with me, save
 in the relation of mere servant. joseph fell under ban also: he
 _would_ speak his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a
 little girl; and she esteemed herself woman, and our mistress, and
 thought that her recent illness gave her claim to be treated with
 consideration. then the doctor had said that she would not bear
 crossing much; she ought to have her own way; and it was nothing less
 than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to stand up and
 contradict her. from mr. earnshaw and his companions she kept aloof;
 and tutored by kenneth, and serious threats of fit that often
 attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she pleased to
 demand, and generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper. was
 rather _too_ indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from affection,
 but from pride: wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the
 family by an alliance with the lintons, and as long as she let him
 alone she might trample on us like slaves, for aught cared! edgar
 linton, as multitudes have been before and will be after him, was
 infatuated: and believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he
 led her to gimmerton chapel, three years subsequent to his father’s
 death.
 
much against my inclination, i was persuaded to leave wuthering heights
 and accompany her here. little hareton was nearly five years old, and i
 had just begun to teach him his letters. we made sad parting; but
 catherine’s tears were more powerful than ours. when i refused to go,
 and when she found her entreaties did not move me, she went lamenting
 to her husband and brother. the former offered munificent wages; the
 latter ordered to pack up: wanted women in the house, said,
 now that there was mistress; and as to hareton, the curate should
 take him in hand, by-and-by. and so i had but one choice left: to do as
 i was ordered. i told the master got rid of all decent people only
 to run to ruin little faster; i kissed hareton, said good-by; and
 since then has been stranger: and it’s very queer to think it, but
 i’ve doubt has completely forgotten all about ellen dean, and
 that was ever more than all the world to her and she to him!
 
* * * * *
 

at this point of the housekeeper’s story she chanced to glance towards
 the time-piece over the chimney; and was in amazement on seeing the
 minute-hand measure half-past one. she would not hear of staying a
 second longer: in truth, i felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of
 her narrative myself. and now that she is vanished to her rest, and i
 have meditated for another hour or two, i shall summon courage to go
 also, in spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.
 



chapter x
 

charming introduction to hermit’s life! four weeks’ torture,
 tossing, and sickness! oh, these bleak winds and bitter northern skies,
 and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons! and oh, this
 dearth of the human physiognomy! and, worse than all, the terrible
 intimation of kenneth that i need not expect to be out of doors till
 spring!
 
mr. heathcliff has just honoured with call. about seven days ago
 sent brace of grouse—the last of the season. scoundrel! is
 not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine; and that i had a
 great mind to tell him. but, alas! how could i offend man who was
 charitable enough to sit at my bedside good hour, and talk on some
 other subject than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches? this is
 quite an easy interval. i am too weak to read; yet i feel as if i could
 enjoy something interesting. why not have up mrs. dean to finish her
 tale? i can recollect its chief incidents, as far as she had gone. yes:
 i remember her hero had run off, and never been heard of for three
 years; and the heroine was married. i’ll ring: she’ll be delighted to
 find capable of talking cheerfully. mrs. dean came.
 
“it wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine,” she commenced.
 
“away, away with it!” i replied; “i desire to have—”
 
“the doctor says you must drop the powders.”
 
“with all my heart! don’t interrupt me. come and take your seat here.
 keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials. draw your knitting
 out of your pocket—that will do—now continue the history of mr.
 heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day. did finish
 his education on the continent, and come back gentleman? or did he
 get sizar’s place at college, or escape to america, and earn honours
 by drawing blood from his foster-country? or make fortune more
 promptly on the english highways?”
 
“he may have done little in all these vocations, mr. lockwood; but i
 couldn’t give my word for any. i stated before that i didn’t know how
 gained his money; neither am i aware of the means took to raise
 his mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with
 your leave, i’ll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse
 and not weary you. are you feeling better this morning?”
 
“much.”
 
“that’s good news.”
 
* * * * *
 

i got miss catherine and myself to thrushcross grange; and, to my
 agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinitely better than i dared to
 expect. she seemed almost over-fond of mr. linton; and even to his
 sister she showed plenty of affection. they were both very attentive to
 her comfort, certainly. it was not the thorn bending to the
 honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. there were no
 mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who
 _can_ be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither
 opposition nor indifference? i observed that mr. edgar had a
 deep-rooted fear of ruffling her humour. concealed it from her; but
 if ever heard answer sharply, or saw any other servant grow
 cloudy at some imperious order of hers, would show his trouble by a
 frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account. many a
 time spoke sternly to about my pertness; and averred that the stab
 of knife could not inflict worse pang than suffered at seeing
 his lady vexed. not to grieve kind master, i learned to be less
 touchy; and, for the space of half year, the gunpowder lay as
 harmless as sand, because fire came near to explode it. catherine
 had seasons of gloom and silence now and then: they were respected with
 sympathising silence by her husband, who ascribed them to an alteration
 in her constitution, produced by her perilous illness; as she was never
 subject to depression of spirits before. the return of sunshine was
 welcomed by answering sunshine from him. i believe i may assert that
 they were really in possession of deep and growing happiness.
 
it ended. well, we _must_ be for ourselves in the long run; the mild
 and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineering; and it
 ended when circumstances caused each to feel that the one’s interest
 was not the chief consideration in the other’s thoughts. on mellow
 evening in september, i was coming from the garden with heavy basket
 of apples which i had been gathering. it had got dusk, and the moon
 looked over the high wall of the court, causing undefined shadows to
 lurk in the corners of the numerous projecting portions of the
 building. i set my burden on the house-steps by the kitchen-door, and
 lingered to rest, and drew in few more breaths of the soft, sweet
 air; my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when i
 heard voice behind say,—“nelly, is that you?”
 
it was deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was something in
 the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar. i
 turned about to discover who spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut,
 and i had seen nobody on approaching the steps. something stirred in
 the porch; and, moving nearer, i distinguished tall man dressed in
 dark clothes, with dark face and hair. leant against the side, and
 held his fingers on the latch as if intending to open for himself. “who
 can it be?” i thought. “mr. earnshaw? oh, no! the voice has no
 resemblance to his.”
 
“i have waited here an hour,” resumed, while i continued staring;
 “and the whole of that time all round has been as still as death. i
 dared not enter. you do not know me? look, i’m not stranger!”
 
ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered
 with black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and
 singular. i remembered the eyes.
 
“what!” i cried, uncertain whether to regard him as worldly visitor,
 and i raised my hands in amazement. “what! you come back? is it really
 you? is it?”
 
“yes, heathcliff,” replied, glancing from up to the windows,
 which reflected score of glittering moons, but showed lights from
 within. “are they at home? where is she? nelly, you are not glad! you
 needn’t be so disturbed. is she here? speak! i want to have one word
 with her—your mistress. go, and say some person from gimmerton desires
 to see her.”
 
“how will she take it?” i exclaimed. “what will she do? the surprise
 bewilders me—it will put her out of her head! and you _are_ heathcliff!
 but altered! nay, there’s comprehending it. have you been for a
 soldier?”
 
“go and carry my message,” interrupted, impatiently. “i’m in hell
 till you do!”
 
lifted the latch, and i entered; but when i got to the parlour where
 mr. and mrs. linton were, i could not persuade myself to proceed. at
 length i resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the
 candles lighted, and i opened the door.
 
they sat together in window whose lattice lay back against the wall,
 and displayed, beyond the garden trees, and the wild green park, the
 valley of gimmerton, with long line of mist winding nearly to its top
 (for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticed, the
 sough that runs from the marshes joins beck which follows the bend of
 the glen). wuthering heights rose above this silvery vapour; but our
 old house was invisible; it rather dips down on the other side. both
 the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked
 wondrously peaceful. i shrank reluctantly from performing my errand;
 and was actually going away leaving it unsaid, after having put my
 question about the candles, when sense of my folly compelled to
 return, and mutter, “a person from gimmerton wishes to see you ma’am.”
 
“what does want?” asked mrs. linton.
 
“i did not question him,” i answered.
 
“well, close the curtains, nelly,” she said; “and bring up tea. i’ll be
 back again directly.”
 
she quitted the apartment; mr. edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.
 
“some one mistress does not expect,” i replied. “that heathcliff—you
 recollect him, sir—who used to live at mr. earnshaw’s.”
 
“what! the gipsy—the ploughboy?” cried. “why did you not say so to
 catherine?”
 
“hush! you must not call him by those names, master,” i said. “she’d be
 sadly grieved to hear you. she was nearly heartbroken when ran off.
 i guess his return will make jubilee to her.”
 
mr. linton walked to window on the other side of the room that
 overlooked the court. unfastened it, and leant out. i suppose they
 were below, for exclaimed quickly: “don’t stand there, love! bring
 the person in, if it be anyone particular.” ere long, i heard the click
 of the latch, and catherine flew upstairs, breathless and wild; too
 excited to show gladness: indeed, by her face, you would rather have
 surmised an awful calamity.
 
“oh, edgar, edgar!” she panted, flinging her arms round his neck. “oh,
 edgar darling! heathcliff’s come back—he is!” and she tightened her
 embrace to squeeze.
 
“well, well,” cried her husband, crossly, “don’t strangle for that!
 never struck as such marvellous treasure. there is need to
 be frantic!”
 
“i know you didn’t like him,” she answered, repressing little the
 intensity of her delight. “yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
 shall i tell him to come up?”
 
“here,” said, “into the parlour?”
 
“where else?” she asked.
 
looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as more suitable place for
 him. mrs. linton eyed him with droll expression—half angry, half
 laughing at his fastidiousness.
 
“no,” she added, after while; “i cannot sit in the kitchen. set two
 tables here, ellen: one for your master and miss isabella, being
 gentry; the other for heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.
 will that please you, dear? or must i have fire lighted elsewhere? if
 so, give directions. i’ll run down and secure my guest. i’m afraid the
 joy is too great to be real!”
 
she was about to dart off again; but edgar arrested her.
 
“_you_ bid him step up,” said, addressing me; “and, catherine, try
 to be glad, without being absurd. the whole household need not witness
 the sight of your welcoming runaway servant as brother.”
 
i descended, and found heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
 anticipating an invitation to enter. followed my guidance without
 waste of words, and i ushered him into the presence of the master and
 mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking. but the
 lady’s glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the
 door: she sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to linton;
 and then she seized linton’s reluctant fingers and crushed them into
 his. now, fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, i was amazed,
 more than ever, to behold the transformation of heathcliff. had
 grown tall, athletic, well-formed man; beside whom my master seemed
 quite slender and youth-like. his upright carriage suggested the idea
 of his having been in the army. his countenance was much older in
 expression and decision of feature than mr. linton’s; it looked
 intelligent, and retained marks of former degradation. a
 half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and eyes full
 of black fire, but it was subdued; and his manner was even dignified:
 quite divested of roughness, though too stern for grace. my master’s
 surprise equalled or exceeded mine: remained for minute at loss
 how to address the ploughboy, as had called him. heathcliff dropped
 his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till chose to
 speak.
 
“sit down, sir,” said, at length. “mrs. linton, recalling old times,
 would have give you cordial reception; and, of course, i am
 gratified when anything occurs to please her.”
 
“and i also,” answered heathcliff, “especially if it be anything in
 which i have part. i shall stay an hour or two willingly.”
 
took seat opposite catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if
 she feared would vanish were she to remove it. did not raise his
 to her often: quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed
 back, each time more confidently, the undisguised delight drank from
 hers. they were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer
 embarrassment. not so mr. edgar: grew pale with pure annoyance: a
 feeling that reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across
 the rug, seized heathcliff’s hands again, and laughed like one beside
 herself.
 
“i shall think it dream to-morrow!” she cried. “i shall not be able
 to believe that i have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.
 and yet, cruel heathcliff! you don’t deserve this welcome. to be absent
 and silent for three years, and never to think of me!”
 
“a little more than you have thought of me,” murmured. “i heard of
 your marriage, cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard
 below, i meditated this plan—just to have one glimpse of your face, a
 stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle
 my score with hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
 myself. your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of
 meeting with another aspect next time! nay, you’ll not drive off
 again. you were really sorry for me, were you? well, there was cause.
 i’ve fought through bitter life since i last heard your voice; and
 you must forgive me, for i struggled only for you!”
 
“catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the
 table,” interrupted linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and
 due measure of politeness. “mr. heathcliff will have long walk,
 wherever may lodge to-night; and i’m thirsty.”
 
she took her post before the urn; and miss isabella came, summoned by
 the bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, i left the room.
 the meal hardly endured ten minutes. catherine’s cup was never filled:
 she could neither eat nor drink. edgar had made slop in his saucer,
 and scarcely swallowed mouthful. their guest did not protract his
 stay that evening above an hour longer. i asked, as departed, if he
 went to gimmerton?
 
“no, to wuthering heights,” answered: “mr. earnshaw invited me, when
 i called this morning.”
 
mr. earnshaw invited _him_! and _he_ called on mr. earnshaw! i pondered
 this sentence painfully, after was gone. is turning out bit of
 hypocrite, and coming into the country to work mischief under a
 cloak? i mused: i had presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he
 had better have remained away.
 
about the middle of the night, i was wakened from my first nap by mrs.
 linton gliding into my chamber, taking seat on my bedside, and
 pulling by the hair to rouse me.
 
“i cannot rest, ellen,” she said, by way of apology. “and i want some
 living creature to keep company in my happiness! edgar is sulky,
 because i’m glad of thing that does not interest him: refuses to
 open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches; and he
 affirmed i was cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when was so
 sick and sleepy. always contrives to be sick at the least cross! i
 gave few sentences of commendation to heathcliff, and he, either for
 headache or pang of envy, began to cry: so i got up and left him.”
 
“what use is it praising heathcliff to him?” i answered. “as lads they
 had an aversion to each other, and heathcliff would hate just as much
 to hear him praised: it’s human nature. let mr. linton alone about him,
 unless you would like an open quarrel between them.”
 
“but does it not show great weakness?” pursued she. “i’m not envious: i
 never feel hurt at the brightness of isabella’s yellow hair and the
 whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance, and the fondness all the
 family exhibit for her. even you, nelly, if we have dispute
 sometimes, you back isabella at once; and i yield like foolish
 mother: i call her darling, and flatter her into good temper. it
 pleases her brother to see us cordial, and that pleases me. but they
 are very much alike: they are spoiled children, and fancy the world was
 made for their accommodation; and though i humour both, i think smart
 chastisement might improve them all the same.”
 
“you’re mistaken, mrs. linton,” said i. “they humour you: i know what
 there would be to do if they did not. you can well afford to indulge
 their passing whims as long as their business is to anticipate all your
 desires. you may, however, fall out, at last, over something of equal
 consequence to both sides; and then those you term weak are very
 capable of being as obstinate as you.”
 
“and then we shall fight to the death, sha’n’t we, nelly?” she
 returned, laughing. “no! i tell you, i have such faith in linton’s
 love, that i believe i might kill him, and wouldn’t wish to
 retaliate.”
 
i advised her to value him the more for his affection.
 
“i do,” she answered, “but needn’t resort to whining for trifles. it
 is childish; and, instead of melting into tears because i said that
 heathcliff was now worthy of anyone’s regard, and it would honour the
 first gentleman in the country to be his friend, ought to have said
 it for me, and been delighted from sympathy. must get accustomed to
 him, and may as well like him: considering how heathcliff has reason
 to object to him, i’m sure behaved excellently!”
 
“what do you think of his going to wuthering heights?” i inquired. “he
 is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite christian: offering
 the right hand of fellowship to his enemies all around!”
 
“he explained it,” she replied. “i wonder as much as you. said he
 called to gather information concerning from you, supposing you
 resided there still; and joseph told hindley, who came out and fell to
 questioning him of what had been doing, and how had been living;
 and finally, desired him to walk in. there were some persons sitting at
 cards; heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him, and,
 finding him plentifully supplied, requested that would come again
 in the evening: to which consented. hindley is too reckless to
 select his acquaintance prudently: doesn’t trouble himself to
 reflect on the causes might have for mistrusting one whom has
 basely injured. but heathcliff affirms his principal reason for
 resuming connection with his ancient persecutor is wish to install
 himself in quarters at walking distance from the grange, and an
 attachment to the house where we lived together; and likewise hope
 that i shall have more opportunities of seeing him there than i could
 have if settled in gimmerton. means to offer liberal payment for
 permission to lodge at the heights; and doubtless my brother’s
 covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms: was always greedy;
 though what grasps with one hand flings away with the other.”
 
“it’s nice place for young man to fix his dwelling in!” said i.
 “have you fear of the consequences, mrs. linton?”
 
“none for my friend,” she replied: “his strong head will keep him from
 danger; little for hindley: but can’t be made morally worse than
 is; and i stand between him and bodily harm. the event of this
 evening has reconciled to god and humanity! i had risen in angry
 rebellion against providence. oh, i’ve endured very, very bitter
 misery, nelly! if that creature knew how bitter, he’d be ashamed to
 cloud its removal with idle petulance. it was kindness for him which
 induced to bear it alone: had i expressed the agony i frequently
 felt, would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently
 as i. however, it’s over, and i’ll take revenge on his folly; i can
 afford to suffer anything hereafter! should the meanest thing alive
 slap on the cheek, i’d not only turn the other, but i’d ask pardon
 for provoking it; and, as proof, i’ll go make my peace with edgar
 instantly. good-night! i’m an angel!”
 
in this self-complacent conviction she departed; and the success of her
 fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: mr. linton had not only
 abjured his peevishness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by
 catherine’s exuberance of vivacity), but ventured objection to
 her taking isabella with her to wuthering heights in the afternoon; and
 she rewarded him with such summer of sweetness and affection in
 return as made the house paradise for several days; both master and
 servants profiting from the perpetual sunshine.
 
heathcliff—mr. heathcliff i should say in future—used the liberty of
 visiting at thrushcross grange cautiously, at first: seemed
 estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion. catherine, also,
 deemed it judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in
 receiving him; and gradually established his right to be expected.
 retained great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was
 remarkable; and that served to repress all startling demonstrations of
 feeling. my master’s uneasiness experienced lull, and further
 circumstances diverted it into another channel for space.
 
his new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of
 isabella linton evincing sudden and irresistible attraction towards
 the tolerated guest. she was at that time charming young lady of
 eighteen; infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen
 feelings, and keen temper, too, if irritated. her brother, who loved
 her tenderly, was appalled at this fantastic preference. leaving aside
 the degradation of an alliance with nameless man, and the possible
 fact that his property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such
 one’s power, had sense to comprehend heathcliff’s disposition: to
 know that, though his exterior was altered, his mind was unchangeable
 and unchanged. and dreaded that mind: it revolted him: shrank
 forebodingly from the idea of committing isabella to its keeping. he
 would have recoiled still more had been aware that her attachment
 rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it awakened reciprocation
 of sentiment; for the minute discovered its existence laid the
 blame on heathcliff’s deliberate designing.
 
we had all remarked, during some time, that miss linton fretted and
 pined over something. she grew cross and wearisome; snapping at and
 teasing catherine continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting her
 limited patience. we excused her, to certain extent, on the plea of
 ill-health: she was dwindling and fading before our eyes. but one day,
 when she had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast,
 complaining that the servants did not do what she told them; that the
 mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house, and edgar
 neglected her; that she had caught cold with the doors being left
 open, and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to vex her, with a
 hundred yet more frivolous accusations, mrs. linton peremptorily
 insisted that she should get to bed; and, having scolded her heartily,
 threatened to send for the doctor. mention of kenneth caused her to
 exclaim, instantly, that her health was perfect, and it was only
 catherine’s harshness which made her unhappy.
 
“how can you say i am harsh, you naughty fondling?” cried the mistress,
 amazed at the unreasonable assertion. “you are surely losing your
 reason. when have i been harsh, tell me?”
 
“yesterday,” sobbed isabella, “and now!”
 
“yesterday!” said her sister-in-law. “on what occasion?”
 
“in our walk along the moor: you told to ramble where i pleased,
 while you sauntered on with mr. heathcliff!”
 
“and that’s your notion of harshness?” said catherine, laughing. “it
 was hint that your company was superfluous; we didn’t care whether
 you kept with us or not; i merely thought heathcliff’s talk would have
 nothing entertaining for your ears.”
 
“oh, no,” wept the young lady; “you wished away, because you knew i
 liked to be there!”
 
“is she sane?” asked mrs. linton, appealing to me. “i’ll repeat our
 conversation, word for word, isabella; and you point out any charm it
 could have had for you.”
 
“i don’t mind the conversation,” she answered: “i wanted to be with—”
 
“well?” said catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete the
 sentence.
 
“with him: and i won’t be always sent off!” she continued, kindling up.
 “you are dog in the manger, cathy, and desire one to be loved but
 yourself!”
 
“you are an impertinent little monkey!” exclaimed mrs. linton, in
 surprise. “but i’ll not believe this idiocy! it is impossible that you
 can covet the admiration of heathcliff—that you consider him an
 agreeable person! i hope i have misunderstood you, isabella?”
 
“no, you have not,” said the infatuated girl. “i love him more than
 ever you loved edgar, and might love me, if you would let him!”
 
“i wouldn’t be you for kingdom, then!” catherine declared,
 emphatically: and she seemed to speak sincerely. “nelly, help to
 convince her of her madness. tell her what heathcliff is: an
 unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid
 wilderness of furze and whinstone. i’d as soon put that little canary
 into the park on winter’s day, as recommend you to bestow your heart
 on him! it is deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and nothing
 else, which makes that dream enter your head. pray, don’t imagine that
 conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath stern
 exterior! he’s not rough diamond—a pearl-containing oyster of a
 rustic: he’s fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. i never say to him, ‘let
 this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to
 harm them;’ i say, ‘let them alone, because _i_ should hate them to be
 wronged:’ and he’d crush you like sparrow’s egg, isabella, if he
 found you troublesome charge. i know couldn’t love linton; and
 yet he’d be quite capable of marrying your fortune and expectations:
 avarice is growing with him besetting sin. there’s my picture: and
 i’m his friend—so much so, that had thought seriously to catch you,
 i should, perhaps, have held my tongue, and let you fall into his
 trap.”
 
miss linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.
 
“for shame! for shame!” she repeated, angrily. “you are worse than
 twenty foes, you poisonous friend!”
 
“ah! you won’t believe me, then?” said catherine. “you think i speak
 from wicked selfishness?”
 
“i’m certain you do,” retorted isabella; “and i shudder at you!”
 
“good!” cried the other. “try for yourself, if that be your spirit: i
 have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence.”—
 
“and i must suffer for her egotism!” she sobbed, as mrs. linton left
 the room. “all, all is against me: she has blighted my single
 consolation. but she uttered falsehoods, didn’t she? mr. heathcliff is
 not fiend: has an honourable soul, and true one, or how could he
 remember her?”
 
“banish him from your thoughts, miss,” i said. “he’s bird of bad
 omen: mate for you. mrs. linton spoke strongly, and yet i can’t
 contradict her. she is better acquainted with his heart than i, or any
 one besides; and she never would represent him as worse than is.
 honest people don’t hide their deeds. how has been living? how has
 got rich? why is staying at wuthering heights, the house of man
 whom abhors? they say mr. earnshaw is worse and worse since came.
 they sit up all night together continually, and hindley has been
 borrowing money on his land, and does nothing but play and drink: i
 heard only week ago—it was joseph who told me—i met him at gimmerton:
 ‘nelly,’ said, ‘we’s hae crowner’s ’quest enow, at ahr folks’. one
 on ’em ’s a’most getten his finger cut off wi’ hauding t’ other fro’
 stickin’ hisseln loike cawlf. that’s maister, yah knaw, ’at ’s soa
 up o’ going tuh t’ grand ’sizes. he’s noan feared o’ t’ bench o’
 judges, norther paul, nur peter, nur john, nur matthew, nor noan on
 ’em, not he! fair likes—he langs to set his brazened face agean ’em!
 and yon bonny lad heathcliff, yah mind, he’s rare ’un. can girn a
 laugh as well ’s onybody at raight divil’s jest. does niver say
 nowt of his fine living amang us, when goes to t’ grange? this is t’
 way on ’t:—up at sun-down: dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und
 can’le-light till next day at noon: then, t’ fooil gangs banning un
 raving to his cham’er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i’ thur
 lugs fur varry shame; un’ the knave, why can caint his brass, un’
 ate, un’ sleep, un’ off to his neighbour’s to gossip wi’ t’ wife. i’
 course, tells dame catherine how her fathur’s goold runs into his
 pocket, and her fathur’s gallops down t’ broad road, while flees
 afore to oppen t’ pikes!’ now, miss linton, joseph is an old rascal,
 but liar; and, if his account of heathcliff’s conduct be true, you
 would never think of desiring such husband, would you?”
 
“you are leagued with the rest, ellen!” she replied. “i’ll not listen
 to your slanders. what malevolence you must have to wish to convince me
 that there is happiness in the world!”
 
whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or
 persevered in nursing it perpetually, i cannot say: she had little time
 to reflect. the day after, there was justice-meeting at the next
 town; my master was obliged to attend; and mr. heathcliff, aware of his
 absence, called rather earlier than usual. catherine and isabella were
 sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter
 alarmed at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she had made of
 her secret feelings in transient fit of passion; the former, on
 mature consideration, really offended with her companion; and, if she
 laughed again at her pertness, inclined to make it laughing matter
 to _her_. she did laugh as she saw heathcliff pass the window. i was
 sweeping the hearth, and i noticed mischievous smile on her lips.
 isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or book, remained till the
 door opened; and it was too late to attempt an escape, which she would
 gladly have done had it been practicable.
 
“come in, that’s right!” exclaimed the mistress, gaily, pulling chair
 to the fire. “here are two people sadly in need of third to thaw the
 ice between them; and you are the very one we should both of us choose.
 heathcliff, i’m proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you
 more than myself. i expect you to feel flattered. nay, it’s not nelly;
 don’t look at her! my poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart
 by mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty. it lies in
 your own power to be edgar’s brother! no, no, isabella, you sha’n’t run
 off,” she continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the
 confounded girl, who had risen indignantly. “we were quarrelling like
 cats about you, heathcliff; and i was fairly beaten in protestations of
 devotion and admiration: and, moreover, i was informed that if i would
 but have the manners to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself
 to be, would shoot shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever,
 and send my image into eternal oblivion!”
 
“catherine!” said isabella, calling up her dignity, and disdaining to
 struggle from the tight grasp that held her, “i’d thank you to adhere
 to the truth and not slander me, even in joke! mr. heathcliff, be kind
 enough to bid this friend of yours release me: she forgets that you and
 i are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses her is painful to me
 beyond expression.”
 
as the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked thoroughly
 indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him, she turned
 and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor.
 
“by means!” cried mrs. linton in answer. “i won’t be named dog in
 the manger again. you _shall_ stay: now then! heathcliff, why don’t you
 evince satisfaction at my pleasant news? isabella swears that the love
 edgar has for is nothing to that she entertains for you. i’m sure
 she made some speech of the kind; did she not, ellen? and she has
 fasted ever since the day before yesterday’s walk, from sorrow and rage
 that i despatched her out of your society under the idea of its being
 unacceptable.”
 
“i think you belie her,” said heathcliff, twisting his chair to face
 them. “she wishes to be out of my society now, at any rate!”
 
and stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a
 strange repulsive animal: centipede from the indies, for instance,
 which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it
 raises. the poor thing couldn’t bear that; she grew white and red in
 rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, bent the strength
 of her small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of catherine; and
 perceiving that as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another
 closed down, and she could not remove the whole together, she began to
 make use of her nails; and their sharpness presently ornamented the
 detainer’s with crescents of red.
 
“there’s tigress!” exclaimed mrs. linton, setting her free, and
 shaking her hand with pain. “begone, for god’s sake, and hide your
 vixen face! how foolish to reveal those talons to _him_. can’t you
 fancy the conclusions he’ll draw? look, heathcliff! they are
 instruments that will do execution—you must beware of your eyes.”
 
“i’d wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me,” he
 answered, brutally, when the door had closed after her. “but what did
 you mean by teasing the creature in that manner, cathy? you were not
 speaking the truth, were you?”
 
“i assure you i was,” she returned. “she has been dying for your sake
 several weeks, and raving about you this morning, and pouring forth a
 deluge of abuse, because i represented your failings in plain light,
 for the purpose of mitigating her adoration. but don’t notice it
 further: i wished to punish her sauciness, that’s all. i like her too
 well, my dear heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour her
 up.”
 
“and i like her too ill to attempt it,” said he, “except in very
 ghoulish fashion. you’d hear of odd things if i lived alone with that
 mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white
 the colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day
 or two: they detestably resemble linton’s.”
 
“delectably!” observed catherine. “they are dove’s eyes—angel’s!”
 
“she’s her brother’s heir, is she not?” asked, after brief
 silence.
 
“i should be sorry to think so,” returned his companion. “half dozen
 nephews shall erase her title, please heaven! abstract your mind from
 the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour’s
 goods; remember _this_ neighbour’s goods are mine.”
 
“if they were _mine_, they would be none the less that,” said
 heathcliff; “but though isabella linton may be silly, she is scarcely
 mad; and, in short, we’ll dismiss the matter, as you advise.”
 
from their tongues they did dismiss it; and catherine, probably, from
 her thoughts. the other, i felt certain, recalled it often in the
 course of the evening. i saw him smile to himself—grin rather—and lapse
 into ominous musing whenever mrs. linton had occasion to be absent from
 the apartment.
 
i determined to watch his movements. my heart invariably cleaved to the
 master’s, in preference to catherine’s side: with reason i imagined,
 for was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she—she could not be
 called the _opposite_, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide
 latitude, that i had little faith in her principles, and still less
 sympathy for her feelings. i wanted something to happen which might
 have the effect of freeing both wuthering heights and the grange of mr.
 heathcliff, quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent. his
 visits were continual nightmare to me; and, i suspected, to my master
 also. his abode at the heights was an oppression past explaining. i
 felt that god had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked
 wanderings, and an evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting
 his time to spring and destroy.
 



chapter xi
 

sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, i’ve got up in
 sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the
 farm. i’ve persuaded my conscience that it was duty to warn him how
 people talked regarding his ways; and then i’ve recollected his
 confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting him, have flinched
 from re-entering the dismal house, doubting if i could bear to be taken
 at my word.
 
one time i passed the old gate, going out of my way, on journey to
 gimmerton. it was about the period that my narrative has reached: a
 bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road hard and dry. i
 came to stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your
 left hand; rough sand-pillar, with the letters w. h. cut on its north
 side, on the east, g., and on the south-west, t. g. it serves as a
 guide-post to the grange, the heights, and village. the sun shone
 yellow on its grey head, reminding of summer; and i cannot say why,
 but all at once gush of child’s sensations flowed into my heart.
 hindley and i held it favourite spot twenty years before. i gazed
 long at the weather-worn block; and, stooping down, perceived hole
 near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which we were
 fond of storing there with more perishable things; and, as fresh as
 reality, it appeared that i beheld my early playmate seated on the
 withered turf: his dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand
 scooping out the earth with piece of slate. “poor hindley!” i
 exclaimed, involuntarily. i started: my bodily eye was cheated into a
 momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight
 into mine! it vanished in twinkling; but immediately i felt an
 irresistible yearning to be at the heights. superstition urged to
 comply with this impulse: supposing should be dead! i thought—or
 should die soon!—supposing it were sign of death! the nearer i got to
 the house the more agitated i grew; and on catching sight of it i
 trembled in every limb. the apparition had outstripped me: it stood
 looking through the gate. that was my first idea on observing an
 elf-locked, brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the
 bars. further reflection suggested this must be hareton, _my_ hareton,
 not altered greatly since i left him, ten months since.
 
“god bless thee, darling!” i cried, forgetting instantaneously my
 foolish fears. “hareton, it’s nelly! nelly, thy nurse.”
 
retreated out of arm’s length, and picked up large flint.
 
“i am come to see thy father, hareton,” i added, guessing from the
 action that nelly, if she lived in his memory at all, was not
 recognised as one with me.
 
raised his missile to hurl it; i commenced soothing speech, but
 could not stay his hand: the stone struck my bonnet; and then ensued,
 from the stammering lips of the little fellow, string of curses,
 which, whether comprehended them or not, were delivered with
 practised emphasis, and distorted his baby features into shocking
 expression of malignity. you may be certain this grieved more than
 angered me. fit to cry, i took an orange from my pocket, and offered it
 to propitiate him. hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold; as
 if fancied i only intended to tempt and disappoint him. i showed
 another, keeping it out of his reach.
 
“who has taught you those fine words, my bairn?” i inquired. “the
 curate?”
 
“damn the curate, and thee! gie that,” replied.
 
“tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it,” said i.
 “who’s your master?”
 
“devil daddy,” was his answer.
 
“and what do you learn from daddy?” i continued.
 
jumped at the fruit; i raised it higher. “what does teach you?” i
 asked.
 
“naught,” said he, “but to keep out of his gait. daddy cannot bide me,
 because i swear at him.”
 
“ah! and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?” i observed.
 
“ay—nay,” drawled.
 
“who, then?”
 
“heathcliff.”
 
“i asked if liked mr. heathcliff.”
 
“ay!” answered again.
 
desiring to have his reasons for liking him, i could only gather the
 sentences—“i known’t: pays dad back what gies to me—he curses
 daddy for cursing me. says i mun do as i will.”
 
“and the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?” i pursued.
 
“no, i was told the curate should have his —— teeth dashed down his ——
 throat, if stepped over the threshold—heathcliff had promised that!”
 
i put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that woman
 called nelly dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate. he
 went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of hindley,
 heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and i turned directly and ran
 down the road as hard as ever i could race, making halt till i
 gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if i had raised a
 goblin. this is not much connected with miss isabella’s affair: except
 that it urged to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and
 doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the
 grange: even though i should wake domestic storm, by thwarting mrs.
 linton’s pleasure.
 
the next time heathcliff came my young lady chanced to be feeding some
 pigeons in the court. she had never spoken word to her sister-in-law
 for three days; but she had likewise dropped her fretful complaining,
 and we found it great comfort. heathcliff had not the habit of
 bestowing single unnecessary civility on miss linton, i knew. now, as
 soon as beheld her, his first precaution was to take sweeping
 survey of the house-front. i was standing by the kitchen-window, but i
 drew out of sight. then stepped across the pavement to her, and said
 something: she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to
 prevent it, laid his hand on her arm. she averted her face: he
 apparently put some question which she had mind to answer. there was
 another rapid glance at the house, and supposing himself unseen, the
 scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her.
 
“judas! traitor!” i ejaculated. “you are hypocrite, too, are you? a
 deliberate deceiver.”
 
“who is, nelly?” said catherine’s voice at my elbow: i had been
 over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.
 
“your worthless friend!” i answered, warmly: “the sneaking rascal
 yonder. ah, has caught glimpse of us—he is coming in! i wonder
 will have the heart to find plausible excuse for making love to
 miss, when told you hated her?”
 
mrs. linton saw isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden;
 and minute after, heathcliff opened the door. i couldn’t withhold
 giving some loose to my indignation; but catherine angrily insisted on
 silence, and threatened to order out of the kitchen, if i dared to
 be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.
 
“to hear you, people might think you were the mistress!” she cried.
 “you want setting down in your right place! heathcliff, what are you
 about, raising this stir? i said you must let isabella alone!—i beg you
 will, unless you are tired of being received here, and wish linton to
 draw the bolts against you!”
 
“god forbid that should try!” answered the black villain. i detested
 him just then. “god keep him meek and patient! every day i grow madder
 after sending him to heaven!”
 
“hush!” said catherine, shutting the inner door. “don’t vex me. why
 have you disregarded my request? did she come across you on purpose?”
 
“what is it to you?” growled. “i have right to kiss her, if she
 chooses; and you have right to object. i am not _your_ husband:
 _you_ needn’t be jealous of me!”
 
“i’m not jealous of you,” replied the mistress; “i’m jealous for you.
 clear your face: you sha’n’t scowl at me! if you like isabella, you
 shall marry her. but do you like her? tell the truth, heathcliff!
 there, you won’t answer. i’m certain you don’t.”
 
“and would mr. linton approve of his sister marrying that man?” i
 inquired.
 
“mr. linton should approve,” returned my lady, decisively.
 
“he might spare himself the trouble,” said heathcliff: “i could do as
 well without his approbation. and as to you, catherine, i have mind
 to speak few words now, while we are at it. i want you to be aware
 that i _know_ you have treated infernally—infernally! do you hear?
 and if you flatter yourself that i don’t perceive it, you are fool;
 and if you think i can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot:
 and if you fancy i’ll suffer unrevenged, i’ll convince you of the
 contrary, in very little while! meantime, thank you for telling me
 your sister-in-law’s secret: i swear i’ll make the most of it. and
 stand you aside!”
 
“what new phase of his character is this?” exclaimed mrs. linton, in
 amazement. “i’ve treated you infernally—and you’ll take your revenge!
 how will you take it, ungrateful brute? how have i treated you
 infernally?”
 
“i seek revenge on you,” replied heathcliff, less vehemently.
 “that’s not the plan. the tyrant grinds down his slaves and they don’t
 turn against him; they crush those beneath them. you are welcome to
 torture to death for your amusement, only allow to amuse myself a
 little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are
 able. having levelled my palace, don’t erect hovel and complacently
 admire your own charity in giving that for home. if i imagined you
 really wished to marry isabel, i’d cut my throat!”
 
“oh, the evil is that i am _not_ jealous, is it?” cried catherine.
 “well, i won’t repeat my offer of wife: it is as bad as offering
 satan lost soul. your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery. you
 prove it. edgar is restored from the ill-temper gave way to at your
 coming; i begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us
 at peace, appear resolved on exciting quarrel. quarrel with edgar, if
 you please, heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you’ll hit on exactly
 the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.”
 
the conversation ceased. mrs. linton sat down by the fire, flushed and
 gloomy. the spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could
 neither lay nor control it. stood on the hearth with folded arms,
 brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position i left them to seek
 the master, who was wondering what kept catherine below so long.
 
“ellen,” said he, when i entered, “have you seen your mistress?”
 
“yes; she’s in the kitchen, sir,” i answered. “she’s sadly put out by
 mr. heathcliff’s behaviour: and, indeed, i do think it’s time to
 arrange his visits on another footing. there’s harm in being too soft,
 and now it’s come to this—.” and i related the scene in the court, and,
 as near as i dared, the whole subsequent dispute. i fancied it could
 not be very prejudicial to mrs. linton; unless she made it so
 afterwards, by assuming the defensive for her guest. edgar linton had
 difficulty in hearing to the close. his first words revealed that he
 did not clear his wife of blame.
 
“this is insufferable!” exclaimed. “it is disgraceful that she
 should own him for friend, and force his company on me! call two
 men out of the hall, ellen. catherine shall linger longer to argue
 with the low ruffian—i have humoured her enough.”
 
descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went,
 followed by me, to the kitchen. its occupants had recommenced their
 angry discussion: mrs. linton, at least, was scolding with renewed
 vigour; heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat
 cowed by her violent rating apparently. saw the master first, and
 made hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed,
 abruptly, on discovering the reason of his intimation.
 
“how is this?” said linton, addressing her; “what notion of propriety
 must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to
 you by that blackguard? i suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you
 think nothing of it: you are habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps,
 imagine i can get used to it too!”
 
“have you been listening at the door, edgar?” asked the mistress, in a
 tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband, implying both
 carelessness and contempt of his irritation. heathcliff, who had raised
 his eyes at the former speech, gave sneering laugh at the latter; on
 purpose, it seemed, to draw mr. linton’s attention to him. he
 succeeded; but edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high
 flights of passion.
 
“i’ve been so far forbearing with you, sir,” said quietly; “not that
 i was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but i felt you
 were only partly responsible for that; and catherine wishing to keep up
 your acquaintance, i acquiesced—foolishly. your presence is moral
 poison that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to
 prevent worse consequences, i shall deny you hereafter admission into
 this house, and give notice now that i require your instant departure.
 three minutes’ delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.”
 
heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye
 full of derision.
 
“cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like bull!” said. “it is in
 danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles. by god! mr. linton,
 i’m mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!”
 
my master glanced towards the passage, and signed to fetch the men:
 had intention of hazarding personal encounter. i obeyed the
 hint; but mrs. linton, suspecting something, followed; and when i
 attempted to call them, she pulled back, slammed the door to, and
 locked it.
 
“fair means!” she said, in answer to her husband’s look of angry
 surprise. “if you have not courage to attack him, make an apology, or
 allow yourself to be beaten. it will correct you of feigning more
 valour than you possess. no, i’ll swallow the key before you shall get
 it! i’m delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each! after constant
 indulgence of one’s weak nature, and the other’s bad one, i earn for
 thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity! edgar, i
 was defending you and yours; and i wish heathcliff may flog you sick,
 for daring to think an evil thought of me!”
 
it did not need the medium of flogging to produce that effect on the
 master. tried to wrest the key from catherine’s grasp, and for
 safety she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon mr.
 edgar was taken with nervous trembling, and his countenance grew
 deadly pale. for his life could not avert that excess of emotion:
 mingled anguish and humiliation overcame him completely. leant on
 the back of chair, and covered his face.
 
“oh, heavens! in old days this would win you knighthood!” exclaimed
 mrs. linton. “we are vanquished! we are vanquished! heathcliff would as
 soon lift finger at you as the king would march his army against a
 colony of mice. cheer up! you sha’n’t be hurt! your type is not lamb,
 it’s sucking leveret.”
 
“i wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, cathy!” said her friend. “i
 compliment you on your taste. and that is the slavering, shivering
 thing you preferred to me! i would not strike him with my fist, but i’d
 kick him with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction. is he
 weeping, or is going to faint for fear?”
 
the fellow approached and gave the chair on which linton rested push.
 he’d better have kept his distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and
 struck him full on the throat blow that would have levelled a
 slighter man. it took his breath for minute; and while choked, mr.
 linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to
 the front entrance.
 
“there! you’ve done with coming here,” cried catherine. “get away, now;
 he’ll return with brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants. if he
 did overhear us, of course he’d never forgive you. you’ve played an
 ill turn, heathcliff! but go—make haste! i’d rather see edgar at bay
 than you.”
 
“do you suppose i’m going with that blow burning in my gullet?” he
 thundered. “by hell, no! i’ll crush his ribs in like rotten hazel-nut
 before i cross the threshold! if i don’t floor him now, i shall murder
 him some time; so, as you value his existence, let get at him!”
 
“he is not coming,” i interposed, framing bit of lie. “there’s the
 coachman and the two gardeners; you’ll surely not wait to be thrust
 into the road by them! each has bludgeon; and master will, very
 likely, be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil
 his orders.”
 
the gardeners and coachman _were_ there: but linton was with them. they
 had already entered the court. heathcliff, on the second thoughts,
 resolved to avoid struggle against three underlings: seized the
 poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape as
 they tramped in.
 
mrs. linton, who was very much excited, bade accompany her upstairs.
 she did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and i was
 anxious to keep her in ignorance.
 
“i’m nearly distracted, nelly!” she exclaimed, throwing herself on the
 sofa. “a thousand smiths’ hammers are beating in my head! tell isabella
 to shun me; this uproar is owing to her; and should she or any one else
 aggravate my anger at present, i shall get wild. and, nelly, say to
 edgar, if you see him again to-night, that i’m in danger of being
 seriously ill. i wish it may prove true. has startled and distressed
 shockingly! i want to frighten him. besides, might come and begin
 string of abuse or complainings; i’m certain i should recriminate,
 and god knows where we should end! will you do so, my good nelly? you
 are aware that i am way blamable in this matter. what possessed him
 to turn listener? heathcliff’s talk was outrageous, after you left us;
 but i could soon have diverted him from isabella, and the rest meant
 nothing. now all is dashed wrong; by the fool’s craving to hear evil of
 self, that haunts some people like demon! had edgar never gathered
 our conversation, would never have been the worse for it. really,
 when opened on in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after i
 had scolded heathcliff till i was hoarse for _him;_ i did not care
 hardly what they did to each other; especially as i felt that, however
 the scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how
 long! well, if i cannot keep heathcliff for my friend—if edgar will be
 mean and jealous, i’ll try to break their hearts by breaking my own.
 that will be prompt way of finishing all, when i am pushed to
 extremity! but it’s deed to be reserved for forlorn hope; i’d not
 take linton by surprise with it. to this point has been discreet in
 dreading to provoke me; you must represent the peril of quitting that
 policy, and remind him of my passionate temper, verging, when kindled,
 on frenzy. i wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that
 countenance, and look rather more anxious about me.”
 
the stolidity with which i received these instructions was, doubt,
 rather exasperating: for they were delivered in perfect sincerity; but
 i believed person who could plan the turning of her fits of passion
 to account, beforehand, might, by exerting her will, manage to control
 herself tolerably, even while under their influence; and i did not wish
 to “frighten” her husband, as she said, and multiply his annoyances for
 the purpose of serving her selfishness. therefore i said nothing when i
 met the master coming towards the parlour; but i took the liberty of
 turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel
 together. began to speak first.
 
“remain where you are, catherine,” said; without any anger in his
 voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. “i shall not stay. i am
 neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but i wish just to learn
 whether, after this evening’s events, you intend to continue your
 intimacy with—”
 
“oh, for mercy’s sake,” interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot,
 “for mercy’s sake, let us hear more of it now! your cold blood
 cannot be worked into fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but
 mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance.”
 
“to get rid of me, answer my question,” persevered mr. linton. “you
 _must_ answer it; and that violence does not alarm me. i have found
 that you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please. will you give up
 heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me? it is impossible for you
 to be _my_ friend and _his_ at the same time; and i absolutely
 _require_ to know which you choose.”
 
“i require to be let alone!” exclaimed catherine, furiously. “i demand
 it! don’t you see i can scarcely stand? edgar, you—you leave me!”
 
she rang the bell till it broke with twang; i entered leisurely. it
 was enough to try the temper of saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
 there she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa, and
 grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy she would crash them to
 splinters! mr. linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and
 fear. told to fetch some water. she had breath for speaking. i
 brought glass full; and as she would not drink, i sprinkled it on her
 face. in few seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up
 her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the
 aspect of death. linton looked terrified.
 
“there is nothing in the world the matter,” i whispered. i did not want
 him to yield, though i could not help being afraid in my heart.
 
“she has blood on her lips!” said, shuddering.
 
“never mind!” i answered, tartly. and i told him how she had resolved,
 previous to his coming, on exhibiting fit of frenzy. i incautiously
 gave the account aloud, and she heard me; for she started up—her hair
 flying over her shoulders, her eyes flashing, the muscles of her neck
 and arms standing out preternaturally. i made up my mind for broken
 bones, at least; but she only glared about her for an instant, and then
 rushed from the room. the master directed to follow; i did, to her
 chamber-door: she hindered from going further by securing it against
 me.
 
as she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, i went to
 ask whether she would have some carried up. “no!” she replied,
 peremptorily. the same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and
 again on the morrow after, and received the same answer. mr. linton, on
 his part, spent his time in the library, and did not inquire concerning
 his wife’s occupations. isabella and had had an hour’s interview,
 during which tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper
 horror for heathcliff’s advances: but could make nothing of her
 evasive replies, and was obliged to close the examination
 unsatisfactorily; adding, however, solemn warning, that if she were
 so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all
 bonds of relationship between herself and him.
 



chapter xii
 

while miss linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and
 almost always in tears; and her brother shut himself up among books
 that never opened—wearying, i guessed, with continual vague
 expectation that catherine, repenting her conduct, would come of her
 own accord to ask pardon, and seek reconciliation—and _she_ fasted
 pertinaciously, under the idea, probably, that at every meal edgar was
 ready to choke for her absence, and pride alone held him from running
 to cast himself at her feet; i went about my household duties,
 convinced that the grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and
 that lodged in my body. i wasted condolences on miss, nor any
 expostulations on my mistress; nor did i pay much attention to the
 sighs of my master, who yearned to hear his lady’s name, since might
 not hear her voice. i determined they should come about as they pleased
 for me; and though it was tiresomely slow process, i began to rejoice
 at length in faint dawn of its progress: as i thought at first.
 
mrs. linton, on the third day, unbarred her door, and having finished
 the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired renewed supply, and a
 basin of gruel, for she believed she was dying. that i set down as a
 speech meant for edgar’s ears; i believed such thing, so i kept it
 to myself and brought her some tea and dry toast. she ate and drank
 eagerly, and sank back on her pillow again, clenching her hands and
 groaning. “oh, i will die,” she exclaimed, “since one cares anything
 about me. i wish i had not taken that.” then good while after i heard
 her murmur, “no, i’ll not die—he’d be glad—he does not love at
 all—he would never miss me!”
 
“did you want anything, ma’am?” i inquired, still preserving my
 external composure, in spite of her ghastly countenance and strange,
 exaggerated manner.
 
“what is that apathetic being doing?” she demanded, pushing the thick
 entangled locks from her wasted face. “has fallen into lethargy,
 or is dead?”
 
“neither,” replied i; “if you mean mr. linton. he’s tolerably well, i
 think, though his studies occupy him rather more than they ought: is
 continually among his books, since has other society.”
 
i should not have spoken so if i had known her true condition, but i
 could not get rid of the notion that she acted part of her disorder.
 
“among his books!” she cried, confounded. “and i dying! i on the brink
 of the grave! my god! does know how i’m altered?” continued she,
 staring at her reflection in mirror hanging against the opposite
 wall. “is that catherine linton? imagines in pet—in play,
 perhaps. cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest? nelly, if
 it be not too late, as soon as i learn how feels, i’ll choose
 between these two: either to starve at once—that would be punishment
 unless had heart—or to recover, and leave the country. are you
 speaking the truth about him now? take care. is actually so utterly
 indifferent for my life?”
 
“why, ma’am,” i answered, “the master has idea of your being
 deranged; and of course does not fear that you will let yourself die
 of hunger.”
 
“you think not? cannot you tell him i will?” she returned. “persuade
 him! speak of your own mind: say you are certain i will!”
 
“no, you forget, mrs. linton,” i suggested, “that you have eaten some
 food with relish this evening, and to-morrow you will perceive its
 good effects.”
 
“if i were only sure it would kill him,” she interrupted, “i’d kill
 myself directly! these three awful nights i’ve never closed my lids—and
 oh, i’ve been tormented! i’ve been haunted, nelly! but i begin to fancy
 you don’t like me. how strange! i thought, though everybody hated and
 despised each other, they could not avoid loving me. and they have all
 turned to enemies in few hours. _they_ have, i’m positive; the people
 _here_. how dreary to meet death, surrounded by their cold faces!
 isabella, terrified and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be
 so dreadful to watch catherine go. and edgar standing solemnly by to
 see it over; then offering prayers of thanks to god for restoring peace
 to his house, and going back to his _books_! what in the name of all
 that feels has to do with _books_, when i am dying?”
 
she could not bear the notion which i had put into her head of mr.
 linton’s philosophical resignation. tossing about, she increased her
 feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the pillow with her teeth;
 then raising herself up all burning, desired that i would open the
 window. we were in the middle of winter, the wind blew strong from the
 north-east, and i objected. both the expressions flitting over her
 face, and the changes of her moods, began to alarm terribly; and
 brought to my recollection her former illness, and the doctor’s
 injunction that she should not be crossed. minute previously she was
 violent; now, supported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey
 her, she seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers from
 the rents she had just made, and ranging them on the sheet according to
 their different species: her mind had strayed to other associations.
 
“that’s turkey’s,” she murmured to herself; “and this is wild
 duck’s; and this is pigeon’s. ah, they put pigeons’ feathers in the
 pillows—no wonder i couldn’t die! let take care to throw it on the
 floor when i lie down. and here is moor-cock’s; and this—i should
 know it among thousand—it’s lapwing’s. bonny bird; wheeling over
 our heads in the middle of the moor. it wanted to get to its nest, for
 the clouds had touched the swells, and it felt rain coming. this
 feather was picked up from the heath, the bird was not shot: we saw its
 nest in the winter, full of little skeletons. heathcliff set trap
 over it, and the old ones dared not come. i made him promise he’d never
 shoot lapwing after that, and didn’t. yes, here are more! did he
 shoot my lapwings, nelly? are they red, any of them? let look.”
 
“give over with that baby-work!” i interrupted, dragging the pillow
 away, and turning the holes towards the mattress, for she was removing
 its contents by handfuls. “lie down and shut your eyes: you’re
 wandering. there’s mess! the down is flying about like snow.”
 
i went here and there collecting it.
 
“i see in you, nelly,” she continued dreamily, “an aged woman: you have
 grey hair and bent shoulders. this bed is the fairy cave under
 penistone crags, and you are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers;
 pretending, while i am near, that they are only locks of wool. that’s
 what you’ll come to fifty years hence: i know you are not so now. i’m
 not wandering: you’re mistaken, or else i should believe you really
 _were_ that withered hag, and i should think i _was_ under penistone
 crags; and i’m conscious it’s night, and there are two candles on the
 table making the black press shine like jet.”
 
“the black press? where is that?” i asked. “you are talking in your
 sleep!”
 
“it’s against the wall, as it always is,” she replied. “it _does_
 appear odd—i see face in it!”
 
“there’s press in the room, and never was,” said i, resuming my
 seat, and looping up the curtain that i might watch her.
 
“don’t _you_ see that face?” she inquired, gazing earnestly at the
 mirror.
 
and say what i could, i was incapable of making her comprehend it to be
 her own; so i rose and covered it with shawl.
 
“it’s behind there still!” she pursued, anxiously. “and it stirred. who
 is it? i hope it will not come out when you are gone! oh! nelly, the
 room is haunted! i’m afraid of being alone!”
 
i took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed; for succession of
 shudders convulsed her frame, and she _would_ keep straining her gaze
 towards the glass.
 
“there’s nobody here!” i insisted. “it was _yourself_, mrs. linton: you
 knew it while since.”
 
“myself!” she gasped, “and the clock is striking twelve! it’s true,
 then! that’s dreadful!”
 
her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her eyes. i
 attempted to steal to the door with an intention of calling her
 husband; but i was summoned back by piercing shriek—the shawl had
 dropped from the frame.
 
“why, what _is_ the matter?” cried i. “who is coward now? wake up! that
 is the glass—the mirror, mrs. linton; and you see yourself in it, and
 there am i too by your side.”
 
trembling and bewildered, she held fast, but the horror gradually
 passed from her countenance; its paleness gave place to glow of
 shame.
 
“oh, dear! i thought i was at home,” she sighed. “i thought i was lying
 in my chamber at wuthering heights. because i’m weak, my brain got
 confused, and i screamed unconsciously. don’t say anything; but stay
 with me. i dread sleeping: my dreams appal me.”
 
“a sound sleep would do you good, ma’am,” i answered: “and i hope this
 suffering will prevent your trying starving again.”
 
“oh, if i were but in my own bed in the old house!” she went on
 bitterly, wringing her hands. “and that wind sounding in the firs by
 the lattice. do let feel it—it comes straight down the moor—do let
 have one breath!”
 
to pacify her i held the casement ajar few seconds. cold blast
 rushed through; i closed it, and returned to my post. she lay still
 now, her face bathed in tears. exhaustion of body had entirely subdued
 her spirit: our fiery catherine was better than wailing child.
 
“how long is it since i shut myself in here?” she asked, suddenly
 reviving.
 
“it was monday evening,” i replied, “and this is thursday night, or
 rather friday morning, at present.”
 
“what! of the same week?” she exclaimed. “only that brief time?”
 
“long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,”
 observed i.
 
“well, it seems weary number of hours,” she muttered doubtfully: “it
 must be more. i remember being in the parlour after they had
 quarrelled, and edgar being cruelly provoking, and running into this
 room desperate. as soon as ever i had barred the door, utter blackness
 overwhelmed me, and i fell on the floor. i couldn’t explain to edgar
 how certain i felt of having fit, or going raging mad, if he
 persisted in teasing me! i had command of tongue, or brain, and he
 did not guess my agony, perhaps: it barely left sense to try to
 escape from him and his voice. before i recovered sufficiently to see
 and hear, it began to be dawn, and, nelly, i’ll tell you what i
 thought, and what has kept recurring and recurring till i feared for my
 reason. i thought as i lay there, with my head against that table leg,
 and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window, that i was
 enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home; and my heart ached with some
 great grief which, just waking, i could not recollect. i pondered, and
 worried myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the
 whole last seven years of my life grew blank! i did not recall that
 they had been at all. i was child; my father was just buried, and my
 misery arose from the separation that hindley had ordered between me
 and heathcliff. i was laid alone, for the first time; and, rousing from
 dismal doze after night of weeping, i lifted my hand to push the
 panels aside: it struck the table-top! i swept it along the carpet, and
 then memory burst in: my late anguish was swallowed in paroxysm of
 despair. i cannot say why i felt so wildly wretched: it must have been
 temporary derangement; for there is scarcely cause. but, supposing at
 twelve years old i had been wrenched from the heights, and every early
 association, and my all in all, as heathcliff was at that time, and
 been converted at stroke into mrs. linton, the lady of thrushcross
 grange, and the wife of stranger: an exile, and outcast, thenceforth,
 from what had been my world. you may fancy glimpse of the abyss where
 i grovelled! shake your head as you will, nelly, _you_ have helped to
 unsettle me! you should have spoken to edgar, indeed you should, and
 compelled him to leave quiet! oh, i’m burning! i wish i were out of
 doors! i wish i were girl again, half savage and hardy, and free; and
 laughing at injuries, not maddening under them! why am i so changed?
 why does my blood rush into hell of tumult at few words? i’m sure i
 should be myself were i once among the heather on those hills. open the
 window again wide: fasten it open! quick, why don’t you move?”
 
“because i won’t give you your death of cold,” i answered.
 
“you won’t give chance of life, you mean,” she said sullenly.
 “however, i’m not helpless yet; i’ll open it myself.”
 
and sliding from the bed before i could hinder her, she crossed the
 room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and bent out, careless
 of the frosty air that cut about her shoulders as keen as knife. i
 entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire. but i soon
 found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she _was_ delirious,
 i became convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings). there was no
 moon, and everything beneath lay in misty darkness: not light gleamed
 from any house, far or near; all had been extinguished long ago: and
 those at wuthering heights were never visible—still she asserted she
 caught their shining.
 
“look!” she cried eagerly, “that’s my room with the candle in it, and
 the trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in joseph’s
 garret. joseph sits up late, doesn’t he? he’s waiting till i come home
 that may lock the gate. well, he’ll wait while yet. it’s rough
 journey, and sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by gimmerton
 kirk to go that journey! we’ve braved its ghosts often together, and
 dared each other to stand among the graves and ask them to come. but,
 heathcliff, if i dare you now, will you venture? if you do, i’ll keep
 you. i’ll not lie there by myself: they may bury twelve feet deep,
 and throw the church down over me, but i won’t rest till you are with
 me. i never will!”
 
she paused, and resumed with strange smile. “he’s considering—he’d
 rather i’d come to him! find way, then! not through that kirkyard.
 you are slow! be content, you always followed me!”
 
perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, i was planning how i
 could reach something to wrap about her, without quitting my hold of
 herself (for i could not trust her alone by the gaping lattice), when,
 to my consternation, i heard the rattle of the door-handle, and mr.
 linton entered. had only then come from the library; and, in passing
 through the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted by
 curiosity, or fear, to examine what it signified, at that late hour.
 
“oh, sir!” i cried, checking the exclamation risen to his lips at the
 sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber. “my poor
 mistress is ill, and she quite masters me: i cannot manage her at all;
 pray, come and persuade her to go to bed. forget your anger, for she’s
 hard to guide any way but her own.”
 
“catherine ill?” said, hastening to us. “shut the window, ellen!
 catherine! why—”
 
was silent. the haggardness of mrs. linton’s appearance smote him
 speechless, and could only glance from her to in horrified
 astonishment.
 
“she’s been fretting here,” i continued, “and eating scarcely anything,
 and never complaining: she would admit none of us till this evening,
 and so we couldn’t inform you of her state, as we were not aware of it
 ourselves; but it is nothing.”
 
i felt i uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master frowned. “it is
 nothing, is it, ellen dean?” said sternly. “you shall account more
 clearly for keeping ignorant of this!” and took his wife in his
 arms, and looked at her with anguish.
 
at first she gave him glance of recognition: was invisible to her
 abstracted gaze. the delirium was not fixed, however; having weaned her
 eyes from contemplating the outer darkness, by degrees she centred her
 attention on him, and discovered who it was that held her.
 
“ah! you are come, are you, edgar linton?” she said, with angry
 animation. “you are one of those things that are ever found when least
 wanted, and when you are wanted, never! i suppose we shall have plenty
 of lamentations now—i see we shall—but they can’t keep from my
 narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where i’m bound before spring
 is over! there it is: not among the lintons, mind, under the
 chapel-roof, but in the open air, with head-stone; and you may please
 yourself whether you go to them or come to me!”
 
“catherine, what have you done?” commenced the master. “am i nothing to
 you any more? do you love that wretch heath—”
 
“hush!” cried mrs. linton. “hush, this moment! you mention that name
 and i end the matter instantly by spring from the window! what you
 touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that hill-top
 before you lay hands on again. i don’t want you, edgar: i’m past
 wanting you. return to your books. i’m glad you possess consolation,
 for all you had in is gone.”
 
“her mind wanders, sir,” i interposed. “she has been talking nonsense
 the whole evening; but let her have quiet, and proper attendance, and
 she’ll rally. hereafter, we must be cautious how we vex her.”
 
“i desire further advice from you,” answered mr. linton. “you knew
 your mistress’s nature, and you encouraged to harass her. and not to
 give one hint of how she has been these three days! it was
 heartless! months of sickness could not cause such change!”
 
i began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for
 another’s wicked waywardness. “i knew mrs. linton’s nature to be
 headstrong and domineering,” cried i: “but i didn’t know that you
 wished to foster her fierce temper! i didn’t know that, to humour her,
 i should wink at mr. heathcliff. i performed the duty of faithful
 servant in telling you, and i have got faithful servant’s wages!
 well, it will teach to be careful next time. next time you may
 gather intelligence for yourself!”
 
“the next time you bring tale to you shall quit my service, ellen
 dean,” replied.
 
“you’d rather hear nothing about it, i suppose, then, mr. linton?” said
 i. “heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to miss, and to
 drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison
 the mistress against you?”
 
confused as catherine was, her wits were alert at applying our
 conversation.
 
“ah! nelly has played traitor,” she exclaimed, passionately. “nelly is
 my hidden enemy. you witch! so you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us! let me
 go, and i’ll make her rue! i’ll make her howl recantation!”
 
maniac’s fury kindled under her brows; she struggled desperately to
 disengage herself from linton’s arms. i felt inclination to tarry
 the event; and, resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibility,
 i quitted the chamber.
 
in passing the garden to reach the road, at place where bridle hook
 is driven into the wall, i saw something white moved irregularly,
 evidently by another agent than the wind. notwithstanding my hurry, i
 stayed to examine it, lest ever after i should have the conviction
 impressed on my imagination that it was creature of the other world.
 my surprise and perplexity were great on discovering, by touch more
 than vision, miss isabella’s springer, fanny, suspended by a
 handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp. i quickly released the
 animal, and lifted it into the garden. i had seen it follow its
 mistress upstairs when she went to bed; and wondered much how it could
 have got out there, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
 while untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to that i
 repeatedly caught the beat of horses’ feet galloping at some distance;
 but there were such number of things to occupy my reflections that i
 hardly gave the circumstance thought: though it was strange sound,
 in that place, at two o’clock in the morning.
 
mr. kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to see a
 patient in the village as i came up the street; and my account of
 catherine linton’s malady induced him to accompany back immediately.
 was plain rough man; and made scruple to speak his doubts of
 her surviving this second attack; unless she were more submissive to
 his directions than she had shown herself before.
 
“nelly dean,” said he, “i can’t help fancying there’s an extra cause
 for this. what has there been to do at the grange? we’ve odd reports up
 here. stout, hearty lass like catherine does not fall ill for a
 trifle; and that sort of people should not either. it’s hard work
 bringing them through fevers, and such things. how did it begin?”
 
“the master will inform you,” i answered; “but you are acquainted with
 the earnshaws’ violent dispositions, and mrs. linton caps them all. i
 may say this; it commenced in quarrel. she was struck during a
 tempest of passion with kind of fit. that’s her account, at least:
 for she flew off in the height of it, and locked herself up.
 afterwards, she refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and
 remains in half dream; knowing those about her, but having her mind
 filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions.”
 
“mr. linton will be sorry?” observed kenneth, interrogatively.
 
“sorry? he’ll break his heart should anything happen!” i replied.
 “don’t alarm him more than necessary.”
 
“well, i told him to beware,” said my companion; “and must bide the
 consequences of neglecting my warning! hasn’t been intimate with mr.
 heathcliff lately?”
 
“heathcliff frequently visits at the grange,” answered i, “though more
 on the strength of the mistress having known him when boy, than
 because the master likes his company. at present he’s discharged from
 the trouble of calling; owing to some presumptuous aspirations after
 miss linton which manifested. i hardly think he’ll be taken in
 again.”
 
“and does miss linton turn cold shoulder on him?” was the doctor’s
 next question.
 
“i’m not in her confidence,” returned i, reluctant to continue the
 subject.
 
“no, she’s sly one,” remarked, shaking his head. “she keeps her
 own counsel! but she’s real little fool. i have it from good
 authority that last night (and pretty night it was!) she and
 heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back of your house
 above two hours; and pressed her not to go in again, but just mount
 his horse and away with him! my informant said she could only put him
 off by pledging her word of honour to be prepared on their first
 meeting after that: when it was to be didn’t hear; but you urge mr.
 linton to look sharp!”
 
this news filled with fresh fears; i outstripped kenneth, and ran
 most of the way back. the little dog was yelping in the garden yet. i
 spared minute to open the gate for it, but instead of going to the
 house door, it coursed up and down snuffing the grass, and would have
 escaped to the road, had i not seized it and conveyed it in with me. on
 ascending to isabella’s room, my suspicions were confirmed: it was
 empty. had i been few hours sooner mrs. linton’s illness might have
 arrested her rash step. but what could be done now? there was bare
 possibility of overtaking them if pursued instantly. _i_ could not
 pursue them, however; and i dared not rouse the family, and fill the
 place with confusion; still less unfold the business to my master,
 absorbed as was in his present calamity, and having heart to
 spare for second grief! i saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue,
 and suffer matters to take their course; and kenneth being arrived, i
 went with badly composed countenance to announce him. catherine lay
 in troubled sleep: her husband had succeeded in soothing the excess
 of frenzy; now hung over her pillow, watching every shade and every
 change of her painfully expressive features.
 
the doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hopefully to him
 of its having favourable termination, if we could only preserve
 around her perfect and constant tranquillity. to me, signified the
 threatening danger was not so much death, as permanent alienation of
 intellect.
 
i did not close my eyes that night, nor did mr. linton: indeed, we
 never went to bed; and the servants were all up long before the usual
 hour, moving through the house with stealthy tread, and exchanging
 whispers as they encountered each other in their vocations. every one
 was active but miss isabella; and they began to remark how sound she
 slept: her brother, too, asked if she had risen, and seemed impatient
 for her presence, and hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her
 sister-in-law. i trembled lest should send to call her; but i was
 spared the pain of being the first proclaimant of her flight. one of
 the maids, thoughtless girl, who had been on an early errand to
 gimmerton, came panting upstairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the
 chamber, crying: “oh, dear, dear! what mun we have next? master,
 master, our young lady—”
 
“hold your noise!” cried i hastily, enraged at her clamorous manner.
 
“speak lower, mary—what is the matter?” said mr. linton. “what ails
 your young lady?”
 
“she’s gone, she’s gone! yon’ heathcliff’s run off wi’ her!” gasped the
 girl.
 
“that is not true!” exclaimed linton, rising in agitation. “it cannot
 be: how has the idea entered your head? ellen dean, go and seek her. it
 is incredible: it cannot be.”
 
as spoke took the servant to the door, and then repeated his
 demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.
 
“why, i met on the road lad that fetches milk here,” she stammered,
 “and asked whether we weren’t in trouble at the grange. i thought he
 meant for missis’s sickness, so i answered, yes. then says he, ‘there’s
 somebody gone after ’em, i guess?’ i stared. saw i knew nought about
 it, and told how gentleman and lady had stopped to have horse’s
 shoe fastened at blacksmith’s shop, two miles out of gimmerton, not
 very long after midnight! and how the blacksmith’s lass had got up to
 spy who they were: she knew them both directly. and she noticed the
 man—heathcliff it was, she felt certain: nob’dy could mistake him,
 besides—put sovereign in her father’s hand for payment. the lady had
 cloak about her face; but having desired sup of water, while she
 drank it fell back, and she saw her very plain. heathcliff held both
 bridles as they rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and
 went as fast as the rough roads would let them. the lass said nothing
 to her father, but she told it all over gimmerton this morning.”
 
i ran and peeped, for form’s sake, into isabella’s room; confirming,
 when i returned, the servant’s statement. mr. linton had resumed his
 seat by the bed; on my re-entrance, raised his eyes, read the
 meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped them without giving an order,
 or uttering word.
 
“are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing her back,” i
 inquired. “how should we do?”
 
“she went of her own accord,” answered the master; “she had right to
 go if she pleased. trouble more about her. hereafter she is only
 my sister in name: not because i disown her, but because she has
 disowned me.”
 
and that was all said on the subject: did not make single inquiry
 further, or mention her in any way, except directing to send what
 property she had in the house to her fresh home, wherever it was, when
 i knew it.
 



chapter xiii
 

for two months the fugitives remained absent; in those two months, mrs.
 linton encountered and conquered the worst shock of what was
 denominated brain fever. mother could have nursed an only child
 more devotedly than edgar tended her. day and night was watching,
 and patiently enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a
 shaken reason could inflict; and, though kenneth remarked that what he
 saved from the grave would only recompense his care by forming the
 source of constant future anxiety—in fact, that his health and strength
 were being sacrificed to preserve mere ruin of humanity—he knew no
 limits in gratitude and joy when catherine’s life was declared out of
 danger; and hour after hour would sit beside her, tracing the
 gradual return to bodily health, and flattering his too sanguine hopes
 with the illusion that her mind would settle back to its right balance
 also, and she would soon be entirely her former self.
 
the first time she left her chamber was at the commencement of the
 following march. mr. linton had put on her pillow, in the morning, a
 handful of golden crocuses; her eye, long stranger to any gleam of
 pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone delighted as she gathered
 them eagerly together.
 
“these are the earliest flowers at the heights,” she exclaimed. “they
 remind of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and nearly melted
 snow. edgar, is there not south wind, and is not the snow almost
 gone?”
 
“the snow is quite gone down here, darling,” replied her husband; “and
 i only see two white spots on the whole range of moors: the sky is
 blue, and the larks are singing, and the becks and brooks are all brim
 full. catherine, last spring at this time, i was longing to have you
 under this roof; now, i wish you were mile or two up those hills: the
 air blows so sweetly, i feel that it would cure you.”
 
“i shall never be there but once more,” said the invalid; “and then
 you’ll leave me, and i shall remain for ever. next spring you’ll long
 again to have under this roof, and you’ll look back and think you
 were happy to-day.”
 
linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer her by
 the fondest words; but, vaguely regarding the flowers, she let the
 tears collect on her lashes and stream down her cheeks unheeding. we
 knew she was really better, and, therefore, decided that long
 confinement to single place produced much of this despondency, and it
 might be partially removed by change of scene. the master told to
 light fire in the many-weeks’ deserted parlour, and to set an
 easy-chair in the sunshine by the window; and then brought her down,
 and she sat long while enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected,
 revived by the objects round her: which, though familiar, were free
 from the dreary associations investing her hated sick chamber. by
 evening she seemed greatly exhausted; yet arguments could persuade
 her to return to that apartment, and i had to arrange the parlour sofa
 for her bed, till another room could be prepared. to obviate the
 fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs, we fitted up this, where
 you lie at present—on the same floor with the parlour; and she was soon
 strong enough to move from one to the other, leaning on edgar’s arm.
 ah, i thought myself, she might recover, so waited on as she was. and
 there was double cause to desire it, for on her existence depended that
 of another: we cherished the hope that in little while mr. linton’s
 heart would be gladdened, and his lands secured from stranger’s
 gripe, by the birth of an heir.
 
i should mention that isabella sent to her brother, some six weeks from
 her departure, short note, announcing her marriage with heathcliff.
 it appeared dry and cold; but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil
 an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind remembrance and
 reconciliation, if her proceeding had offended him: asserting that she
 could not help it then, and being done, she had now power to repeal
 it. linton did not reply to this, i believe; and, in fortnight more,
 i got long letter, which i considered odd, coming from the pen of a
 bride just out of the honeymoon. i’ll read it: for i keep it yet. any
 relic of the dead is precious, if they were valued living.
 
* * * * *
 

dear ellen, it begins,—i came last night to wuthering heights, and
 heard, for the first time, that catherine has been, and is yet, very
 ill. i must not write to her, i suppose, and my brother is either too
 angry or too distressed to answer what i sent him. still, i must write
 to somebody, and the only choice left is you.
 
inform edgar that i’d give the world to see his face again—that my
 heart returned to thrushcross grange in twenty-four hours after i left
 it, and is there at this moment, full of warm feelings for him, and
 catherine! _i can’t follow it though_—(these words are underlined)—they
 need not expect me, and they may draw what conclusions they please;
 taking care, however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or
 deficient affection.
 
the remainder of the letter is for yourself alone. i want to ask you
 two questions: the first is,—how did you contrive to preserve the
 common sympathies of human nature when you resided here? i cannot
 recognise any sentiment which those around share with me.
 
the second question i have great interest in; it is this—is mr.
 heathcliff man? if so, is mad? and if not, is devil? i
 sha’n’t tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but i beseech you to
 explain, if you can, what i have married: that is, when you call to see
 me; and you must call, ellen, very soon. don’t write, but come, and
 bring something from edgar.
 
now, you shall hear how i have been received in my new home, as i am
 led to imagine the heights will be. it is to amuse myself that i dwell
 on such subjects as the lack of external comforts: they never occupy my
 thoughts, except at the moment when i miss them. i should laugh and
 dance for joy, if i found their absence was the total of my miseries,
 and the rest was an unnatural dream!
 
the sun set behind the grange as we turned on to the moors; by that, i
 judged it to be six o’clock; and my companion halted half an hour, to
 inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as
 well as could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard
 of the farmhouse, and your old fellow-servant, joseph, issued out to
 receive us by the light of dip candle. did it with courtesy that
 redounded to his credit. his first act was to elevate his torch to a
 level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn
 away. then took the two horses, and led them into the stables;
 reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived
 in an ancient castle.
 
heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and i entered the kitchen—a dingy,
 untidy hole; i daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it
 was in your charge. by the fire stood ruffianly child, strong in limb
 and dirty in garb, with look of catherine in his eyes and about his
 mouth.
 
“this is edgar’s legal nephew,” i reflected—“mine in manner; i must
 shake hands, and—yes—i must kiss him. it is right to establish good
 understanding at the beginning.”
 
i approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said—“how do you
 do, my dear?”
 
replied in jargon i did not comprehend.
 
“shall you and i be friends, hareton?” was my next essay at
 conversation.
 
an oath, and threat to set throttler on if i did not “frame off”
 rewarded my perseverance.
 
“hey, throttler, lad!” whispered the little wretch, rousing half-bred
 bull-dog from its lair in corner. “now, wilt thou be ganging?” he
 asked authoritatively.
 
love for my life urged compliance; i stepped over the threshold to
 wait till the others should enter. mr. heathcliff was nowhere visible;
 and joseph, whom i followed to the stables, and requested to accompany
 in, after staring and muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and
 replied—“mim! mim! mim! did iver christian body hear aught like it?
 mincing un’ munching! how can i tell whet ye say?”
 
“i say, i wish you to come with into the house!” i cried, thinking
 him deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
 
“none o’ me! i getten summut else to do,” answered, and continued
 his work; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and surveying my dress and
 countenance (the former great deal too fine, but the latter, i’m
 sure, as sad as could desire) with sovereign contempt.
 
i walked round the yard, and through wicket, to another door, at
 which i took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant
 might show himself. after short suspense, it was opened by tall,
 gaunt man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his
 features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders;
 and _his_ eyes, too, were like ghostly catherine’s with all their
 beauty annihilated.
 
“what’s your business here?” demanded, grimly. “who are you?”
 
“my name _was_ isabella linton,” i replied. “you’ve seen before,
 sir. i’m lately married to mr. heathcliff, and has brought here—i
 suppose by your permission.”
 
“is come back, then?” asked the hermit, glaring like hungry wolf.
 
“yes—we came just now,” i said; “but left by the kitchen door;
 and when i would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the
 place, and frightened off by the help of bull-dog.”
 
“it’s well the hellish villain has kept his word!” growled my future
 host, searching the darkness beyond in expectation of discovering
 heathcliff; and then indulged in soliloquy of execrations, and
 threats of what would have done had the “fiend” deceived him.
 
i repented having tried this second entrance, and was almost inclined
 to slip away before finished cursing, but ere i could execute that
 intention, ordered in, and shut and re-fastened the door. there
 was great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apartment,
 whose floor had grown uniform grey; and the once brilliant
 pewter-dishes, which used to attract my gaze when i was girl, partook
 of similar obscurity, created by tarnish and dust. i inquired whether
 i might call the maid, and be conducted to bedroom! mr. earnshaw
 vouchsafed answer. walked up and down, with his hands in his
 pockets, apparently quite forgetting my presence; and his abstraction
 was evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropical, that i
 shrank from disturbing him again.
 
you’ll not be surprised, ellen, at my feeling particularly cheerless,
 seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and
 remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing
 the only people i loved on earth; and there might as well be the
 atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: i could not overpass
 them! i questioned with myself—where must i turn for comfort? and—mind
 you don’t tell edgar, or catherine—above every sorrow beside, this rose
 pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally
 against heathcliff! i had sought shelter at wuthering heights, almost
 gladly, because i was secured by that arrangement from living alone
 with him; but knew the people we were coming amongst, and did not
 fear their intermeddling.
 
i sat and thought doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and
 still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and
 perfectly silent, unless groan or bitter ejaculation forced itself
 out at intervals. i listened to detect woman’s voice in the house,
 and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations,
 which, at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping. i
 was not aware how openly i grieved, till earnshaw halted opposite, in
 his measured walk, and gave stare of newly-awakened surprise.
 taking advantage of his recovered attention, i exclaimed—“i’m tired
 with my journey, and i want to go to bed! where is the maid-servant?
 direct to her, as she won’t come to me!”
 
“we have none,” answered; “you must wait on yourself!”
 
“where must i sleep, then?” i sobbed; i was beyond regarding
 self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.
 
“joseph will show you heathcliff’s chamber,” said he; “open that
 door—he’s in there.”
 
i was going to obey, but suddenly arrested me, and added in the
 strangest tone—“be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
 bolt—don’t omit it!”
 
“well!” i said. “but why, mr. earnshaw?” i did not relish the notion of
 deliberately fastening myself in with heathcliff.
 
“look here!” replied, pulling from his waistcoat a
 curiously-constructed pistol, having double-edged spring knife
 attached to the barrel. “that’s great tempter to desperate man, is
 it not? i cannot resist going up with this every night, and trying his
 door. if once i find it open he’s done for; i do it invariably, even
 though the minute before i have been recalling hundred reasons that
 should make refrain: it is some devil that urges to thwart my own
 schemes by killing him. you fight against that devil for love as long
 as you may; when the time comes, not all the angels in heaven shall
 save him!”
 
i surveyed the weapon inquisitively. hideous notion struck me: how
 powerful i should be possessing such an instrument! i took it from his
 hand, and touched the blade. looked astonished at the expression my
 face assumed during brief second: it was not horror, it was
 covetousness. snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife,
 and returned it to its concealment.
 
“i don’t care if you tell him,” said he. “put him on his guard, and
 watch for him. you know the terms we are on, i see: his danger does not
 shock you.”
 
“what has heathcliff done to you?” i asked. “in what has wronged
 you, to warrant this appalling hatred? wouldn’t it be wiser to bid him
 quit the house?”
 
“no!” thundered earnshaw; “should offer to leave me, he’s dead
 man: persuade him to attempt it, and you are murderess! am i to lose
 _all_, without chance of retrieval? is hareton to be beggar? oh,
 damnation! i _will_ have it back; and i’ll have _his_ gold too; and
 then his blood; and hell shall have his soul! it will be ten times
 blacker with that guest than ever it was before!”
 
you’ve acquainted me, ellen, with your old master’s habits. is
 clearly on the verge of madness: was so last night at least. i
 shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant’s ill-bred
 moroseness as comparatively agreeable. now recommenced his moody
 walk, and i raised the latch, and escaped into the kitchen. joseph was
 bending over the fire, peering into large pan that swung above it;
 and wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by. the contents
 of the pan began to boil, and turned to plunge his hand into the
 bowl; i conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper,
 and, being hungry, i resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out
 sharply, “_i’ll_ make the porridge!” i removed the vessel out of his
 reach, and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit. “mr.
 earnshaw,” i continued, “directs to wait on myself: i will. i’m not
 going to act the lady among you, for fear i should starve.”
 
“gooid lord!” muttered, sitting down, and stroking his ribbed
 stockings from the knee to the ankle. “if there’s to be fresh
 ortherings—just when i getten used to two maisters, if i mun hev’ a
 _mistress_ set o’er my heead, it’s like time to be flitting. i niver
 _did_ think to see t’ day that i mud lave th’ owld place—but i doubt
 it’s nigh at hand!”
 
this lamentation drew notice from me: i went briskly to work,
 sighing to remember period when it would have been all merry fun; but
 compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance. it racked to recall
 past happiness and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its
 apparition, the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the
 handfuls of meal fell into the water. joseph beheld my style of cookery
 with growing indignation.
 
“thear!” ejaculated. “hareton, thou willn’t sup thy porridge
 to-neeght; they’ll be naught but lumps as big as my neive. thear,
 agean! i’d fling in bowl un’ all, if i wer ye! there, pale t’ guilp
 off, un’ then ye’ll hae done wi’t. bang, bang. it’s mercy t’ bothom
 isn’t deaved out!”
 
it _was_ rather rough mess, i own, when poured into the basins; four
 had been provided, and gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from
 the dairy, which hareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling
 from the expansive lip. i expostulated, and desired that should have
 his in mug; affirming that i could not taste the liquid treated so
 dirtily. the old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety;
 assuring me, repeatedly, that “the barn was every bit as good” as i,
 “and every bit as wollsome,” and wondering how i could fashion to be so
 conceited. meanwhile, the infant ruffian continued sucking; and
 glowered up at defyingly, as slavered into the jug.
 
“i shall have my supper in another room,” i said. “have you place
 you call parlour?”
 
“_parlour_!” echoed, sneeringly, “_parlour_! nay, we’ve noa
 _parlours_. if yah dunnut loike wer company, there’s maister’s; un’ if
 yah dunnut loike maister, there’s us.”
 
“then i shall go upstairs,” i answered; “show chamber.”
 
i put my basin on tray, and went myself to fetch some more milk. with
 great grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded in my ascent: we
 mounted to the garrets; opened door, now and then, to look into
 the apartments we passed.
 
“here’s rahm,” said, at last, flinging back cranky board on
 hinges. “it’s weel eneugh to ate few porridge in. there’s pack o’
 corn i’ t’ corner, thear, meeterly clane; if ye’re feared o’ muckying
 yer grand silk cloes, spread yer hankerchir o’ t’ top on’t.”
 
the “rahm” was kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of malt and grain;
 various sacks of which articles were piled around, leaving wide, bare
 space in the middle.
 
“why, man,” i exclaimed, facing him angrily, “this is not place to
 sleep in. i wish to see my bed-room.”
 
“_bed-rume_!” repeated, in tone of mockery. “yah’s see all t’
 _bed-rumes_ thear is—yon’s mine.”
 
pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first in
 being more naked about the walls, and having large, low, curtainless
 bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.
 
“what do i want with yours?” i retorted. “i suppose mr. heathcliff does
 not lodge at the top of the house, does he?”
 
“oh! it’s maister _hathecliff’s_ ye’re wanting?” cried he, as if making
 new discovery. “couldn’t ye ha’ said soa, at onst? un’ then, i mud
 ha’ telled ye, baht all this wark, that that’s just one ye cannut
 see—he allas keeps it locked, un’ nob’dy iver mells on’t but hisseln.”
 
“you’ve nice house, joseph,” i could not refrain from observing, “and
 pleasant inmates; and i think the concentrated essence of all the
 madness in the world took up its abode in my brain the day i linked my
 fate with theirs! however, that is not to the present purpose—there are
 other rooms. for heaven’s sake be quick, and let settle somewhere!”
 
made reply to this adjuration; only plodding doggedly down the
 wooden steps, and halting before an apartment which, from that halt
 and the superior quality of its furniture, i conjectured to be the best
 one. there was carpet—a good one, but the pattern was obliterated by
 dust; fireplace hung with cut-paper, dropping to pieces; handsome
 oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtains of rather expensive material
 and modern make; but they had evidently experienced rough usage: the
 vallances hung in festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron rod
 supporting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the drapery to
 trail upon the floor. the chairs were also damaged, many of them
 severely; and deep indentations deformed the panels of the walls. i was
 endeavouring to gather resolution for entering and taking possession,
 when my fool of guide announced,—“this here is t’ maister’s.” my
 supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my patience
 exhausted. i insisted on being provided instantly with place of
 refuge, and means of repose.
 
“whear the divil?” began the religious elder. “the lord bless us! the
 lord forgie us! whear the _hell_ wold ye gang? ye marred, wearisome
 nowt! ye’ve seen all but hareton’s bit of cham’er. there’s not
 another hoile to lig down in i’ th’ hahse!”
 
i was so vexed, i flung my tray and its contents on the ground; and
 then seated myself at the stairs’-head, hid my face in my hands, and
 cried.
 
“ech! ech!” exclaimed joseph. “weel done, miss cathy! weel done, miss
 cathy! howsiver, t’ maister sall just tum’le o’er them brocken pots;
 un’ then we’s hear summut; we’s hear how it’s to be. gooid-for-naught
 madling! ye desarve pining fro’ this to churstmas, flinging t’ precious
 gifts uh god under fooit i’ yer flaysome rages! but i’m mista’en if ye
 shew yer sperrit lang. will hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye?
 i nobbut wish may catch ye i’ that plisky. i nobbut wish may.”
 
and so went on scolding to his den beneath, taking the candle with
 him; and i remained in the dark. the period of reflection succeeding
 this silly action compelled to admit the necessity of smothering my
 pride and choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its
 effects. an unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of
 throttler, whom i now recognised as of our old skulker: it had
 spent its whelphood at the grange, and was given by my father to mr.
 hindley. i fancy it knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way of
 salute, and then hastened to devour the porridge; while i groped from
 step to step, collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the
 spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief. our
 labours were scarcely over when i heard earnshaw’s tread in the
 passage; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed to the wall; i
 stole into the nearest doorway. the dog’s endeavour to avoid him was
 unsuccessful; as i guessed by scutter downstairs, and prolonged,
 piteous yelping. i had better luck: passed on, entered his chamber,
 and shut the door. directly after joseph came up with hareton, to put
 him to bed. i had found shelter in hareton’s room, and the old man, on
 seeing me, said,—“they’s rahm for boath ye un’ yer pride, now, i sud
 think i’ the hahse. it’s empty; ye may hev’ it all to yerseln, un’ him
 as allas maks third, i’ sich ill company!”
 
gladly did i take advantage of this intimation; and the minute i flung
 myself into chair, by the fire, i nodded, and slept. my slumber was
 deep and sweet, though over far too soon. mr. heathcliff awoke me; he
 had just come in, and demanded, in his loving manner, what i was doing
 there? i told him the cause of my staying up so late—that had the
 key of our room in his pocket. the adjective _our_ gave mortal offence.
 swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he’d—but i’ll not
 repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct: is ingenious
 and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence! i sometimes wonder at
 him with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, i assure you, tiger
 or venomous serpent could not rouse terror in equal to that which
 wakens. told of catherine’s illness, and accused my brother of
 causing it; promising that i should be edgar’s proxy in suffering, till
 could get hold of him.
 
i do hate him—i am wretched—i have been fool! beware of uttering one
 breath of this to any one at the grange. i shall expect you every
 day—don’t disappoint me!—isabella.
 



chapter xiv
 

as soon as i had perused this epistle i went to the master, and
 informed him that his sister had arrived at the heights, and sent a
 letter expressing her sorrow for mrs. linton’s situation, and her
 ardent desire to see him; with wish that would transmit to her, as
 early as possible, some token of forgiveness by me.
 
“forgiveness!” said linton. “i have nothing to forgive her, ellen. you
 may call at wuthering heights this afternoon, if you like, and say that
 i am not _angry_, but i’m _sorry_ to have lost her; especially as i can
 never think she’ll be happy. it is out of the question my going to see
 her, however: we are eternally divided; and should she really wish to
 oblige me, let her persuade the villain she has married to leave the
 country.”
 
“and you won’t write her little note, sir?” i asked, imploringly.
 
“no,” answered. “it is needless. my communication with heathcliff’s
 family shall be as sparing as his with mine. it shall not exist!”
 
mr. edgar’s coldness depressed exceedingly; and all the way from the
 grange i puzzled my brains how to put more heart into what said,
 when i repeated it; and how to soften his refusal of even few lines
 to console isabella. i daresay she had been on the watch for since
 morning: i saw her looking through the lattice as i came up the garden
 causeway, and i nodded to her; but she drew back, as if afraid of being
 observed. i entered without knocking. there never was such dreary,
 dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented! i must confess,
 that if i had been in the young lady’s place, i would, at least, have
 swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with duster. but she already
 partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed her. her
 pretty face was wan and listless; her hair uncurled: some locks hanging
 lankly down, and some carelessly twisted round her head. probably she
 had not touched her dress since yester evening. hindley was not there.
 mr. heathcliff sat at table, turning over some papers in his
 pocket-book; but rose when i appeared, asked how i did, quite
 friendly, and offered chair. was the only thing there that
 seemed decent; and i thought never looked better. so much had
 circumstances altered their positions, that would certainly have
 struck stranger as born and bred gentleman; and his wife as a
 thorough little slattern! she came forward eagerly to greet me, and
 held out one hand to take the expected letter. i shook my head. she
 wouldn’t understand the hint, but followed to sideboard, where i
 went to lay my bonnet, and importuned in whisper to give her
 directly what i had brought. heathcliff guessed the meaning of her
 manœuvres, and said—“if you have got anything for isabella (as no
 doubt you have, nelly), give it to her. you needn’t make secret of
 it: we have secrets between us.”
 
“oh, i have nothing,” i replied, thinking it best to speak the truth at
 once. “my master bid tell his sister that she must not expect either
 letter or visit from him at present. sends his love, ma’am, and
 his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have
 occasioned; but thinks that after this time his household and the
 household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of
 keeping it up.”
 
mrs. heathcliff’s lip quivered slightly, and she returned to her seat
 in the window. her husband took his stand on the hearthstone, near me,
 and began to put questions concerning catherine. i told him as much as
 i thought proper of her illness, and extorted from me, by
 cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin. i
 blamed her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and ended
 by hoping that would follow mr. linton’s example and avoid future
 interference with his family, for good or evil.
 
“mrs. linton is now just recovering,” i said; “she’ll never be like she
 was, but her life is spared; and if you really have regard for her,
 you’ll shun crossing her way again: nay, you’ll move out of this
 country entirely; and that you may not regret it, i’ll inform you
 catherine linton is as different now from your old friend catherine
 earnshaw, as that young lady is different from me. her appearance is
 changed greatly, her character much more so; and the person who is
 compelled, of necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his
 affection hereafter by the remembrance of what she once was, by common
 humanity, and sense of duty!”
 
“that is quite possible,” remarked heathcliff, forcing himself to seem
 calm: “quite possible that your master should have nothing but common
 humanity and sense of duty to fall back upon. but do you imagine that
 i shall leave catherine to his _duty_ and _humanity_? and can you
 compare my feelings respecting catherine to his? before you leave this
 house, i must exact promise from you that you’ll get an interview
 with her: consent, or refuse, i _will_ see her! what do you say?”
 
“i say, mr. heathcliff,” i replied, “you must not: you never shall,
 through my means. another encounter between you and the master would
 kill her altogether.”
 
“with your aid that may be avoided,” continued; “and should there be
 danger of such an event—should be the cause of adding single
 trouble more to her existence—why, i think i shall be justified in
 going to extremes! i wish you had sincerity enough to tell whether
 catherine would suffer greatly from his loss: the fear that she would
 restrains me. and there you see the distinction between our feelings:
 had been in my place, and i in his, though i hated him with hatred
 that turned my life to gall, i never would have raised hand against
 him. you may look incredulous, if you please! i never would have
 banished him from her society as long as she desired his. the moment
 her regard ceased, i would have torn his heart out, and drunk his
 blood! but, till then—if you don’t believe me, you don’t know me—till
 then, i would have died by inches before i touched single hair of his
 head!”
 
“and yet,” i interrupted, “you have scruples in completely ruining
 all hopes of her perfect restoration, by thrusting yourself into her
 remembrance now, when she has nearly forgotten you, and involving her
 in new tumult of discord and distress.”
 
“you suppose she has nearly forgotten me?” said. “oh, nelly! you
 know she has not! you know as well as i do, that for every thought she
 spends on linton she spends thousand on me! at most miserable
 period of my life, i had notion of the kind: it haunted on my
 return to the neighbourhood last summer; but only her own assurance
 could make admit the horrible idea again. and then, linton would be
 nothing, nor hindley, nor all the dreams that ever i dreamt. two words
 would comprehend my future—_death_ and _hell_: existence, after losing
 her, would be hell. yet i was fool to fancy for moment that she
 valued edgar linton’s attachment more than mine. if loved with all
 the powers of his puny being, couldn’t love as much in eighty years
 as i could in day. and catherine has heart as deep as i have: the
 could be as readily contained in that horse-trough as her whole
 affection be monopolised by him. tush! is scarcely degree dearer
 to her than her dog, or her horse. it is not in him to be loved like
 me: how can she love in him what has not?”
 
“catherine and edgar are as fond of each other as any two people can
 be,” cried isabella, with sudden vivacity. “no one has right to talk
 in that manner, and i won’t hear my brother depreciated in silence!”
 
“your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn’t he?” observed
 heathcliff, scornfully. “he turns you adrift on the world with
 surprising alacrity.”
 
“he is not aware of what i suffer,” she replied. “i didn’t tell him
 that.”
 
“you have been telling him something, then: you have written, have
 you?”
 
“to say that i was married, i did write—you saw the note.”
 
“and nothing since?”
 
“no.”
 
“my young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of condition,”
 i remarked. “somebody’s love comes short in her case, obviously; whose,
 i may guess; but, perhaps, i shouldn’t say.”
 
“i should guess it was her own,” said heathcliff. “she degenerates into
 mere slut! she is tired of trying to please uncommonly early.
 you’d hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding she was
 weeping to go home. however, she’ll suit this house so much the better
 for not being over nice, and i’ll take care she does not disgrace by
 rambling abroad.”
 
“well, sir,” returned i, “i hope you’ll consider that mrs. heathcliff
 is accustomed to be looked after and waited on; and that she has been
 brought up like an only daughter, whom every one was ready to serve.
 you must let her have maid to keep things tidy about her, and you
 must treat her kindly. whatever be your notion of mr. edgar, you cannot
 doubt that she has capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn’t
 have abandoned the elegancies, and comforts, and friends of her former
 home, to fix contentedly, in such wilderness as this, with you.”
 
“she abandoned them under delusion,” answered; “picturing in a
 hero of romance, and expecting unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous
 devotion. i can hardly regard her in the light of rational creature,
 so obstinately has she persisted in forming fabulous notion of my
 character and acting on the false impressions she cherished. but, at
 last, i think she begins to know me: i don’t perceive the silly smiles
 and grimaces that provoked at first; and the senseless incapability
 of discerning that i was in earnest when i gave her my opinion of her
 infatuation and herself. it was marvellous effort of perspicacity to
 discover that i did not love her. i believed, at one time, lessons
 could teach her that! and yet it is poorly learnt; for this morning she
 announced, as piece of appalling intelligence, that i had actually
 succeeded in making her hate me! positive labour of hercules, i
 assure you! if it be achieved, i have cause to return thanks. can i
 trust your assertion, isabella? are you sure you hate me? if i let you
 alone for half day, won’t you come sighing and wheedling to again?
 i daresay she would rather i had seemed all tenderness before you: it
 wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed. but i don’t care who knows
 that the passion was wholly on one side: and i never told her lie
 about it. she cannot accuse of showing one bit of deceitful
 softness. the first thing she saw do, on coming out of the grange,
 was to hang up her little dog; and when she pleaded for it, the first
 words i uttered were wish that i had the hanging of every being
 belonging to her, except one: possibly she took that exception for
 herself. but brutality disgusted her: i suppose she has an innate
 admiration of it, if only her precious person were secure from injury!
 now, was it not the depth of absurdity—of genuine idiocy, for that
 pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that i could love her?
 tell your master, nelly, that i never, in all my life, met with such an
 abject thing as she is. she even disgraces the name of linton; and i’ve
 sometimes relented, from pure lack of invention, in my experiments on
 what she could endure, and still creep shamefully cringing back! but
 tell him, also, to set his fraternal and magisterial heart at ease:
 that i keep strictly within the limits of the law. i have avoided, up
 to this period, giving her the slightest right to claim separation;
 and, what’s more, she’d thank nobody for dividing us. if she desired to
 go, she might: the nuisance of her presence outweighs the gratification
 to be derived from tormenting her!”
 
“mr. heathcliff,” said i, “this is the talk of madman; your wife,
 most likely, is convinced you are mad; and, for that reason, she has
 borne with you hitherto: but now that you say she may go, she’ll
 doubtless avail herself of the permission. you are not so bewitched,
 ma’am, are you, as to remain with him of your own accord?”
 
“take care, ellen!” answered isabella, her eyes sparkling irefully;
 there was misdoubting by their expression the full success of her
 partner’s endeavours to make himself detested. “don’t put faith in a
 single word speaks. he’s lying fiend! monster, and not human
 being! i’ve been told i might leave him before; and i’ve made the
 attempt, but i dare not repeat it! only, ellen, promise you’ll not
 mention syllable of his infamous conversation to my brother or
 catherine. whatever may pretend, wishes to provoke edgar to
 desperation: says has married on purpose to obtain power over
 him; and sha’n’t obtain it—i’ll die first! i just hope, i pray, that
 may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me! the single pleasure
 i can imagine is to die, or to see him dead!”
 
“there—that will do for the present!” said heathcliff. “if you are
 called upon in court of law, you’ll remember her language, nelly! and
 take good look at that countenance: she’s near the point which would
 suit me. no; you’re not fit to be your own guardian, isabella, now; and
 i, being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however
 distasteful the obligation may be. go upstairs; i have something to say
 to ellen dean in private. that’s not the way: upstairs, i tell you!
 why, this is the road upstairs, child!”
 
seized, and thrust her from the room; and returned muttering—“i have
 pity! i have pity! the more the worms writhe, the more i yearn to
 crush out their entrails! it is moral teething; and i grind with
 greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain.”
 
“do you understand what the word pity means?” i said, hastening to
 resume my bonnet. “did you ever feel touch of it in your life?”
 
“put that down!” interrupted, perceiving my intention to depart.
 “you are not going yet. come here now, nelly: i must either persuade or
 compel you to aid in fulfilling my determination to see catherine,
 and that without delay. i swear that i meditate harm: i don’t desire
 to cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult mr. linton; i only
 wish to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill; and to
 ask if anything that i could do would be of use to her. last night i
 was in the grange garden six hours, and i’ll return there to-night; and
 every night i’ll haunt the place, and every day, till i find an
 opportunity of entering. if edgar linton meets me, i shall not hesitate
 to knock him down, and give him enough to insure his quiescence while i
 stay. if his servants oppose me, i shall threaten them off with these
 pistols. but wouldn’t it be better to prevent my coming in contact with
 them, or their master? and you could do it so easily. i’d warn you when
 i came, and then you might let in unobserved, as soon as she was
 alone, and watch till i departed, your conscience quite calm: you would
 be hindering mischief.”
 
i protested against playing that treacherous part in my employer’s
 house: and, besides, i urged the cruelty and selfishness of his
 destroying mrs. linton’s tranquillity for his satisfaction. “the
 commonest occurrence startles her painfully,” i said. “she’s all
 nerves, and she couldn’t bear the surprise, i’m positive. don’t
 persist, sir! or else i shall be obliged to inform my master of your
 designs; and he’ll take measures to secure his house and its inmates
 from any such unwarrantable intrusions!”
 
“in that case i’ll take measures to secure you, woman!” exclaimed
 heathcliff; “you shall not leave wuthering heights till to-morrow
 morning. it is foolish story to assert that catherine could not bear
 to see me; and as to surprising her, i don’t desire it: you must
 prepare her—ask her if i may come. you say she never mentions my name,
 and that i am never mentioned to her. to whom should she mention if
 i am forbidden topic in the house? she thinks you are all spies for
 her husband. oh, i’ve doubt she’s in hell among you! i guess by her
 silence, as much as anything, what she feels. you say she is often
 restless, and anxious-looking: is that proof of tranquillity? you
 talk of her mind being unsettled. how the devil could it be otherwise
 in her frightful isolation? and that insipid, paltry creature attending
 her from _duty_ and _humanity_! from _pity_ and _charity_! might as
 well plant an oak in flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine
 can restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares! let us
 settle it at once: will you stay here, and am i to fight my way to
 catherine over linton and his footman? or will you be my friend, as you
 have been hitherto, and do what i request? decide! because there is no
 reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn
 ill-nature!”
 
well, mr. lockwood, i argued and complained, and flatly refused him
 fifty times; but in the long run forced to an agreement. i
 engaged to carry letter from him to my mistress; and should she
 consent, i promised to let him have intelligence of linton’s next
 absence from home, when might come, and get in as was able: i
 wouldn’t be there, and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the
 way. was it right or wrong? i fear it was wrong, though expedient. i
 thought i prevented another explosion by my compliance; and i thought,
 too, it might create favourable crisis in catherine’s mental illness:
 and then i remembered mr. edgar’s stern rebuke of my carrying tales;
 and i tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject, by
 affirming, with frequent iteration, that that betrayal of trust, if it
 merited so harsh an appellation, should be the last. notwithstanding,
 my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither; and many
 misgivings i had, ere i could prevail on myself to put the missive into
 mrs. linton’s hand.
 
but here is kenneth; i’ll go down, and tell him how much better you
 are. my history is _dree_, as we say, and will serve to while away
 another morning.
 
* * * * *
 

dree, and dreary! i reflected as the good woman descended to receive
 the doctor: and not exactly of the kind which i should have chosen to
 amuse me. but never mind! i’ll extract wholesome medicines from mrs.
 dean’s bitter herbs; and firstly, let beware of the fascination that
 lurks in catherine heathcliff’s brilliant eyes. i should be in a
 curious taking if i surrendered my heart to that young person, and the
 daughter turned out second edition of the mother.
 



chapter xv
 

another week over—and i am so many days nearer health, and spring! i
 have now heard all my neighbour’s history, at different sittings, as
 the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations. i’ll
 continue it in her own words, only little condensed. she is, on the
 whole, very fair narrator, and i don’t think i could improve her
 style.
 
* * * * *
 

in the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the heights, i
 knew, as well as if i saw him, that mr. heathcliff was about the place;
 and i shunned going out, because i still carried his letter in my
 pocket, and didn’t want to be threatened or teased any more. i had made
 up my mind not to give it till my master went somewhere, as i could not
 guess how its receipt would affect catherine. the consequence was, that
 it did not reach her before the lapse of three days. the fourth was
 sunday, and i brought it into her room after the family were gone to
 church. there was man servant left to keep the house with me, and we
 generally made practice of locking the doors during the hours of
 service; but on that occasion the weather was so warm and pleasant that
 i set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement, as i knew who would
 be coming, i told my companion that the mistress wished very much for
 some oranges, and must run over to the village and get few, to be
 paid for on the morrow. departed, and i went upstairs.
 
mrs. linton sat in loose white dress, with light shawl over her
 shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual. her thick, long
 hair had been partly removed at the beginning of her illness, and now
 she wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and
 neck. her appearance was altered, as i had told heathcliff; but when
 she was calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the change. the flash of
 her eyes had been succeeded by dreamy and melancholy softness; they
 longer gave the impression of looking at the objects around her:
 they appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond—you would have said
 out of this world. then, the paleness of her face—its haggard aspect
 having vanished as she recovered flesh—and the peculiar expression
 arising from her mental state, though painfully suggestive of their
 causes, added to the touching interest which she awakened;
 and—invariably to me, i know, and to any person who saw her, i should
 think—refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and stamped her as
 one doomed to decay.
 
book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely perceptible
 wind fluttered its leaves at intervals. i believe linton had laid it
 there: for she never endeavoured to divert herself with reading, or
 occupation of any kind, and would spend many an hour in trying to
 entice her attention to some subject which had formerly been her
 amusement. she was conscious of his aim, and in her better moods
 endured his efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness by now and
 then suppressing wearied sigh, and checking him at last with the
 saddest of smiles and kisses. at other times, she would turn petulantly
 away, and hide her face in her hands, or even push him off angrily; and
 then took care to let her alone, for was certain of doing no
 good.
 
gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing; and the full, mellow flow of
 the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear. it was sweet
 substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which
 drowned that music about the grange when the trees were in leaf. at
 wuthering heights it always sounded on quiet days following great
 thaw or season of steady rain. and of wuthering heights catherine was
 thinking as she listened: that is, if she thought or listened at all;
 but she had the vague, distant look i mentioned before, which expressed
 recognition of material things either by ear or eye.
 
“there’s letter for you, mrs. linton,” i said, gently inserting it in
 one hand that rested on her knee. “you must read it immediately,
 because it wants an answer. shall i break the seal?” “yes,” she
 answered, without altering the direction of her eyes. i opened it—it
 was very short. “now,” i continued, “read it.” she drew away her hand,
 and let it fall. i replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it
 should please her to glance down; but that movement was so long delayed
 that at last i resumed—“must i read it, ma’am? it is from mr.
 heathcliff.”
 
there was start and troubled gleam of recollection, and struggle
 to arrange her ideas. she lifted the letter, and seemed to peruse it;
 and when she came to the signature she sighed: yet still i found she
 had not gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to hear her reply,
 she merely pointed to the name, and gazed at with mournful and
 questioning eagerness.
 
“well, wishes to see you,” said i, guessing her need of an
 interpreter. “he’s in the garden by this time, and impatient to know
 what answer i shall bring.”
 
as i spoke, i observed large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath
 raise its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back,
 announce, by wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did
 not consider stranger. mrs. linton bent forward, and listened
 breathlessly. the minute after step traversed the hall; the open
 house was too tempting for heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely
 supposed that i was inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to
 trust to his own audacity. with straining eagerness catherine gazed
 towards the entrance of her chamber. did not hit the right room
 directly: she motioned to admit him, but found it out ere i could
 reach the door, and in stride or two was at her side, and had her
 grasped in his arms.
 
neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes, during
 which period bestowed more kisses than ever gave in his life
 before, i daresay: but then my mistress had kissed him first, and i
 plainly saw that could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look
 into her face! the same conviction had stricken him as me, from the
 instant beheld her, that there was prospect of ultimate recovery
 there—she was fated, sure to die.
 
“oh, cathy! oh, my life! how can i bear it?” was the first sentence he
 uttered, in tone that did not seek to disguise his despair. and now
 stared at her so earnestly that i thought the very intensity of his
 gaze would bring tears into his eyes; but they burned with anguish:
 they did not melt.
 
“what now?” said catherine, leaning back, and returning his look with a
 suddenly clouded brow: her humour was mere vane for constantly
 varying caprices. “you and edgar have broken my heart, heathcliff! and
 you both come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be
 pitied! i shall not pity you, not i. you have killed me—and thriven on
 it, i think. how strong you are! how many years do you mean to live
 after i am gone?”
 
heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; attempted to rise,
 but she seized his hair, and kept him down.
 
“i wish i could hold you,” she continued, bitterly, “till we were both
 dead! i shouldn’t care what you suffered. i care nothing for your
 sufferings. why shouldn’t you suffer? i do! will you forget me? will
 you be happy when i am in the earth? will you say twenty years hence,
 ‘that’s the grave of catherine earnshaw? i loved her long ago, and was
 wretched to lose her; but it is past. i’ve loved many others since: my
 children are dearer to than she was; and, at death, i shall not
 rejoice that i am going to her: i shall be sorry that i must leave
 them!’ will you say so, heathcliff?”
 
“don’t torture till i’m as mad as yourself,” cried he, wrenching his
 head free, and grinding his teeth.
 
the two, to cool spectator, made strange and fearful picture. well
 might catherine deem that heaven would be land of exile to her,
 unless with her mortal body she cast away her moral character also. her
 present countenance had wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a
 bloodless lip and scintillating eye; and she retained in her closed
 fingers portion of the locks she had been grasping. as to her
 companion, while raising himself with one hand, had taken her arm
 with the other; and so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to the
 requirements of her condition, that on his letting go i saw four
 distinct impressions left blue in the colourless skin.
 
“are you possessed with devil,” pursued, savagely, “to talk in
 that manner to when you are dying? do you reflect that all those
 words will be branded in my memory, and eating deeper eternally after
 you have left me? you know you lie to say i have killed you: and,
 catherine, you know that i could as soon forget you as my existence! is
 it not sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at
 peace i shall writhe in the torments of hell?”
 
“i shall not be at peace,” moaned catherine, recalled to sense of
 physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart, which
 beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation. she said
 nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then she continued, more
 kindly—
 
“i’m not wishing you greater torment than i have, heathcliff. i only
 wish us never to be parted: and should word of mine distress you
 hereafter, think i feel the same distress underground, and for my own
 sake, forgive me! come here and kneel down again! you never harmed me
 in your life. nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember
 than my harsh words! won’t you come here again? do!”
 
heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leant over, but not so
 far as to let her see his face, which was livid with emotion. she bent
 round to look at him; would not permit it: turning abruptly, he
 walked to the fireplace, where stood, silent, with his back towards
 us. mrs. linton’s glance followed him suspiciously: every movement woke
 new sentiment in her. after pause and prolonged gaze, she
 resumed; addressing in accents of indignant disappointment:—
 
“oh, you see, nelly, would not relent moment to keep out of the
 grave. _that_ is how i’m loved! well, never mind. that is not _my_
 heathcliff. i shall love mine yet; and take him with me: he’s in my
 soul. and,” added she musingly, “the thing that irks most is this
 shattered prison, after all. i’m tired of being enclosed here. i’m
 wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be always there:
 not seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the
 walls of an aching heart: but really with it, and in it. nelly, you
 think you are better and more fortunate than i; in full health and
 strength: you are sorry for me—very soon that will be altered. i shall
 be sorry for _you_. i shall be incomparably beyond and above you all. i
 _wonder_ won’t be near me!” she went on to herself. “i thought he
 wished it. heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now. do come to
 me, heathcliff.”
 
in her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the
 chair. at that earnest appeal turned to her, looking absolutely
 desperate. his eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on her; his
 breast heaved convulsively. an instant they held asunder, and then how
 they met i hardly saw, but catherine made spring, and caught her,
 and they were locked in an embrace from which i thought my mistress
 would never be released alive: in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly
 insensible. flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my
 approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she had fainted, gnashed at
 me, and foamed like mad dog, and gathered her to him with greedy
 jealousy. i did not feel as if i were in the company of creature of
 my own species: it appeared that would not understand, though i
 spoke to him; so i stood off, and held my tongue, in great perplexity.
 
movement of catherine’s relieved little presently: she put up
 her hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to his as held her;
 while he, in return, covering her with frantic caresses, said wildly—
 
“you teach now how cruel you’ve been—cruel and false. _why_ did you
 despise me? _why_ did you betray your own heart, cathy? i have not one
 word of comfort. you deserve this. you have killed yourself. yes, you
 may kiss me, and cry; and wring out my kisses and tears: they’ll blight
 you—they’ll damn you. you loved me—then what _right_ had you to leave
 me? what right—answer me—for the poor fancy you felt for linton?
 because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that god or
 satan could inflict would have parted us, _you_, of your own will, did
 it. i have not broken your heart—_you_ have broken it; and in breaking
 it, you have broken mine. so much the worse for that i am strong. do
 i want to live? what kind of living will it be when you—oh, god! would
 _you_ like to live with your soul in the grave?”
 
“let alone. let alone,” sobbed catherine. “if i’ve done wrong,
 i’m dying for it. it is enough! you left too: but i won’t upbraid
 you! i forgive you. forgive me!”
 
“it is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those
 wasted hands,” answered. “kiss again; and don’t let see your
 eyes! i forgive what you have done to me. i love _my_ murderer—but
 _yours_! how can i?”
 
they were silent—their faces hid against each other, and washed by each
 other’s tears. at least, i suppose the weeping was on both sides; as it
 seemed heathcliff _could_ weep on great occasion like this.
 
i grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away,
 the man whom i had sent off returned from his errand, and i could
 distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, concourse
 thickening outside gimmerton chapel porch.
 
“service is over,” i announced. “my master will be here in half an
 hour.”
 
heathcliff groaned curse, and strained catherine closer: she never
 moved.
 
ere long i perceived group of the servants passing up the road
 towards the kitchen wing. mr. linton was not far behind; opened the
 gate himself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely
 afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.
 
“now is here,” i exclaimed. “for heaven’s sake, hurry down! you’ll
 not meet any one on the front stairs. do be quick; and stay among the
 trees till is fairly in.”
 
“i must go, cathy,” said heathcliff, seeking to extricate himself from
 his companion’s arms. “but if i live, i’ll see you again before you are
 asleep. i won’t stray five yards from your window.”
 
“you must not go!” she answered, holding him as firmly as her strength
 allowed. “you _shall_ not, i tell you.”
 
“for one hour,” pleaded earnestly.
 
“not for one minute,” she replied.
 
“i _must_—linton will be up immediately,” persisted the alarmed
 intruder.
 
would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act—she clung fast,
 gasping: there was mad resolution in her face.
 
“no!” she shrieked. “oh, don’t, don’t go. it is the last time! edgar
 will not hurt us. heathcliff, i shall die! i shall die!”
 
“damn the fool! there is,” cried heathcliff, sinking back into his
 seat. “hush, my darling! hush, hush, catherine! i’ll stay. if shot
 so, i’d expire with blessing on my lips.”
 
and there they were fast again. i heard my master mounting the
 stairs—the cold sweat ran from my forehead: i was horrified.
 
“are you going to listen to her ravings?” i said, passionately. “she
 does not know what she says. will you ruin her, because she has not wit
 to help herself? get up! you could be free instantly. that is the most
 diabolical deed that ever you did. we are all done for—master,
 mistress, and servant.”
 
i wrung my hands, and cried out; and mr. linton hastened his step at
 the noise. in the midst of my agitation, i was sincerely glad to
 observe that catherine’s arms had fallen relaxed, and her head hung
 down.
 
“she’s fainted, or dead,” i thought: “so much the better. far better
 that she should be dead, than lingering burden and misery-maker to
 all about her.”
 
edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with astonishment and
 rage. what meant to do i cannot tell; however, the other stopped all
 demonstrations, at once, by placing the lifeless-looking form in his
 arms.
 
“look there!” said. “unless you be fiend, help her first—then you
 shall speak to me!”
 
walked into the parlour, and sat down. mr. linton summoned me, and
 with great difficulty, and after resorting to many means, we managed to
 restore her to sensation; but she was all bewildered; she sighed, and
 moaned, and knew nobody. edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her
 hated friend. i did not. i went, at the earliest opportunity, and
 besought him to depart; affirming that catherine was better, and he
 should hear from in the morning how she passed the night.
 
“i shall not refuse to go out of doors,” answered; “but i shall stay
 in the garden: and, nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow. i shall
 be under those larch-trees. mind! or i pay another visit, whether
 linton be in or not.”
 
sent rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and,
 ascertaining that what i stated was apparently true, delivered the
 house of his luckless presence.
 



chapter xvi
 

about twelve o’clock that night was born the catherine you saw at
 wuthering heights: puny, seven-months’ child; and two hours after the
 mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss
 heathcliff, or know edgar. the latter’s distraction at his bereavement
 is subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how
 deep the sorrow sunk. great addition, in my eyes, was his being left
 without an heir. i bemoaned that, as i gazed on the feeble orphan; and
 i mentally abused old linton for (what was only natural partiality) the
 securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son’s. an
 unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing! it might have wailed out of life,
 and nobody cared morsel, during those first hours of existence. we
 redeemed the neglect afterwards; but its beginning was as friendless as
 its end is likely to be.
 
next morning—bright and cheerful out of doors—stole softened in through
 the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch and its occupant
 with mellow, tender glow. edgar linton had his head laid on the
 pillow, and his eyes shut. his young and fair features were almost as
 deathlike as those of the form beside him, and almost as fixed: but
 _his_ was the hush of exhausted anguish, and _hers_ of perfect peace.
 her brow smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expression of a
 smile; angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared.
 and i partook of the infinite calm in which she lay: my mind was never
 in holier frame than while i gazed on that untroubled image of divine
 rest. i instinctively echoed the words she had uttered few hours
 before: “incomparably beyond and above us all! whether still on earth
 or now in heaven, her spirit is at home with god!”
 
i don’t know if it be peculiarity in me, but i am seldom otherwise
 than happy while watching in the chamber of death, should frenzied
 or despairing mourner share the duty with me. i see repose that
 neither earth nor hell can break, and i feel an assurance of the
 endless and shadowless hereafter—the eternity they have entered—where
 life is boundless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in
 its fulness. i noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is
 even in love like mr. linton’s, when so regretted catherine’s
 blessed release! to be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward
 and impatient existence she had led, whether she merited haven of
 peace at last. one might doubt in seasons of cold reflection; but not
 then, in the presence of her corpse. it asserted its own tranquillity,
 which seemed pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.
 
do you believe such people _are_ happy in the other world, sir? i’d
 give great deal to know.
 
i declined answering mrs. dean’s question, which struck as something
 heterodox. she proceeded:
 
retracing the course of catherine linton, i fear we have right to
 think she is; but we’ll leave her with her maker.
 
the master looked asleep, and i ventured soon after sunrise to quit the
 room and steal out to the pure refreshing air. the servants thought me
 gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my
 chief motive was seeing mr. heathcliff. if had remained among the
 larches all night, would have heard nothing of the stir at the
 grange; unless, perhaps, might catch the gallop of the messenger
 going to gimmerton. if had come nearer, would probably be aware,
 from the lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of
 the outer doors, that all was not right within. i wished, yet feared,
 to find him. i felt the terrible news must be told, and i longed to get
 it over; but _how_ to do it i did not know. was there—at least, a
 few yards further in the park; leant against an old ash-tree, his hat
 off, and his hair soaked with the dew that had gathered on the budded
 branches, and fell pattering round him. had been standing long
 time in that position, for i saw pair of ousels passing and repassing
 scarcely three feet from him, busy in building their nest, and
 regarding his proximity more than that of piece of timber. they
 flew off at my approach, and raised his eyes and spoke:—“she’s
 dead!” said; “i’ve not waited for you to learn that. put your
 handkerchief away—don’t snivel before me. damn you all! she wants none
 of _your_ tears!”
 
i was weeping as much for him as her: we do sometimes pity creatures
 that have none of the feeling either for themselves or others. when i
 first looked into his face, i perceived that had got intelligence of
 the catastrophe; and foolish notion struck that his heart was
 quelled and prayed, because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on
 the ground.
 
“yes, she’s dead!” i answered, checking my sobs and drying my cheeks.
 “gone to heaven, i hope; where we may, every one, join her, if we take
 due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good!”
 
“did _she_ take due warning, then?” asked heathcliff, attempting a
 sneer. “did she die like saint? come, give true history of the
 event. how did—?”
 
endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and
 compressing his mouth held silent combat with his inward agony,
 defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.
 “how did she die?” resumed, at last—fain, notwithstanding his
 hardihood, to have support behind him; for, after the struggle, he
 trembled, in spite of himself, to his very finger-ends.
 
“poor wretch!” i thought; “you have heart and nerves the same as your
 brother men! why should you be anxious to conceal them? your pride
 cannot blind god! you tempt him to wring them, till forces cry of
 humiliation.”
 
“quietly as lamb!” i answered, aloud. “she drew sigh, and stretched
 herself, like child reviving, and sinking again to sleep; and five
 minutes after i felt one little pulse at her heart, and nothing more!”
 
“and—did she ever mention me?” asked, hesitating, as if dreaded
 the answer to his question would introduce details that could not
 bear to hear.
 
“her senses never returned: she recognised nobody from the time you
 left her,” i said. “she lies with sweet smile on her face; and her
 latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days. her life closed in a
 gentle dream—may she wake as kindly in the other world!”
 
“may she wake in torment!” cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping
 his foot, and groaning in sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
 “why, she’s liar to the end! where is she? not _there_—not in
 heaven—not perished—where? oh! you said you cared nothing for my
 sufferings! and i pray one prayer—i repeat it till my tongue
 stiffens—catherine earnshaw, may you not rest as long as i am living;
 you said i killed you—haunt me, then! the murdered _do_ haunt their
 murderers, i believe. i know that ghosts _have_ wandered on earth. be
 with always—take any form—drive mad! only _do_ not leave in
 this abyss, where i cannot find you! oh, god! it is unutterable! i
 _cannot_ live without my life! i _cannot_ live without my soul!”
 
dashed his head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up his eyes,
 howled, not like man, but like savage beast being goaded to death
 with knives and spears. i observed several splashes of blood about the
 bark of the tree, and his hand and forehead were both stained; probably
 the scene i witnessed was repetition of others acted during the
 night. it hardly moved my compassion—it appalled me: still, i felt
 reluctant to quit him so. but the moment recollected himself enough
 to notice watching, thundered command for to go, and i
 obeyed. was beyond my skill to quiet or console!
 
mrs. linton’s funeral was appointed to take place on the friday
 following her decease; and till then her coffin remained uncovered, and
 strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the great drawing-room.
 linton spent his days and nights there, sleepless guardian; and—a
 circumstance concealed from all but me—heathcliff spent his nights, at
 least, outside, equally stranger to repose. i held communication
 with him; still, i was conscious of his design to enter, if could;
 and on the tuesday, little after dark, when my master, from sheer
 fatigue, had been compelled to retire couple of hours, i went and
 opened one of the windows; moved by his perseverance to give him a
 chance of bestowing on the faded image of his idol one final adieu. he
 did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously and
 briefly; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slightest noise.
 indeed, i shouldn’t have discovered that had been there, except for
 the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse’s face, and for
 observing on the floor curl of light hair, fastened with silver
 thread; which, on examination, i ascertained to have been taken from a
 locket hung round catherine’s neck. heathcliff had opened the trinket
 and cast out its contents, replacing them by black lock of his own. i
 twisted the two, and enclosed them together.
 
mr. earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his
 sister to the grave; sent excuse, but never came; so that,
 besides her husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and
 servants. isabella was not asked.
 
the place of catherine’s interment, to the surprise of the villagers,
 was neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the lintons, nor
 yet by the tombs of her own relations, outside. it was dug on green
 slope in corner of the kirkyard, where the wall is so low that heath
 and bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor; and peat-mould
 almost buries it. her husband lies in the same spot now; and they have
 each simple headstone above, and plain grey block at their feet, to
 mark the graves.
 



chapter xvii
 

that friday made the last of our fine days for month. in the evening
 the weather broke: the wind shifted from south to north-east, and
 brought rain first, and then sleet and snow. on the morrow one could
 hardly imagine that there had been three weeks of summer: the primroses
 and crocuses were hidden under wintry drifts; the larks were silent,
 the young leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened. and dreary,
 and chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over! my master kept his
 room; i took possession of the lonely parlour, converting it into a
 nursery: and there i was, sitting with the moaning doll of child laid
 on my knee; rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still
 driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the door opened,
 and some person entered, out of breath and laughing! my anger was
 greater than my astonishment for minute. i supposed it one of the
 maids, and i cried—“have done! how dare you show your giddiness here?
 what would mr. linton say if heard you?”
 
“excuse me!” answered familiar voice; “but i know edgar is in bed,
 and i cannot stop myself.”
 
with that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and holding her
 hand to her side.
 
“i have run the whole way from wuthering heights!” she continued, after
 pause; “except where i’ve flown. i couldn’t count the number of falls
 i’ve had. oh, i’m aching all over! don’t be alarmed! there shall be an
 explanation as soon as i can give it; only just have the goodness to
 step out and order the carriage to take on to gimmerton, and tell a
 servant to seek up few clothes in my wardrobe.”
 
the intruder was mrs. heathcliff. she certainly seemed in laughing
 predicament: her hair streamed on her shoulders, dripping with snow and
 water; she was dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore,
 befitting her age more than her position: low frock with short
 sleeves, and nothing on either head or neck. the frock was of light
 silk, and clung to her with wet, and her feet were protected merely by
 thin slippers; add to this deep cut under one ear, which only the
 cold prevented from bleeding profusely, white face scratched and
 bruised, and frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue; and
 you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when i had had
 leisure to examine her.
 
“my dear young lady,” i exclaimed, “i’ll stir nowhere, and hear
 nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes, and put
 on dry things; and certainly you shall not go to gimmerton to-night, so
 it is needless to order the carriage.”
 
“certainly i shall,” she said; “walking or riding: yet i’ve no
 objection to dress myself decently. and—ah, see how it flows down my
 neck now! the fire does make it smart.”
 
she insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she would let me
 touch her; and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get
 ready, and maid set to pack up some necessary attire, did i obtain
 her consent for binding the wound and helping to change her garments.
 
“now, ellen,” she said, when my task was finished and she was seated in
 an easy-chair on the hearth, with cup of tea before her, “you sit
 down opposite me, and put poor catherine’s baby away: i don’t like to
 see it! you mustn’t think i care little for catherine, because i
 behaved so foolishly on entering: i’ve cried, too, bitterly—yes, more
 than any one else has reason to cry. we parted unreconciled, you
 remember, and i sha’n’t forgive myself. but, for all that, i was not
 going to sympathise with him—the brute beast! oh, give the poker!
 this is the last thing of his i have about me:” she slipped the gold
 ring from her third finger, and threw it on the floor. “i’ll smash it!”
 she continued, striking it with childish spite, “and then i’ll burn
 it!” and she took and dropped the misused article among the coals.
 “there! shall buy another, if gets back again. he’d be capable
 of coming to seek me, to tease edgar. i dare not stay, lest that notion
 should possess his wicked head! and besides, edgar has not been kind,
 has he? and i won’t come suing for his assistance; nor will i bring him
 into more trouble. necessity compelled to seek shelter here; though,
 if i had not learned was out of the way, i’d have halted at the
 kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself, got you to bring what i wanted,
 and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed—of that
 incarnate goblin! ah, was in such fury! if had caught me! it’s
 pity earnshaw is not his match in strength: i wouldn’t have run till
 i’d seen him all but demolished, had hindley been able to do it!”
 
“well, don’t talk so fast, miss!” i interrupted; “you’ll disorder the
 handkerchief i have tied round your face, and make the cut bleed again.
 drink your tea, and take breath, and give over laughing: laughter is
 sadly out of place under this roof, and in your condition!”
 
“an undeniable truth,” she replied. “listen to that child! it maintains
 constant wail—send it out of my hearing for an hour; i sha’n’t stay
 any longer.”
 
i rang the bell, and committed it to servant’s care; and then i
 inquired what had urged her to escape from wuthering heights in such an
 unlikely plight, and where she meant to go, as she refused remaining
 with us.
 
“i ought, and i wished to remain,” answered she, “to cheer edgar and
 take care of the baby, for two things, and because the grange is my
 right home. but i tell you wouldn’t let me! do you think could
 bear to see grow fat and merry—could bear to think that we were
 tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning our comfort? now, i have the
 satisfaction of being sure that detests me, to the point of its
 annoying him seriously to have within ear-shot or eyesight: i
 notice, when i enter his presence, the muscles of his countenance are
 involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred; partly arising
 from his knowledge of the good causes i have to feel that sentiment for
 him, and partly from original aversion. it is strong enough to make me
 feel pretty certain that would not chase over england, supposing
 i contrived clear escape; and therefore i must get quite away. i’ve
 recovered from my first desire to be killed by him: i’d rather he’d
 kill himself! has extinguished my love effectually, and so i’m at my
 ease. i can recollect yet how i loved him; and can dimly imagine that i
 could still be loving him, if—no, no! even if had doted on me, the
 devilish nature would have revealed its existence somehow. catherine
 had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him so dearly, knowing him so
 well. monster! would that could be blotted out of creation, and out
 of my memory!”
 
“hush, hush! he’s human being,” i said. “be more charitable: there
 are worse men than is yet!”
 
“he’s not human being,” she retorted; “and has claim on my
 charity. i gave him my heart, and took and pinched it to death, and
 flung it back to me. people feel with their hearts, ellen: and since he
 has destroyed mine, i have not power to feel for him: and i would not,
 though groaned from this to his dying day, and wept tears of blood
 for catherine! no, indeed, indeed, i wouldn’t!” and here isabella began
 to cry; but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes, she
 recommenced. “you asked, what has driven to flight at last? i was
 compelled to attempt it, because i had succeeded in rousing his rage a
 pitch above his malignity. pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers
 requires more coolness than knocking on the head. was worked up to
 forget the fiendish prudence boasted of, and proceeded to murderous
 violence. i experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him: the
 sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so i fairly
 broke free; and if ever i come into his hands again is welcome to a
 signal revenge.
 
“yesterday, you know, mr. earnshaw should have been at the funeral. he
 kept himself sober for the purpose—tolerably sober: not going to bed
 mad at six o’clock and getting up drunk at twelve. consequently, he
 rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for dance;
 and instead, sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by
 tumblerfuls.
 
“heathcliff—i shudder to name him! has been stranger in the house
 from last sunday till to-day. whether the angels have fed him, or his
 kin beneath, i cannot tell; but has not eaten meal with us for
 nearly week. has just come home at dawn, and gone upstairs to his
 chamber; locking himself in—as if anybody dreamt of coveting his
 company! there has continued, praying like methodist: only the
 deity implored is senseless dust and ashes; and god, when addressed,
 was curiously confounded with his own black father! after concluding
 these precious orisons—and they lasted generally till grew hoarse
 and his voice was strangled in his throat—he would be off again; always
 straight down to the grange! i wonder edgar did not send for a
 constable, and give him into custody! for me, grieved as i was about
 catherine, it was impossible to avoid regarding this season of
 deliverance from degrading oppression as holiday.
 
“i recovered spirits sufficient to hear joseph’s eternal lectures
 without weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot
 of frightened thief than formerly. you wouldn’t think that i should
 cry at anything joseph could say; but and hareton are detestable
 companions. i’d rather sit with hindley, and hear his awful talk, than
 with ‘t’ little maister’ and his staunch supporter, that odious old
 man! when heathcliff is in, i’m often obliged to seek the kitchen and
 their society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when he
 is not, as was the case this week, i establish table and chair at one
 corner of the house fire, and never mind how mr. earnshaw may occupy
 himself; and does not interfere with my arrangements. is quieter
 now than used to be, if one provokes him: more sullen and
 depressed, and less furious. joseph affirms he’s sure he’s an altered
 man: that the lord has touched his heart, and is saved ‘so as by
 fire.’ i’m puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change: but it is
 not my business.
 
“yester-evening i sat in my nook reading some old books till late on
 towards twelve. it seemed so dismal to go upstairs, with the wild snow
 blowing outside, and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirkyard
 and the new-made grave! i dared hardly lift my eyes from the page
 before me, that melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place.
 hindley sat opposite, his head leant on his hand; perhaps meditating on
 the same subject. had ceased drinking at point below
 irrationality, and had neither stirred nor spoken during two or three
 hours. there was sound through the house but the moaning wind, which
 shook the windows every now and then, the faint crackling of the coals,
 and the click of my snuffers as i removed at intervals the long wick of
 the candle. hareton and joseph were probably fast asleep in bed. it was
 very, very sad: and while i read i sighed, for it seemed as if all joy
 had vanished from the world, never to be restored.
 
“the doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen
 latch: heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual;
 owing, i suppose, to the sudden storm. that entrance was fastened, and
 we heard him coming round to get in by the other. i rose with an
 irrepressible expression of what i felt on my lips, which induced my
 companion, who had been staring towards the door, to turn and look at
 me.
 
“‘i’ll keep him out five minutes,’ exclaimed. ‘you won’t object?’
 
“‘no, you may keep him out the whole night for me,’ i answered. ‘do!
 put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts.’
 
“earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front; then
 came and brought his chair to the other side of my table, leaning over
 it, and searching in my eyes for sympathy with the burning hate that
 gleamed from his: as both looked and felt like an assassin, he
 couldn’t exactly find that; but discovered enough to encourage him
 to speak.
 
“‘you, and i,’ said, ‘have each great debt to settle with the man
 out yonder! if we were neither of us cowards, we might combine to
 discharge it. are you as soft as your brother? are you willing to
 endure to the last, and not once attempt repayment?’
 
“‘i’m weary of enduring now,’ i replied; ‘and i’d be glad of a
 retaliation that wouldn’t recoil on myself; but treachery and violence
 are spears pointed at both ends; they wound those who resort to them
 worse than their enemies.’
 
“‘treachery and violence are just return for treachery and violence!’
 cried hindley. ‘mrs. heathcliff, i’ll ask you to do nothing; but sit
 still and be dumb. tell now, can you? i’m sure you would have as
 much pleasure as i in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend’s
 existence; he’ll be _your_ death unless you overreach him; and he’ll be
 _my_ ruin. damn the hellish villain! knocks at the door as if he
 were master here already! promise to hold your tongue, and before that
 clock strikes—it wants three minutes of one—you’re free woman!’
 
“he took the implements which i described to you in my letter from his
 breast, and would have turned down the candle. i snatched it away,
 however, and seized his arm.
 
“‘i’ll not hold my tongue!’ i said; ‘you mustn’t touch him. let the
 door remain shut, and be quiet!’
 
“‘no! i’ve formed my resolution, and by god i’ll execute it!’ cried the
 desperate being. ‘i’ll do you kindness in spite of yourself, and
 hareton justice! and you needn’t trouble your head to screen me;
 catherine is gone. nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though
 i cut my throat this minute—and it’s time to make an end!’
 
“i might as well have struggled with bear, or reasoned with a
 lunatic. the only resource left was to run to lattice and warn his
 intended victim of the fate which awaited him.
 
“‘you’d better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!’ i exclaimed, in
 rather triumphant tone. ‘mr. earnshaw has mind to shoot you, if you
 persist in endeavouring to enter.’
 
“‘you’d better open the door, you—’ answered, addressing by some
 elegant term that i don’t care to repeat.
 
“‘i shall not meddle in the matter,’ i retorted again. ‘come in and get
 shot, if you please. i’ve done my duty.’
 
“with that i shut the window and returned to my place by the fire;
 having too small stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any
 anxiety for the danger that menaced him. earnshaw swore passionately at
 me: affirming that i loved the villain yet; and calling all sorts of
 names for the base spirit i evinced. and i, in my secret heart (and
 conscience never reproached me), thought what blessing it would be
 for _him_ should heathcliff put him out of misery; and what blessing
 for _me_ should send heathcliff to his right abode! as i sat nursing
 these reflections, the casement behind was banged on to the floor by
 blow from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked
 blightingly through. the stanchions stood too close to suffer his
 shoulders to follow, and i smiled, exulting in my fancied security. his
 hair and clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth,
 revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.
 
“‘isabella, let in, or i’ll make you repent!’ ‘girned,’ as joseph
 calls it.
 
“‘i cannot commit murder,’ i replied. ‘mr. hindley stands sentinel with
 knife and loaded pistol.’
 
“‘let in by the kitchen door,’ said.
 
“‘hindley will be there before me,’ i answered: ‘and that’s poor love
 of yours that cannot bear shower of snow! we were left at peace in
 our beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment blast of
 winter returns, you must run for shelter! heathcliff, if i were you,
 i’d go stretch myself over her grave and die like faithful dog. the
 world is surely not worth living in now, is it? you had distinctly
 impressed on the idea that catherine was the whole joy of your life:
 i can’t imagine how you think of surviving her loss.’
 
“‘he’s there, is he?’ exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap. ‘if i
 can get my arm out i can hit him!’
 
“i’m afraid, ellen, you’ll set down as really wicked; but you don’t
 know all, so don’t judge. i wouldn’t have aided or abetted an attempt
 on even _his_ life for anything. wish that were dead, i must; and
 therefore i was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
 consequences of my taunting speech, when flung himself on earnshaw’s
 weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.
 
“the charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
 owner’s wrist. heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
 flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket. then
 took stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
 in. his adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
 of blood, that gushed from an artery or large vein. the ruffian
 kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the
 flags, holding with one hand, meantime, to prevent summoning
 joseph. exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing
 him completely; but getting out of breath, finally desisted, and
 dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle. there tore
 off the sleeve of earnshaw’s coat, and bound up the wound with brutal
 roughness; spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically
 as had kicked before. being at liberty, i lost time in seeking
 the old servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my
 hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as descended the steps two at
 once.
 
“‘what is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?’
 
“‘there’s this to do,’ thundered heathcliff, ‘that your master’s mad;
 and should last another month, i’ll have him to an asylum. and how
 the devil did you come to fasten out, you toothless hound? don’t
 stand muttering and mumbling there. come, i’m not going to nurse him.
 wash that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle—it is more
 than half brandy!’
 
“‘and so ye’ve been murthering on him?’ exclaimed joseph, lifting his
 hands and eyes in horror. ‘if iver i seed seeght loike this! may the
 lord—’
 
“heathcliff gave him push on to his knees in the middle of the blood,
 and flung towel to him; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, he
 joined his hands and began prayer, which excited my laughter from its
 odd phraseology. i was in the condition of mind to be shocked at
 nothing: in fact, i was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves
 at the foot of the gallows.
 
“‘oh, i forgot you,’ said the tyrant. ‘you shall do that. down with
 you. and you conspire with him against me, do you, viper? there, that
 is work fit for you!’
 
“he shook till my teeth rattled, and pitched beside joseph, who
 steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing would
 set off for the grange directly. mr. linton was magistrate, and
 though had fifty wives dead, should inquire into this. was so
 obstinate in his resolution, that heathcliff deemed it expedient to
 compel from my lips recapitulation of what had taken place; standing
 over me, heaving with malevolence, as i reluctantly delivered the
 account in answer to his questions. it required great deal of labour
 to satisfy the old man that heathcliff was not the aggressor;
 especially with my hardly-wrung replies. however, mr. earnshaw soon
 convinced him that was alive still; joseph hastened to administer a
 dose of spirits, and by their succour his master presently regained
 motion and consciousness. heathcliff, aware that his opponent was
 ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called him
 deliriously intoxicated; and said should not notice his atrocious
 conduct further, but advised him to get to bed. to my joy, left us,
 after giving this judicious counsel, and hindley stretched himself on
 the hearthstone. i departed to my own room, marvelling that i had
 escaped so easily.
 
“this morning, when i came down, about half an hour before noon, mr.
 earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; his evil genius, almost
 as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney. neither appeared
 inclined to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, i
 commenced alone. nothing hindered from eating heartily, and i
 experienced certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at
 intervals, i cast look towards my silent companions, and felt the
 comfort of quiet conscience within me. after i had done, i ventured
 on the unusual liberty of drawing near the fire, going round earnshaw’s
 seat, and kneeling in the corner beside him.
 
“heathcliff did not glance my way, and i gazed up, and contemplated his
 features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone. his
 forehead, that i once thought so manly, and that i now think so
 diabolical, was shaded with heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were
 nearly quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes
 were wet then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in
 an expression of unspeakable sadness. had it been another, i would have
 covered my face in the presence of such grief. in _his_ case, i was
 gratified; and, ignoble as it seems to insult fallen enemy, i
 couldn’t miss this chance of sticking in dart: his weakness was the
 only time when i could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.”
 
“fie, fie, miss!” i interrupted. “one might suppose you had never
 opened bible in your life. if god afflict your enemies, surely that
 ought to suffice you. it is both mean and presumptuous to add your
 torture to his!”
 
“in general i’ll allow that it would be, ellen,” she continued; “but
 what misery laid on heathcliff could content me, unless i have hand
 in it? i’d rather suffered _less_, if i might cause his sufferings
 and might _know_ that i was the cause. oh, i owe him so much. on
 only one condition can i hope to forgive him. it is, if i may take an
 eye for an eye, tooth for tooth; for every wrench of agony return a
 wrench: reduce him to my level. as was the first to injure, make him
 the first to implore pardon; and then—why then, ellen, i might show you
 some generosity. but it is utterly impossible i can ever be revenged,
 and therefore i cannot forgive him. hindley wanted some water, and i
 handed him glass, and asked him how was.
 
“‘not as ill as i wish,’ replied. ‘but leaving out my arm, every
 inch of is as sore as if i had been fighting with legion of imps!’
 
“‘yes, wonder,’ was my next remark. ‘catherine used to boast that
 she stood between you and bodily harm: she meant that certain persons
 would not hurt you for fear of offending her. it’s well people don’t
 _really_ rise from their grave, or, last night, she might have
 witnessed repulsive scene! are not you bruised, and cut over your
 chest and shoulders?’
 
“‘i can’t say,’ answered; ‘but what do you mean? did dare to
 strike when i was down?’
 
“‘he trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground,’ i
 whispered. ‘and his mouth watered to tear you with his teeth; because
 he’s only half man: not so much, and the rest fiend.’
 
“mr. earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our mutual foe;
 who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed insensible to anything around him:
 the longer stood, the plainer his reflections revealed their
 blackness through his features.
 
“‘oh, if god would but give strength to strangle him in my last
 agony, i’d go to hell with joy,’ groaned the impatient man, writhing to
 rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the
 struggle.
 
“‘nay, it’s enough that has murdered one of you,’ i observed aloud.
 ‘at the grange, every one knows your sister would have been living now
 had it not been for mr. heathcliff. after all, it is preferable to be
 hated than loved by him. when i recollect how happy we were—how happy
 catherine was before came—i’m fit to curse the day.’
 
“most likely, heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than
 the spirit of the person who said it. his attention was roused, i saw,
 for his eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and drew his breath
 in suffocating sighs. i stared full at him, and laughed scornfully. the
 clouded windows of hell flashed moment towards me; the fiend which
 usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that i did not
 fear to hazard another sound of derision.
 
“‘get up, and begone out of my sight,’ said the mourner.
 
“i guessed uttered those words, at least, though his voice was
 hardly intelligible.
 
“‘i beg your pardon,’ i replied. ‘but i loved catherine too; and her
 brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, i shall supply. now
 that she’s dead, i see her in hindley: hindley has exactly her eyes, if
 you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and
 her—’
 
“‘get up, wretched idiot, before i stamp you to death!’ cried,
 making movement that caused to make one also.
 
“‘but then,’ i continued, holding myself ready to flee, ‘if poor
 catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible,
 degrading title of mrs. heathcliff, she would soon have presented a
 similar picture! _she_ wouldn’t have borne your abominable behaviour
 quietly: her detestation and disgust must have found voice.’
 
“the back of the settle and earnshaw’s person interposed between and
 him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, snatched dinner-knife
 from the table and flung it at my head. it struck beneath my ear, and
 stopped the sentence i was uttering; but, pulling it out, i sprang to
 the door and delivered another; which i hope went little deeper than
 his missile. the last glimpse i caught of him was furious rush on his
 part, checked by the embrace of his host; and both fell locked together
 on the hearth. in my flight through the kitchen i bid joseph speed to
 his master; i knocked over hareton, who was hanging litter of puppies
 from chair-back in the doorway; and, blessed as soul escaped from
 purgatory, i bounded, leaped, and flew down the steep road; then,
 quitting its windings, shot direct across the moor, rolling over banks,
 and wading through marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the
 beacon-light of the grange. and far rather would i be condemned to a
 perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night,
 abide beneath the roof of wuthering heights again.”
 
isabella ceased speaking, and took drink of tea; then she rose, and
 bidding put on her bonnet, and great shawl i had brought, and
 turning deaf ear to my entreaties for her to remain another hour, she
 stepped on to chair, kissed edgar’s and catherine’s portraits,
 bestowed similar salute on me, and descended to the carriage,
 accompanied by fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her
 mistress. she was driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but
 regular correspondence was established between her and my master when
 things were more settled. i believe her new abode was in the south,
 near london; there she had born few months subsequent to her
 escape. was christened linton, and, from the first, she reported him
 to be an ailing, peevish creature.
 
mr. heathcliff, meeting one day in the village, inquired where she
 lived. i refused to tell. remarked that it was not of any moment,
 only she must beware of coming to her brother: she should not be with
 him, if had to keep her himself. though i would give information,
 discovered, through some of the other servants, both her place of
 residence and the existence of the child. still, didn’t molest her:
 for which forbearance she might thank his aversion, i suppose. often
 asked about the infant, when saw me; and on hearing its name, smiled
 grimly, and observed: “they wish to hate it too, do they?”
 
“i don’t think they wish you to know anything about it,” i answered.
 
“but i’ll have it,” said, “when i want it. they may reckon on that!”
 
fortunately its mother died before the time arrived; some thirteen
 years after the decease of catherine, when linton was twelve, or a
 little more.
 
on the day succeeding isabella’s unexpected visit i had opportunity
 of speaking to my master: shunned conversation, and was fit for
 discussing nothing. when i could get him to listen, i saw it pleased
 him that his sister had left her husband; whom abhorred with an
 intensity which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to
 allow. so deep and sensitive was his aversion, that refrained from
 going anywhere where was likely to see or hear of heathcliff. grief,
 and that together, transformed him into complete hermit: threw up
 his office of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the
 village on all occasions, and spent life of entire seclusion within
 the limits of his park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on
 the moors, and visits to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or
 early morning before other wanderers were abroad. but was too good
 to be thoroughly unhappy long. _he_ didn’t pray for catherine’s soul to
 haunt him. time brought resignation, and melancholy sweeter than
 common joy. recalled her memory with ardent, tender love, and
 hopeful aspiring to the better world; where doubted not she was
 gone.
 
and had earthly consolation and affections also. for few days, i
 said, seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that
 coldness melted as fast as snow in april, and ere the tiny thing could
 stammer word or totter step it wielded despot’s sceptre in his
 heart. it was named catherine; but never called it the name in full,
 as had never called the first catherine short: probably because
 heathcliff had habit of doing so. the little one was always cathy: it
 formed to him distinction from the mother, and yet connection with
 her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than
 from its being his own.
 
i used to draw comparison between him and hindley earnshaw, and
 perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so
 opposite in similar circumstances. they had both been fond husbands,
 and were both attached to their children; and i could not see how they
 shouldn’t both have taken the same road, for good or evil. but, i
 thought in my mind, hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has
 shown himself sadly the worse and the weaker man. when his ship struck,
 the captain abandoned his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save
 her, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving hope for their luckless
 vessel. linton, on the contrary, displayed the true courage of loyal
 and faithful soul: trusted god; and god comforted him. one hoped,
 and the other despaired: they chose their own lots, and were
 righteously doomed to endure them. but you’ll not want to hear my
 moralising, mr. lockwood; you’ll judge, as well as i can, all these
 things: at least, you’ll think you will, and that’s the same. the end
 of earnshaw was what might have been expected; it followed fast on his
 sister’s: there were scarcely six months between them. we, at the
 grange, never got very succinct account of his state preceding it;
 all that i did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the
 preparations for the funeral. mr. kenneth came to announce the event to
 my master.
 
“well, nelly,” said he, riding into the yard one morning, too early not
 to alarm with an instant presentiment of bad news, “it’s yours and
 my turn to go into mourning at present. who’s given us the slip now, do
 you think?”
 
“who?” i asked in flurry.
 
“why, guess!” returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a
 hook by the door. “and nip up the corner of your apron: i’m certain
 you’ll need it.”
 
“not mr. heathcliff, surely?” i exclaimed.
 
“what! would you have tears for him?” said the doctor. “no,
 heathcliff’s tough young fellow: looks blooming to-day. i’ve just
 seen him. he’s rapidly regaining flesh since lost his better half.”
 
“who is it, then, mr. kenneth?” i repeated impatiently.
 
“hindley earnshaw! your old friend hindley,” replied, “and my wicked
 gossip: though he’s been too wild for this long while. there! i said
 we should draw water. but cheer up! died true to his character:
 drunk as lord. poor lad! i’m sorry, too. one can’t help missing an
 old companion: though had the worst tricks with him that ever man
 imagined, and has done many rascally turn. he’s barely
 twenty-seven, it seems; that’s your own age: who would have thought you
 were born in one year?”
 
i confess this blow was greater to than the shock of mrs. linton’s
 death: ancient associations lingered round my heart; i sat down in the
 porch and wept as for blood relation, desiring mr. kenneth to get
 another servant to introduce him to the master. i could not hinder
 myself from pondering on the question—“had had fair play?” whatever
 i did, that idea would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious
 that i resolved on requesting leave to go to wuthering heights, and
 assist in the last duties to the dead. mr. linton was extremely
 reluctant to consent, but i pleaded eloquently for the friendless
 condition in which lay; and i said my old master and foster-brother
 had claim on my services as strong as his own. besides, i reminded
 him that the child hareton was his wife’s nephew, and, in the absence
 of nearer kin, ought to act as its guardian; and ought to and
 must inquire how the property was left, and look over the concerns of
 his brother-in-law. was unfit for attending to such matters then,
 but bid speak to his lawyer; and at length permitted to go.
 his lawyer had been earnshaw’s also: i called at the village, and asked
 him to accompany me. shook his head, and advised that heathcliff
 should be let alone; affirming, if the truth were known, hareton would
 be found little else than beggar.
 
“his father died in debt,” said; “the whole property is mortgaged,
 and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity
 of creating some interest in the creditor’s heart, that may be
 inclined to deal leniently towards him.”
 
when i reached the heights, i explained that i had come to see
 everything carried on decently; and joseph, who appeared in sufficient
 distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence. mr. heathcliff said he
 did not perceive that i was wanted; but i might stay and order the
 arrangements for the funeral, if i chose.
 
“correctly,” remarked, “that fool’s body should be buried at the
 cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. i happened to leave him ten
 minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval fastened the two
 doors of the house against me, and has spent the night in drinking
 himself to death deliberately! we broke in this morning, for we heard
 him snorting like horse; and there was, laid over the settle:
 flaying and scalping would not have wakened him. i sent for kenneth,
 and came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: was
 both dead and cold, and stark; and so you’ll allow it was useless
 making more stir about him!”
 
the old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:
 
“i’d rayther he’d goan hisseln for t’ doctor! i sud ha’ taen tent o’ t’
 maister better nor him—and warn’t deead when i left, naught o’ t’
 soart!”
 
i insisted on the funeral being respectable. mr. heathcliff said i
 might have my own way there too: only, desired to remember that
 the money for the whole affair came out of his pocket. maintained a
 hard, careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if
 anything, it expressed flinty gratification at piece of difficult
 work successfully executed. i observed once, indeed, something like
 exultation in his aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the
 coffin from the house. had the hypocrisy to represent mourner: and
 previous to following with hareton, lifted the unfortunate child on
 to the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, “now, my bonny lad, you
 are _mine_! and we’ll see if one tree won’t grow as crooked as another,
 with the same wind to twist it!” the unsuspecting thing was pleased at
 this speech: played with heathcliff’s whiskers, and stroked his
 cheek; but i divined its meaning, and observed tartly, “that boy must
 go back with to thrushcross grange, sir. there is nothing in the
 world less yours than is!”
 
“does linton say so?” demanded.
 
“of course—he has ordered to take him,” i replied.
 
“well,” said the scoundrel, “we’ll not argue the subject now: but i
 have fancy to try my hand at rearing young one; so intimate to your
 master that i must supply the place of this with my own, if attempt
 to remove it. i don’t engage to let hareton go undisputed; but i’ll be
 pretty sure to make the other come! remember to tell him.”
 
this hint was enough to bind our hands. i repeated its substance on my
 return; and edgar linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke
 more of interfering. i’m not aware that could have done it to any
 purpose, had been ever so willing.
 
the guest was now the master of wuthering heights: held firm
 possession, and proved to the attorney—who, in his turn, proved it to
 mr. linton—that earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land owned for
 cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, heathcliff, was the
 mortgagee. in that manner hareton, who should now be the first
 gentleman in the neighbourhood, was reduced to state of complete
 dependence on his father’s inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house
 as servant, deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right
 himself, because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that has
 been wronged.
 



chapter xviii
 

the twelve years, continued mrs. dean, following that dismal period
 were the happiest of my life: my greatest troubles in their passage
 rose from our little lady’s trifling illnesses, which she had to
 experience in common with all children, rich and poor. for the rest,
 after the first six months, she grew like larch, and could walk and
 talk too, in her own way, before the heath blossomed second time over
 mrs. linton’s dust. she was the most winning thing that ever brought
 sunshine into desolate house: real beauty in face, with the
 earnshaws’ handsome dark eyes, but the lintons’ fair skin and small
 features, and yellow curling hair. her spirit was high, though not
 rough, and qualified by heart sensitive and lively to excess in its
 affections. that capacity for intense attachments reminded of her
 mother: still she did not resemble her: for she could be soft and mild
 as dove, and she had gentle voice and pensive expression: her anger
 was never furious; her love never fierce: it was deep and tender.
 however, it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil her gifts. a
 propensity to be saucy was one; and perverse will, that indulged
 children invariably acquire, whether they be good tempered or cross. if
 servant chanced to vex her, it was always—“i shall tell papa!” and if
 reproved her, even by look, you would have thought it a
 heart-breaking business: i don’t believe ever did speak harsh word
 to her. took her education entirely on himself, and made it an
 amusement. fortunately, curiosity and quick intellect made her an apt
 scholar: she learned rapidly and eagerly, and did honour to his
 teaching.
 
till she reached the age of thirteen she had not once been beyond the
 range of the park by herself. mr. linton would take her with him mile
 or so outside, on rare occasions; but trusted her to one else.
 gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears; the chapel, the only
 building she had approached or entered, except her own home. wuthering
 heights and mr. heathcliff did not exist for her: she was perfect
 recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented. sometimes, indeed, while
 surveying the country from her nursery window, she would observe—
 
“ellen, how long will it be before i can walk to the top of those
 hills? i wonder what lies on the other side—is it the sea?”
 
“no, miss cathy,” i would answer; “it is hills again, just like these.”
 
“and what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them?” she
 once asked.
 
the abrupt descent of penistone crags particularly attracted her
 notice; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the topmost
 heights, and the whole extent of landscape besides lay in shadow. i
 explained that they were bare masses of stone, with hardly enough earth
 in their clefts to nourish stunted tree.
 
“and why are they bright so long after it is evening here?” she
 pursued.
 
“because they are great deal higher up than we are,” replied i; “you
 could not climb them, they are too high and steep. in winter the frost
 is always there before it comes to us; and deep into summer i have
 found snow under that black hollow on the north-east side!”
 
“oh, you have been on them!” she cried gleefully. “then i can go, too,
 when i am woman. has papa been, ellen?”
 
“papa would tell you, miss,” i answered, hastily, “that they are not
 worth the trouble of visiting. the moors, where you ramble with him,
 are much nicer; and thrushcross park is the finest place in the world.”
 
“but i know the park, and i don’t know those,” she murmured to herself.
 “and i should delight to look round from the brow of that tallest
 point: my little pony minny shall take some time.”
 
one of the maids mentioning the fairy cave, quite turned her head with
 desire to fulfil this project: she teased mr. linton about it; and he
 promised she should have the journey when she got older. but miss
 catherine measured her age by months, and, “now, am i old enough to go
 to penistone crags?” was the constant question in her mouth. the road
 thither wound close by wuthering heights. edgar had not the heart to
 pass it; so she received as constantly the answer, “not yet, love: not
 yet.”
 
i said mrs. heathcliff lived above dozen years after quitting her
 husband. her family were of delicate constitution: she and edgar both
 lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.
 what her last illness was, i am not certain: i conjecture, they died of
 the same thing, kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but
 incurable, and rapidly consuming life towards the close. she wrote to
 inform her brother of the probable conclusion of four-months’
 indisposition under which she had suffered, and entreated him to come
 to her, if possible; for she had much to settle, and she wished to bid
 him adieu, and deliver linton safely into his hands. her hope was that
 linton might be left with him, as had been with her: his father, she
 would fain convince herself, had desire to assume the burden of his
 maintenance or education. my master hesitated not moment in complying
 with her request: reluctant as was to leave home at ordinary calls,
 flew to answer this; commending catherine to my peculiar vigilance,
 in his absence, with reiterated orders that she must not wander out of
 the park, even under my escort: did not calculate on her going
 unaccompanied.
 
was away three weeks. the first day or two my charge sat in corner
 of the library, too sad for either reading or playing: in that quiet
 state she caused little trouble; but it was succeeded by an interval
 of impatient, fretful weariness; and being too busy, and too old then,
 to run up and down amusing her, i hit on method by which she might
 entertain herself. i used to send her on her travels round the
 grounds—now on foot, and now on pony; indulging her with patient
 audience of all her real and imaginary adventures when she returned.
 
the summer shone in full prime; and she took such taste for this
 solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out from breakfast
 till tea; and then the evenings were spent in recounting her fanciful
 tales. i did not fear her breaking bounds; because the gates were
 generally locked, and i thought she would scarcely venture forth alone,
 if they had stood wide open. unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced.
 catherine came to me, one morning, at eight o’clock, and said she was
 that day an arabian merchant, going to cross the desert with his
 caravan; and i must give her plenty of provision for herself and
 beasts: horse, and three camels, personated by large hound and a
 couple of pointers. i got together good store of dainties, and slung
 them in basket on one side of the saddle; and she sprang up as gay as
 fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the july
 sun, and trotted off with merry laugh, mocking my cautious counsel to
 avoid galloping, and come back early. the naughty thing never made her
 appearance at tea. one traveller, the hound, being an old dog and fond
 of its ease, returned; but neither cathy, nor the pony, nor the two
 pointers were visible in any direction: i despatched emissaries down
 this path, and that path, and at last went wandering in search of her
 myself. there was labourer working at fence round plantation, on
 the borders of the grounds. i inquired of him if had seen our young
 lady.
 
“i saw her at morn,” replied: “she would have to cut her hazel
 switch, and then she leapt her galloway over the hedge yonder, where it
 is lowest, and galloped out of sight.”
 
you may guess how i felt at hearing this news. it struck directly
 she must have started for penistone crags. “what will become of her?” i
 ejaculated, pushing through gap which the man was repairing, and
 making straight to the high-road. i walked as if for wager, mile
 after mile, till turn brought in view of the heights; but no
 catherine could i detect, far or near. the crags lie about mile and a
 half beyond mr. heathcliff’s place, and that is four from the grange,
 so i began to fear night would fall ere i could reach them. “and what
 if she should have slipped in clambering among them,” i reflected, “and
 been killed, or broken some of her bones?” my suspense was truly
 painful; and, at first, it gave delightful relief to observe, in
 hurrying by the farmhouse, charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying
 under window, with swelled head and bleeding ear. i opened the wicket
 and ran to the door, knocking vehemently for admittance. woman whom i
 knew, and who formerly lived at gimmerton, answered: she had been
 servant there since the death of mr. earnshaw.
 
“ah,” said she, “you are come a-seeking your little mistress! don’t be
 frightened. she’s here safe: but i’m glad it isn’t the master.”
 
“he is not at home then, is he?” i panted, quite breathless with quick
 walking and alarm.
 
“no, no,” she replied: “both and joseph are off, and i think they
 won’t return this hour or more. step in and rest you bit.”
 
i entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth, rocking
 herself in little chair that had been her mother’s when child. her
 hat was hung against the wall, and she seemed perfectly at home,
 laughing and chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to hareton—now
 great, strong lad of eighteen—who stared at her with considerable
 curiosity and astonishment: comprehending precious little of the fluent
 succession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased
 pouring forth.
 
“very well, miss!” i exclaimed, concealing my joy under an angry
 countenance. “this is your last ride, till papa comes back. i’ll not
 trust you over the threshold again, you naughty, naughty girl!”
 
“aha, ellen!” she cried, gaily, jumping up and running to my side. “i
 shall have pretty story to tell to-night; and so you’ve found out.
 have you ever been here in your life before?”
 
“put that hat on, and home at once,” said i. “i’m dreadfully grieved at
 you, miss cathy: you’ve done extremely wrong! it’s use pouting and
 crying: that won’t repay the trouble i’ve had, scouring the country
 after you. to think how mr. linton charged to keep you in; and you
 stealing off so! it shows you are cunning little fox, and nobody will
 put faith in you any more.”
 
“what have i done?” sobbed she, instantly checked. “papa charged me
 nothing: he’ll not scold me, ellen—he’s never cross, like you!”
 
“come, come!” i repeated. “i’ll tie the riband. now, let us have no
 petulance. oh, for shame! you thirteen years old, and such baby!”
 
this exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat from her head, and
 retreating to the chimney out of my reach.
 
“nay,” said the servant, “don’t be hard on the bonny lass, mrs. dean.
 we made her stop: she’d fain have ridden forwards, afeard you should be
 uneasy. hareton offered to go with her, and i thought should: it’s a
 wild road over the hills.”
 
hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hands in his pockets,
 too awkward to speak; though looked as if did not relish my
 intrusion.
 
“how long am i to wait?” i continued, disregarding the woman’s
 interference. “it will be dark in ten minutes. where is the pony, miss
 cathy? and where is phoenix? i shall leave you, unless you be quick; so
 please yourself.”
 
“the pony is in the yard,” she replied, “and phoenix is shut in there.
 he’s bitten—and so is charlie. i was going to tell you all about it;
 but you are in bad temper, and don’t deserve to hear.”
 
i picked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it; but perceiving
 that the people of the house took her part, she commenced capering
 round the room; and on my giving chase, ran like mouse over and under
 and behind the furniture, rendering it ridiculous for to pursue.
 hareton and the woman laughed, and she joined them, and waxed more
 impertinent still; till i cried, in great irritation,—“well, miss
 cathy, if you were aware whose house this is you’d be glad enough to
 get out.”
 
“it’s _your_ father’s, isn’t it?” said she, turning to hareton.
 
“nay,” replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.
 
could not stand steady gaze from her eyes, though they were just
 his own.
 
“whose then—your master’s?” she asked.
 
coloured deeper, with different feeling, muttered an oath, and
 turned away.
 
“who is his master?” continued the tiresome girl, appealing to me. “he
 talked about ‘our house,’ and ‘our folk.’ i thought had been the
 owner’s son. and never said miss: should have done, shouldn’t he,
 if he’s servant?”
 
hareton grew black as thunder-cloud at this childish speech. i
 silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded in equipping her
 for departure.
 
“now, get my horse,” she said, addressing her unknown kinsman as she
 would one of the stable-boys at the grange. “and you may come with me.
 i want to see where the goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear
 about the _fairishes_, as you call them: but make haste! what’s the
 matter? get my horse, i say.”
 
“i’ll see thee damned before i be _thy_ servant!” growled the lad.
 
“you’ll see _what?_” asked catherine in surprise.
 
“damned—thou saucy witch!” replied.
 
“there, miss cathy! you see you have got into pretty company,” i
 interposed. “nice words to be used to young lady! pray don’t begin to
 dispute with him. come, let us seek for minny ourselves, and begone.”
 
“but, ellen,” cried she, staring fixed in astonishment, “how dare he
 speak so to me? mustn’t be made to do as i ask him? you wicked
 creature, i shall tell papa what you said.—now, then!”
 
hareton did not appear to feel this threat; so the tears sprang into
 her eyes with indignation. “you bring the pony,” she exclaimed, turning
 to the woman, “and let my dog free this moment!”
 
“softly, miss,” answered the addressed. “you’ll lose nothing by being
 civil. though mr. hareton, there, be not the master’s son, he’s your
 cousin: and i was never hired to serve you.”
 
“_he_ my cousin!” cried cathy, with scornful laugh.
 
“yes, indeed,” responded her reprover.
 
“oh, ellen! don’t let them say such things,” she pursued in great
 trouble. “papa is gone to fetch my cousin from london: my cousin is a
 gentleman’s son. that my—” she stopped, and wept outright; upset at the
 bare notion of relationship with such clown.
 
“hush, hush!” i whispered; “people can have many cousins and of all
 sorts, miss cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they
 needn’t keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.”
 
“he’s not—he’s not my cousin, ellen!” she went on, gathering fresh
 grief from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms for refuge
 from the idea.
 
i was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual revelations;
 having doubt of linton’s approaching arrival, communicated by the
 former, being reported to mr. heathcliff; and feeling as confident that
 catherine’s first thought on her father’s return would be to seek an
 explanation of the latter’s assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred.
 hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for servant,
 seemed moved by her distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the
 door, took, to propitiate her, fine crooked-legged terrier whelp
 from the kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist! for he
 meant nought. pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed him with a
 glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.
 
i could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor
 fellow; who was well-made, athletic youth, good-looking in features,
 and stout and healthy, but attired in garments befitting his daily
 occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after
 rabbits and game. still, i thought i could detect in his physiognomy a
 mind owning better qualities than his father ever possessed. good
 things lost amid wilderness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far
 over-topped their neglected growth; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a
 wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and
 favourable circumstances. mr. heathcliff, i believe, had not treated
 him physically ill; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no
 temptation to that course of oppression: had none of the timid
 susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment, in
 heathcliff’s judgment. appeared to have bent his malevolence on
 making him brute: was never taught to read or write; never rebuked
 for any bad habit which did not annoy his keeper; never led single
 step towards virtue, or guarded by single precept against vice. and
 from what i heard, joseph contributed much to his deterioration, by a
 narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to flatter and pet him, as
 boy, because was the head of the old family. and as had been in
 the habit of accusing catherine earnshaw and heathcliff, when children,
 of putting the master past his patience, and compelling him to seek
 solace in drink by what termed their “offald ways,” so at present he
 laid the whole burden of hareton’s faults on the shoulders of the
 usurper of his property. if the lad swore, wouldn’t correct him: nor
 however culpably behaved. it gave joseph satisfaction, apparently,
 to watch him go the worst lengths: allowed that the lad was ruined:
 that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but then reflected that
 heathcliff must answer for it. hareton’s blood would be required at his
 hands; and there lay immense consolation in that thought. joseph had
 instilled into him pride of name, and of his lineage; would, had
 dared, have fostered hate between him and the present owner of the
 heights: but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition; and he
 confined his feelings regarding him to muttered innuendoes and private
 comminations. i don’t pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode
 of living customary in those days at wuthering heights: i only speak
 from hearsay; for i saw little. the villagers affirmed mr. heathcliff
 was _near_, and cruel hard landlord to his tenants; but the house,
 inside, had regained its ancient aspect of comfort under female
 management, and the scenes of riot common in hindley’s time were not
 now enacted within its walls. the master was too gloomy to seek
 companionship with any people, good or bad; and is yet.
 
this, however, is not making progress with my story. miss cathy
 rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded her own dogs,
 charlie and phoenix. they came limping and hanging their heads; and we
 set out for home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us. i could not
 wring from my little lady how she had spent the day; except that, as i
 supposed, the goal of her pilgrimage was penistone crags; and she
 arrived without adventure to the gate of the farmhouse, when hareton
 happened to issue forth, attended by some canine followers, who
 attacked her train. they had smart battle, before their owners could
 separate them: that formed an introduction. catherine told hareton who
 she was, and where she was going; and asked him to show her the way:
 finally, beguiling him to accompany her. opened the mysteries of the
 fairy cave, and twenty other queer places. but, being in disgrace, i
 was not favoured with description of the interesting objects she saw.
 i could gather, however, that her guide had been favourite till she
 hurt his feelings by addressing him as servant; and heathcliff’s
 housekeeper hurt hers by calling him her cousin. then the language he
 had held to her rankled in her heart; she who was always “love,” and
 “darling,” and “queen,” and “angel,” with everybody at the grange, to
 be insulted so shockingly by stranger! she did not comprehend it; and
 hard work i had to obtain promise that she would not lay the
 grievance before her father. i explained how objected to the whole
 household at the heights, and how sorry would be to find she had
 been there; but i insisted most on the fact, that if she revealed my
 negligence of his orders, would perhaps be so angry that i should
 have to leave; and cathy couldn’t bear that prospect: she pledged her
 word, and kept it for my sake. after all, she was sweet little girl.
 



chapter xix
 

letter, edged with black, announced the day of my master’s return.
 isabella was dead; and wrote to bid get mourning for his
 daughter, and arrange room, and other accommodations, for his
 youthful nephew. catherine ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming
 her father back; and indulged most sanguine anticipations of the
 innumerable excellencies of her “real” cousin. the evening of their
 expected arrival came. since early morning she had been busy ordering
 her own small affairs; and now attired in her new black frock—poor
 thing! her aunt’s death impressed her with definite sorrow—she
 obliged me, by constant worrying, to walk with her down through the
 grounds to meet them.
 
“linton is just six months younger than i am,” she chattered, as we
 strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf, under
 shadow of the trees. “how delightful it will be to have him for a
 playfellow! aunt isabella sent papa beautiful lock of his hair; it
 was lighter than mine—more flaxen, and quite as fine. i have it
 carefully preserved in little glass box; and i’ve often thought what
 pleasure it would be to see its owner. oh! i am happy—and papa, dear,
 dear papa! come, ellen, let us run! come, run.”
 
she ran, and returned and ran again, many times before my sober
 footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on the grassy
 bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently; but that was
 impossible: she couldn’t be still minute.
 
“how long they are!” she exclaimed. “ah, i see some dust on the
 road—they are coming! no! when will they be here? may we not go a
 little way—half mile, ellen, only just half mile? do say yes, to
 that clump of birches at the turn!”
 
i refused staunchly. at length her suspense was ended: the travelling
 carriage rolled in sight. miss cathy shrieked and stretched out her
 arms as soon as she caught her father’s face looking from the window.
 descended, nearly as eager as herself; and considerable interval
 elapsed ere they had thought to spare for any but themselves. while
 they exchanged caresses i took peep in to see after linton. was
 asleep in corner, wrapped in warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had
 been winter. pale, delicate, effeminate boy, who might have been
 taken for my master’s younger brother, so strong was the resemblance:
 but there was sickly peevishness in his aspect that edgar linton
 never had. the latter saw looking; and having shaken hands, advised
 to close the door, and leave him undisturbed; for the journey had
 fatigued him. cathy would fain have taken one glance, but her father
 told her to come, and they walked together up the park, while i
 hastened before to prepare the servants.
 
“now, darling,” said mr. linton, addressing his daughter, as they
 halted at the bottom of the front steps: “your cousin is not so strong
 or so merry as you are, and has lost his mother, remember, very
 short time since; therefore, don’t expect him to play and run about
 with you directly. and don’t harass him much by talking: let him be
 quiet this evening, at least, will you?”
 
“yes, yes, papa,” answered catherine: “but i do want to see him; and he
 hasn’t once looked out.”
 
the carriage stopped; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted to the
 ground by his uncle.
 
“this is your cousin cathy, linton,” said, putting their little
 hands together. “she’s fond of you already; and mind you don’t grieve
 her by crying to-night. try to be cheerful now; the travelling is at an
 end, and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you
 please.”
 
“let go to bed, then,” answered the boy, shrinking from catherine’s
 salute; and put his fingers to his eyes to remove incipient tears.
 
“come, come, there’s good child,” i whispered, leading him in.
 “you’ll make her weep too—see how sorry she is for you!”
 
i do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his cousin put on as
 sad countenance as himself, and returned to her father. all three
 entered, and mounted to the library, where tea was laid ready. i
 proceeded to remove linton’s cap and mantle, and placed him on chair
 by the table; but was sooner seated than began to cry afresh.
 my master inquired what was the matter.
 
“i can’t sit on chair,” sobbed the boy.
 
“go to the sofa, then, and ellen shall bring you some tea,” answered
 his uncle patiently.
 
had been greatly tried, during the journey, i felt convinced, by his
 fretful ailing charge. linton slowly trailed himself off, and lay down.
 cathy carried footstool and her cup to his side. at first she sat
 silent; but that could not last: she had resolved to make pet of her
 little cousin, as she would have him to be; and she commenced stroking
 his curls, and kissing his cheek, and offering him tea in her saucer,
 like baby. this pleased him, for was not much better: dried his
 eyes, and lightened into faint smile.
 
“oh, he’ll do very well,” said the master to me, after watching them a
 minute. “very well, if we can keep him, ellen. the company of child
 of his own age will instil new spirit into him soon, and by wishing for
 strength he’ll gain it.”
 
“ay, if we can keep him!” i mused to myself; and sore misgivings came
 over that there was slight hope of that. and then, i thought, how
 ever will that weakling live at wuthering heights? between his father
 and hareton, what playmates and instructors they’ll be. our doubts were
 presently decided—even earlier than i expected. i had just taken the
 children upstairs, after tea was finished, and seen linton asleep—he
 would not suffer to leave him till that was the case—i had come
 down, and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting bedroom
 candle for mr. edgar, when maid stepped out of the kitchen and
 informed that mr. heathcliff’s servant joseph was at the door, and
 wished to speak with the master.
 
“i shall ask him what wants first,” i said, in considerable
 trepidation. “a very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
 instant they have returned from long journey. i don’t think the
 master can see him.”
 
joseph had advanced through the kitchen as i uttered these words, and
 now presented himself in the hall. was donned in his sunday
 garments, with his most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding
 his hat in one hand, and his stick in the other, proceeded to clean
 his shoes on the mat.
 
“good-evening, joseph,” i said, coldly. “what business brings you here
 to-night?”
 
“it’s maister linton i mun spake to,” answered, waving me
 disdainfully aside.
 
“mr. linton is going to bed; unless you have something particular to
 say, i’m sure won’t hear it now,” i continued. “you had better sit
 down in there, and entrust your message to me.”
 
“which is his rahm?” pursued the fellow, surveying the range of closed
 doors.
 
i perceived was bent on refusing my mediation, so very reluctantly i
 went up to the library, and announced the unseasonable visitor,
 advising that should be dismissed till next day. mr. linton had no
 time to empower to do so, for joseph mounted close at my heels, and,
 pushing into the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the
 table, with his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began
 in an elevated tone, as if anticipating opposition—
 
“hathecliff has sent for his lad, and i munn’t goa back ’bout him.”
 
edgar linton was silent minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow
 overcast his features: would have pitied the child on his own
 account; but, recalling isabella’s hopes and fears, and anxious wishes
 for her son, and her commendations of him to his care, grieved
 bitterly at the prospect of yielding him up, and searched in his heart
 how it might be avoided. plan offered itself: the very exhibition of
 any desire to keep him would have rendered the claimant more
 peremptory: there was nothing left but to resign him. however, was
 not going to rouse him from his sleep.
 
“tell mr. heathcliff,” answered calmly, “that his shall come to
 wuthering heights to-morrow. is in bed, and too tired to go the
 distance now. you may also tell him that the mother of linton desired
 him to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his health is
 very precarious.”
 
“noa!” said joseph, giving thud with his prop on the floor, and
 assuming an authoritative air. “noa! that means naught. hathecliff maks
 noa ’count o’ t’ mother, nor ye norther; but he’ll hev his lad; und i
 mun tak’ him—soa now ye knaw!”
 
“you shall not to-night!” answered linton decisively. “walk down stairs
 at once, and repeat to your master what i have said. ellen, show him
 down. go—”
 
and, aiding the indignant elder with lift by the arm, rid the room
 of him and closed the door.
 
“varrah weell!” shouted joseph, as slowly drew off. “to-morn, he’s
 come hisseln, and thrust _him_ out, if ye darr!”
 



chapter xx
 

to obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, mr. linton
 commissioned to take the boy home early, on catherine’s pony; and,
 said he—“as we shall now have influence over his destiny, good or
 bad, you must say nothing of where is gone to my daughter: she
 cannot associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain
 in ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be restless, and anxious
 to visit the heights. merely tell her his father sent for him suddenly,
 and has been obliged to leave us.”
 
linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o’clock,
 and astonished to be informed that must prepare for further
 travelling; but i softened off the matter by stating that was going
 to spend some time with his father, mr. heathcliff, who wished to see
 him so much, did not like to defer the pleasure till should
 recover from his late journey.
 
“my father!” cried, in strange perplexity. “mamma never told i
 had father. where does live? i’d rather stay with uncle.”
 
“he lives little distance from the grange,” i replied; “just beyond
 those hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when you get
 hearty. and you should be glad to go home, and to see him. you must try
 to love him, as you did your mother, and then will love you.”
 
“but why have i not heard of him before?” asked linton. “why didn’t
 mamma and live together, as other people do?”
 
“he had business to keep him in the north,” i answered, “and your
 mother’s health required her to reside in the south.”
 
“and why didn’t mamma speak to about him?” persevered the child.
 “she often talked of uncle, and i learnt to love him long ago. how am i
 to love papa? i don’t know him.”
 
“oh, all children love their parents,” i said. “your mother, perhaps,
 thought you would want to be with him if she mentioned him often to
 you. let us make haste. an early ride on such beautiful morning is
 much preferable to an hour’s more sleep.”
 
“is _she_ to go with us,” demanded, “the little girl i saw
 yesterday?”
 
“not now,” replied i.
 
“is uncle?” continued.
 
“no, i shall be your companion there,” i said.
 
linton sank back on his pillow and fell into brown study.
 
“i won’t go without uncle,” cried at length: “i can’t tell where you
 mean to take me.”
 
i attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing reluctance to
 meet his father; still obstinately resisted any progress towards
 dressing, and i had to call for my master’s assistance in coaxing him
 out of bed. the poor thing was finally got off, with several delusive
 assurances that his absence should be short: that mr. edgar and cathy
 would visit him, and other promises, equally ill-founded, which i
 invented and reiterated at intervals throughout the way. the pure
 heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of
 minny, relieved his despondency after while. began to put
 questions concerning his new home, and its inhabitants, with greater
 interest and liveliness.
 
“is wuthering heights as pleasant place as thrushcross grange?” he
 inquired, turning to take last glance into the valley, whence light
 mist mounted and formed fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.
 
“it is not so buried in trees,” i replied, “and it is not quite so
 large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air
 is healthier for you—fresher and drier. you will, perhaps, think the
 building old and dark at first; though it is respectable house: the
 next best in the neighbourhood. and you will have such nice rambles on
 the moors. hareton earnshaw—that is, miss cathy’s other cousin, and so
 yours in manner—will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can
 bring book in fine weather, and make green hollow your study; and,
 now and then, your uncle may join you in walk: does, frequently,
 walk out on the hills.”
 
“and what is my father like?” asked. “is as young and handsome as
 uncle?”
 
“he’s as young,” said i; “but has black hair and eyes, and looks
 sterner; and is taller and bigger altogether. he’ll not seem to you
 so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it is not his way: still,
 mind you, be frank and cordial with him; and naturally he’ll be fonder
 of you than any uncle, for you are his own.”
 
“black hair and eyes!” mused linton. “i can’t fancy him. then i am not
 like him, am i?”
 
“not much,” i answered: not morsel, i thought, surveying with regret
 the white complexion and slim frame of my companion, and his large
 languid eyes—his mother’s eyes, save that, unless morbid touchiness
 kindled them moment, they had not vestige of her sparkling spirit.
 
“how strange that should never come to see mamma and me!” he
 murmured. “has ever seen me? if has, i must have been baby. i
 remember not single thing about him!”
 
“why, master linton,” said i, “three hundred miles is great distance;
 and ten years seem very different in length to grown-up person
 compared with what they do to you. it is probable mr. heathcliff
 proposed going from summer to summer, but never found convenient
 opportunity; and now it is too late. don’t trouble him with questions
 on the subject: it will disturb him, for good.”
 
the boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the remainder
 of the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate. i watched
 to catch his impressions in his countenance. surveyed the carved
 front and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and
 crooked firs, with solemn intentness, and then shook his head: his
 private feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.
 but had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation
 within. before dismounted, i went and opened the door. it was
 half-past six; the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was
 clearing and wiping down the table. joseph stood by his master’s chair
 telling some tale concerning lame horse; and hareton was preparing
 for the hayfield.
 
“hallo, nelly!” said mr. heathcliff, when saw me. “i feared i should
 have to come down and fetch my property myself. you’ve brought it, have
 you? let us see what we can make of it.”
 
got up and strode to the door: hareton and joseph followed in gaping
 curiosity. poor linton ran frightened eye over the faces of the
 three.
 
“sure-ly,” said joseph after grave inspection, “he’s swopped wi’ ye,
 maister, an’ yon’s his lass!”
 
heathcliff, having stared his into an ague of confusion, uttered a
 scornful laugh.
 
“god! what beauty! what lovely, charming thing!” exclaimed.
 “hav’n’t they reared it on snails and sour milk, nelly? oh, damn my
 soul! but that’s worse than i expected—and the devil knows i was not
 sanguine!”
 
i bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter. did
 not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father’s speech, or
 whether it were intended for him: indeed, was not yet certain that
 the grim, sneering stranger was his father. but clung to with
 growing trepidation; and on mr. heathcliff’s taking seat and bidding
 him “come hither” hid his face on my shoulder and wept.
 
“tut, tut!” said heathcliff, stretching out hand and dragging him
 roughly between his knees, and then holding up his head by the chin.
 “none of that nonsense! we’re not going to hurt thee, linton—isn’t that
 thy name? thou art thy mother’s child, entirely! where is _my_ share in
 thee, puling chicken?”
 
took off the boy’s cap and pushed back his thick flaxen curls, felt
 his slender arms and his small fingers; during which examination linton
 ceased crying, and lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.
 
“do you know me?” asked heathcliff, having satisfied himself that the
 limbs were all equally frail and feeble.
 
“no,” said linton, with gaze of vacant fear.
 
“you’ve heard of me, i daresay?”
 
“no,” replied again.
 
“no! what shame of your mother, never to waken your filial regard for
 me! you are my son, then, i’ll tell you; and your mother was wicked
 slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possessed.
 now, don’t wince, and colour up! though it _is_ something to see you
 have not white blood. be good lad; and i’ll do for you. nelly, if you
 be tired you may sit down; if not, get home again. i guess you’ll
 report what you hear and see to the cipher at the grange; and this
 thing won’t be settled while you linger about it.”
 
“well,” replied i, “i hope you’ll be kind to the boy, mr. heathcliff,
 or you’ll not keep him long; and he’s all you have akin in the wide
 world, that you will ever know—remember.”
 
“i’ll be _very_ kind to him, you needn’t fear,” said, laughing.
 “only nobody else must be kind to him: i’m jealous of monopolising his
 affection. and, to begin my kindness, joseph, bring the lad some
 breakfast. hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work. yes, nell,”
 added, when they had departed, “my is prospective owner of your
 place, and i should not wish him to die till i was certain of being his
 successor. besides, he’s _mine_, and i want the triumph of seeing _my_
 descendant fairly lord of their estates; my child hiring their children
 to till their fathers’ lands for wages. that is the sole consideration
 which can make endure the whelp: i despise him for himself, and hate
 him for the memories revives! but that consideration is sufficient:
 he’s as safe with me, and shall be tended as carefully as your master
 tends his own. i have room upstairs, furnished for him in handsome
 style; i’ve engaged tutor, also, to come three times week, from
 twenty miles’ distance, to teach him what pleases to learn. i’ve
 ordered hareton to obey him: and in fact i’ve arranged everything with
 view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in him, above his
 associates. i do regret, however, that so little deserves the
 trouble: if i wished any blessing in the world, it was to find him a
 worthy object of pride; and i’m bitterly disappointed with the
 whey-faced, whining wretch!”
 
while was speaking, joseph returned bearing basin of
 milk-porridge, and placed it before linton: who stirred round the
 homely mess with look of aversion, and affirmed could not eat it.
 i saw the old man-servant shared largely in his master’s scorn of the
 child; though was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart,
 because heathcliff plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour.
 
“cannot ate it?” repeated he, peering in linton’s face, and subduing
 his voice to whisper, for fear of being overheard. “but maister
 hareton nivir ate naught else, when wer little ’un; and what wer
 gooid eneugh for him’s gooid eneugh for ye, i’s rayther think!”
 
“i _sha’n’t_ eat it!” answered linton, snappishly. “take it away.”
 
joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.
 
“is there aught ails th’ victuals?” asked, thrusting the tray under
 heathcliff’s nose.
 
“what should ail them?” said.
 
“wah!” answered joseph, “yon dainty chap says cannut ate ’em. but i
 guess it’s raight! his mother wer just soa—we wer a’most too mucky to
 sow t’ corn for makking her breead.”
 
“don’t mention his mother to me,” said the master, angrily. “get him
 something that can eat, that’s all. what is his usual food, nelly?”
 
i suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received
 instructions to prepare some. come, i reflected, his father’s
 selfishness may contribute to his comfort. perceives his delicate
 constitution, and the necessity of treating him tolerably. i’ll console
 mr. edgar by acquainting him with the turn heathcliff’s humour has
 taken. having excuse for lingering longer, i slipped out, while
 linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of friendly
 sheep-dog. but was too much on the alert to be cheated: as i closed
 the door, i heard cry, and frantic repetition of the words—
 
“don’t leave me! i’ll not stay here! i’ll not stay here!”
 
then the latch was raised and fell: they did not suffer him to come
 forth. i mounted minny, and urged her to trot; and so my brief
 guardianship ended.
 



chapter xxi
 

we had sad work with little cathy that day: she rose in high glee,
 eager to join her cousin, and such passionate tears and lamentations
 followed the news of his departure that edgar himself was obliged to
 soothe her, by affirming should come back soon: added, however,
 “if i can get him”; and there were hopes of that. this promise
 poorly pacified her; but time was more potent; and though still at
 intervals she inquired of her father when linton would return, before
 she did see him again his features had waxed so dim in her memory that
 she did not recognise him.
 
when i chanced to encounter the housekeeper of wuthering heights, in
 paying business visits to gimmerton, i used to ask how the young master
 got on; for lived almost as secluded as catherine herself, and was
 never to be seen. i could gather from her that continued in weak
 health, and was tiresome inmate. she said mr. heathcliff seemed to
 dislike him ever longer and worse, though took some trouble to
 conceal it: had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could
 not do at all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes
 together. there seldom passed much talk between them: linton learnt his
 lessons and spent his evenings in small apartment they called the
 parlour: or else lay in bed all day: for was constantly getting
 coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort.
 
“and i never knew such faint-hearted creature,” added the woman; “nor
 one so careful of hisseln. _will_ go on, if i leave the window open
 bit late in the evening. oh! it’s killing, breath of night air! and
 must have fire in the middle of summer; and joseph’s bacca-pipe is
 poison; and must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk,
 milk for ever—heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter;
 and there he’ll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the
 fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and
 if hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him—hareton is not bad-natured,
 though he’s rough—they’re sure to part, one swearing and the other
 crying. i believe the master would relish earnshaw’s thrashing him to a
 mummy, if were not his son; and i’m certain would be fit to turn
 him out of doors, if knew half the nursing gives hisseln. but
 then won’t go into danger of temptation: never enters the
 parlour, and should linton show those ways in the house where is, he
 sends him upstairs directly.”
 
i divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered
 young heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if were not so
 originally; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed: though still
 i was moved with sense of grief at his lot, and wish that had
 been left with us. mr. edgar encouraged to gain information: he
 thought great deal about him, i fancy, and would have run some risk
 to see him; and told once to ask the housekeeper whether ever
 came into the village? she said had only been twice, on horseback,
 accompanying his father; and both times pretended to be quite
 knocked up for three or four days afterwards. that housekeeper left, if
 i recollect rightly, two years after came; and another, whom i did
 not know, was her successor; she lives there still.
 
time wore on at the grange in its former pleasant way till miss cathy
 reached sixteen. on the anniversary of her birth we never manifested
 any signs of rejoicing, because it was also the anniversary of my late
 mistress’s death. her father invariably spent that day alone in the
 library; and walked, at dusk, as far as gimmerton kirkyard, where he
 would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight. therefore catherine
 was thrown on her own resources for amusement. this twentieth of march
 was beautiful spring day, and when her father had retired, my young
 lady came down dressed for going out, and said she asked to have a
 ramble on the edge of the moor with me: mr. linton had given her leave,
 if we went only short distance and were back within the hour.
 
“so make haste, ellen!” she cried. “i know where i wish to go; where a
 colony of moor-game are settled: i want to see whether they have made
 their nests yet.”
 
“that must be good distance up,” i answered; “they don’t breed on the
 edge of the moor.”
 
“no, it’s not,” she said. “i’ve gone very near with papa.”
 
i put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more of the
 matter. she bounded before me, and returned to my side, and was off
 again like young greyhound; and, at first, i found plenty of
 entertainment in listening to the larks singing far and near, and
 enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine; and watching her, my pet and my
 delight, with her golden ringlets flying loose behind, and her bright
 cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as wild rose, and her eyes
 radiant with cloudless pleasure. she was happy creature, and an
 angel, in those days. it’s pity she could not be content.
 
“well,” said i, “where are your moor-game, miss cathy? we should be at
 them: the grange park-fence is great way off now.”
 
“oh, little further—only little further, ellen,” was her answer,
 continually. “climb to that hillock, pass that bank, and by the time
 you reach the other side i shall have raised the birds.”
 
but there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass, that, at
 length, i began to be weary, and told her we must halt, and retrace our
 steps. i shouted to her, as she had outstripped long way; she
 either did not hear or did not regard, for she still sprang on, and i
 was compelled to follow. finally, she dived into hollow; and before i
 came in sight of her again, she was two miles nearer wuthering heights
 than her own home; and i beheld couple of persons arrest her, one of
 whom i felt convinced was mr. heathcliff himself.
 
cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least, hunting
 out the nests of the grouse. the heights were heathcliff’s land, and he
 was reproving the poacher.
 
“i’ve neither taken any nor found any,” she said, as i toiled to them,
 expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement. “i didn’t mean
 to take them; but papa told there were quantities up here, and i
 wished to see the eggs.”
 
heathcliff glanced at with an ill-meaning smile, expressing his
 acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his malevolence towards
 it, and demanded who “papa” was?
 
“mr. linton of thrushcross grange,” she replied. “i thought you did not
 know me, or you wouldn’t have spoken in that way.”
 
“you suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected, then?” said,
 sarcastically.
 
“and what are you?” inquired catherine, gazing curiously on the
 speaker. “that man i’ve seen before. is your son?”
 
she pointed to hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing
 but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his
 age: seemed as awkward and rough as ever.
 
“miss cathy,” i interrupted, “it will be three hours instead of one
 that we are out, presently. we really must go back.”
 
“no, that man is not my son,” answered heathcliff, pushing aside.
 “but i have one, and you have seen him before too; and, though your
 nurse is in hurry, i think both you and she would be the better for a
 little rest. will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my
 house? you’ll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a
 kind welcome.”
 
i whispered catherine that she mustn’t, on any account, accede to the
 proposal: it was entirely out of the question.
 
“why?” she asked, aloud. “i’m tired of running, and the ground is dewy:
 i can’t sit here. let us go, ellen. besides, says i have seen his
 son. he’s mistaken, i think; but i guess where lives: at the
 farmhouse i visited in coming from penistone crags. don’t you?”
 
“i do. come, nelly, hold your tongue—it will be treat for her to look
 in on us. hareton, get forwards with the lass. you shall walk with me,
 nelly.”
 
“no, she’s not going to any such place,” i cried, struggling to release
 my arm, which had seized: but she was almost at the door-stones
 already, scampering round the brow at full speed. her appointed
 companion did not pretend to escort her: shied off by the road-side,
 and vanished.
 
“mr. heathcliff, it’s very wrong,” i continued: “you know you mean no
 good. and there she’ll see linton, and all will be told as soon as ever
 we return; and i shall have the blame.”
 
“i want her to see linton,” answered; “he’s looking better these few
 days; it’s not often he’s fit to be seen. and we’ll soon persuade her
 to keep the visit secret: where is the harm of it?”
 
“the harm of it is, that her father would hate if found i
 suffered her to enter your house; and i am convinced you have bad
 design in encouraging her to do so,” i replied.
 
“my design is as honest as possible. i’ll inform you of its whole
 scope,” said. “that the two cousins may fall in love, and get
 married. i’m acting generously to your master: his young chit has no
 expectations, and should she second my wishes she’ll be provided for at
 once as joint successor with linton.”
 
“if linton died,” i answered, “and his life is quite uncertain,
 catherine would be the heir.”
 
“no, she would not,” said. “there is clause in the will to secure
 it so: his property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, i desire
 their union, and am resolved to bring it about.”
 
“and i’m resolved she shall never approach your house with again,” i
 returned, as we reached the gate, where miss cathy waited our coming.
 
heathcliff bade be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to
 open the door. my young lady gave him several looks, as if she could
 not exactly make up her mind what to think of him; but now smiled
 when met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and i
 was foolish enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him
 from desiring her injury. linton stood on the hearth. had been out
 walking in the fields, for his cap was on, and was calling to joseph
 to bring him dry shoes. had grown tall of his age, still wanting
 some months of sixteen. his features were pretty yet, and his eye and
 complexion brighter than i remembered them, though with merely
 temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.
 
“now, who is that?” asked mr. heathcliff, turning to cathy. “can you
 tell?”
 
“your son?” she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then
 the other.
 
“yes, yes,” answered he: “but is this the only time you have beheld
 him? think! ah! you have short memory. linton, don’t you recall your
 cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?”
 
“what, linton!” cried cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
 “is that little linton? he’s taller than i am! are you linton?”
 
the youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself: she kissed him
 fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in
 the appearance of each. catherine had reached her full height; her
 figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole
 aspect sparkling with health and spirits. linton’s looks and movements
 were very languid, and his form extremely slight; but there was grace
 in his manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not
 unpleasing. after exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his
 cousin went to mr. heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his
 attention between the objects inside and those that lay without:
 pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really noting the
 former alone.
 
“and you are my uncle, then!” she cried, reaching up to salute him. “i
 thought i liked you, though you were cross at first. why don’t you
 visit at the grange with linton? to live all these years such close
 neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?”
 
“i visited it once or twice too often before you were born,” he
 answered. “there—damn it! if you have any kisses to spare, give them to
 linton: they are thrown away on me.”
 
“naughty ellen!” exclaimed catherine, flying to attack next with her
 lavish caresses. “wicked ellen! to try to hinder from entering. but
 i’ll take this walk every morning in future: may i, uncle? and
 sometimes bring papa. won’t you be glad to see us?”
 
“of course,” replied the uncle, with hardly suppressed grimace,
 resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed visitors. “but
 stay,” continued, turning towards the young lady. “now i think of
 it, i’d better tell you. mr. linton has prejudice against me: we
 quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if
 you mention coming here to him, he’ll put veto on your visits
 altogether. therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless
 of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you
 must not mention it.”
 
“why did you quarrel?” asked catherine, considerably crestfallen.
 
“he thought too poor to wed his sister,” answered heathcliff, “and
 was grieved that i got her: his pride was hurt, and he’ll never forgive
 it.”
 
“that’s wrong!” said the young lady: “some time i’ll tell him so. but
 linton and i have share in your quarrel. i’ll not come here, then;
 shall come to the grange.”
 
“it will be too far for me,” murmured her cousin: “to walk four miles
 would kill me. no, come here, miss catherine, now and then: not every
 morning, but once or twice week.”
 
the father launched towards his glance of bitter contempt.
 
“i am afraid, nelly, i shall lose my labour,” muttered to me. “miss
 catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his value, and send
 him to the devil. now, if it had been hareton!—do you know that, twenty
 times day, i covet hareton, with all his degradation? i’d have loved
 the lad had been some one else. but i think he’s safe from _her_
 love. i’ll pit him against that paltry creature, unless it bestir
 itself briskly. we calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen.
 oh, confound the vapid thing! he’s absorbed in drying his feet, and
 never looks at her.—linton!”
 
“yes, father,” answered the boy.
 
“have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even rabbit
 or weasel’s nest? take her into the garden, before you change your
 shoes; and into the stable to see your horse.”
 
“wouldn’t you rather sit here?” asked linton, addressing cathy in a
 tone which expressed reluctance to move again.
 
“i don’t know,” she replied, casting longing look to the door, and
 evidently eager to be active.
 
kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire. heathcliff rose, and
 went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for
 hareton. hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered. the young
 man had been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks
 and his wetted hair.
 
“oh, i’ll ask _you_, uncle,” cried miss cathy, recollecting the
 housekeeper’s assertion. “that is not my cousin, is he?”
 
“yes,” replied, “your mother’s nephew. don’t you like him?”
 
catherine looked queer.
 
“is not handsome lad?” continued.
 
the uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered sentence in
 heathcliff’s ear. laughed; hareton darkened: i perceived was very
 sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously dim notion of his
 inferiority. but his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming—
 
“you’ll be the favourite among us, hareton! she says you are a—what was
 it? well, something very flattering. here! you go with her round the
 farm. and behave like gentleman, mind! don’t use any bad words; and
 don’t stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to
 hide your face when she is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly,
 and keep your hands out of your pockets. be off, and entertain her as
 nicely as you can.”
 
watched the couple walking past the window. earnshaw had his
 countenance completely averted from his companion. seemed studying
 the familiar landscape with stranger’s and an artist’s interest.
 catherine took sly look at him, expressing small admiration. she then
 turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself,
 and tripped merrily on, lilting tune to supply the lack of
 conversation.
 
“i’ve tied his tongue,” observed heathcliff. “he’ll not venture a
 single syllable all the time! nelly, you recollect at his age—nay,
 some years younger. did i ever look so stupid: so ‘gaumless,’ as joseph
 calls it?”
 
“worse,” i replied, “because more sullen with it.”
 
“i’ve pleasure in him,” continued, reflecting aloud. “he has
 satisfied my expectations. if were born fool i should not enjoy it
 half so much. but he’s fool; and i can sympathise with all his
 feelings, having felt them myself. i know what suffers now, for
 instance, exactly: it is merely beginning of what shall suffer,
 though. and he’ll never be able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness
 and ignorance. i’ve got him faster than his scoundrel of father
 secured me, and lower; for takes pride in his brutishness. i’ve
 taught him to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and weak. don’t
 you think hindley would be proud of his son, if could see him?
 almost as proud as i am of mine. but there’s this difference; one is
 gold put to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to
 ape service of silver. _mine_ has nothing valuable about it; yet i
 shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor stuff can go.
 _his_ had first-rate qualities, and they are lost: rendered worse than
 unavailing. _i_ have nothing to regret; _he_ would have more than any,
 but i, are aware of. and the best of it is, hareton is damnably fond of
 me! you’ll own that i’ve outmatched hindley there. if the dead villain
 could rise from his grave to abuse for his offspring’s wrongs, i
 should have the fun of seeing the said offspring fight him back again,
 indignant that should dare to rail at the one friend has in the
 world!”
 
heathcliff chuckled fiendish laugh at the idea. i made reply,
 because i saw that expected none. meantime, our young companion, who
 sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms
 of uneasiness, probably repenting that had denied himself the treat
 of catherine’s society for fear of little fatigue. his father
 remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand
 irresolutely extended towards his cap.
 
“get up, you idle boy!” exclaimed, with assumed heartiness. “away
 after them! they are just at the corner, by the stand of hives.”
 
linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth. the lattice was
 open, and, as stepped out, i heard cathy inquiring of her unsociable
 attendant what was that inscription over the door? hareton stared up,
 and scratched his head like true clown.
 
“it’s some damnable writing,” answered. “i cannot read it.”
 
“can’t read it?” cried catherine; “i can read it: it’s english. but i
 want to know why it is there.”
 
linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth had exhibited.
 
“he does not know his letters,” said to his cousin. “could you
 believe in the existence of such colossal dunce?”
 
“is all as should be?” asked miss cathy, seriously; “or is he
 simple: not right? i’ve questioned him twice now, and each time he
 looked so stupid i think does not understand me. i can hardly
 understand _him_, i’m sure!”
 
linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at hareton tauntingly; who
 certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.
 
“there’s nothing the matter but laziness; is there, earnshaw?” said.
 “my cousin fancies you are an idiot. there you experience the
 consequence of scorning ‘book-larning,’ as you would say. have you
 noticed, catherine, his frightful yorkshire pronunciation?”
 
“why, where the devil is the use on’t?” growled hareton, more ready in
 answering his daily companion. was about to enlarge further, but the
 two youngsters broke into noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being
 delighted to discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of
 amusement.
 
“where is the use of the devil in that sentence?” tittered linton.
 “papa told you not to say any bad words, and you can’t open your mouth
 without one. do try to behave like gentleman, now do!”
 
“if thou weren’t more lass than lad, i’d fell thee this minute, i
 would; pitiful lath of crater!” retorted the angry boor, retreating,
 while his face burnt with mingled rage and mortification; for was
 conscious of being insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.
 
mr. heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as i, smiled
 when saw him go; but immediately afterwards cast look of singular
 aversion on the flippant pair, who remained chattering in the doorway:
 the boy finding animation enough while discussing hareton’s faults and
 deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of his goings on; and the girl
 relishing his pert and spiteful sayings, without considering the
 ill-nature they evinced. i began to dislike, more than to compassionate
 linton, and to excuse his father in some measure for holding him cheap.
 
we stayed till afternoon: i could not tear miss cathy away sooner; but
 happily my master had not quitted his apartment, and remained ignorant
 of our prolonged absence. as we walked home, i would fain have
 enlightened my charge on the characters of the people we had quitted:
 but she got it into her head that i was prejudiced against them.
 
“aha!” she cried, “you take papa’s side, ellen: you are partial i know;
 or else you wouldn’t have cheated so many years into the notion that
 linton lived long way from here. i’m really extremely angry; only i’m
 so pleased i can’t show it! but you must hold your tongue about my
 uncle; he’s _my_ uncle, remember; and i’ll scold papa for quarrelling
 with him.”
 
and so she ran on, till i relinquished the endeavour to convince her of
 her mistake. she did not mention the visit that night, because she did
 not see mr. linton. next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin; and
 still i was not altogether sorry: i thought the burden of directing and
 warning would be more efficiently borne by him than me. but was too
 timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun
 connection with the household of the heights, and catherine liked good
 reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.
 
“papa!” she exclaimed, after the morning’s salutations, “guess whom i
 saw yesterday, in my walk on the moors. ah, papa, you started! you’ve
 not done right, have you, now? i saw—but listen, and you shall hear how
 i found you out; and ellen, who is in league with you, and yet
 pretended to pity so, when i kept hoping, and was always
 disappointed about linton’s coming back!”
 
she gave faithful account of her excursion and its consequences; and
 my master, though cast more than one reproachful look at me, said
 nothing till she had concluded. then drew her to him, and asked if
 she knew why had concealed linton’s near neighbourhood from her?
 could she think it was to deny her pleasure that she might harmlessly
 enjoy?
 
“it was because you disliked mr. heathcliff,” she answered.
 
“then you believe i care more for my own feelings than yours, cathy?”
 said. “no, it was not because i disliked mr. heathcliff, but because
 mr. heathcliff dislikes me; and is most diabolical man, delighting to
 wrong and ruin those hates, if they give him the slightest
 opportunity. i knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with
 your cousin without being brought into contact with him; and i knew he
 would detest you on my account; so for your own good, and nothing else,
 i took precautions that you should not see linton again. i meant to
 explain this some time as you grew older, and i’m sorry i delayed it.”
 
“but mr. heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,” observed catherine, not
 at all convinced; “and _he_ didn’t object to our seeing each other: he
 said i might come to his house when i pleased; only i must not tell
 you, because you had quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for
 marrying aunt isabella. and you won’t. _you_ are the one to be blamed:
 is willing to let _us_ be friends, at least; linton and i; and you
 are not.”
 
my master, perceiving that she would not take his word for her
 uncle-in-law’s evil disposition, gave hasty sketch of his conduct to
 isabella, and the manner in which wuthering heights became his
 property. could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for
 though spoke little of it, still felt the same horror and
 detestation of his ancient enemy that had occupied his heart ever since
 mrs. linton’s death. “she might have been living yet, if it had not
 been for him!” was his constant bitter reflection; and, in his eyes,
 heathcliff seemed murderer. miss cathy—conversant with bad deeds
 except her own slight acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion,
 arising from hot temper and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day
 they were committed—was amazed at the blackness of spirit that could
 brood on and cover revenge for years, and deliberately prosecute its
 plans without visitation of remorse. she appeared so deeply impressed
 and shocked at this new view of human nature—excluded from all her
 studies and all her ideas till now—that mr. edgar deemed it unnecessary
 to pursue the subject. merely added: “you will know hereafter,
 darling, why i wish you to avoid his house and family; now return to
 your old employments and amusements, and think more about them.”
 
catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her lessons for a
 couple of hours, according to custom; then she accompanied him into the
 grounds, and the whole day passed as usual: but in the evening, when
 she had retired to her room, and i went to help her to undress, i found
 her crying, on her knees by the bedside.
 
“oh, fie, silly child!” i exclaimed. “if you had any real griefs you’d
 be ashamed to waste tear on this little contrariety. you never had
 one shadow of substantial sorrow, miss catherine. suppose, for a
 minute, that master and i were dead, and you were by yourself in the
 world: how would you feel, then? compare the present occasion with such
 an affliction as that, and be thankful for the friends you have,
 instead of coveting more.”
 
“i’m not crying for myself, ellen,” she answered, “it’s for him. he
 expected to see again to-morrow, and there he’ll be so disappointed:
 and he’ll wait for me, and i sha’n’t come!”
 
“nonsense!” said i, “do you imagine has thought as much of you as
 you have of him? hasn’t hareton for companion? not one in a
 hundred would weep at losing relation they had just seen twice, for
 two afternoons. linton will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself
 further about you.”
 
“but may i not write note to tell him why i cannot come?” she asked,
 rising to her feet. “and just send those books i promised to lend him?
 his books are not as nice as mine, and wanted to have them
 extremely, when i told him how interesting they were. may i not,
 ellen?”
 
“no, indeed! no, indeed!” replied i with decision. “then would write
 to you, and there’d never be an end of it. no, miss catherine, the
 acquaintance must be dropped entirely: so papa expects, and i shall see
 that it is done.”
 
“but how can one little note—?” she recommenced, putting on an
 imploring countenance.
 
“silence!” i interrupted. “we’ll not begin with your little notes. get
 into bed.”
 
she threw at very naughty look, so naughty that i would not kiss
 her good-night at first: i covered her up, and shut her door, in great
 displeasure; but, repenting half-way, i returned softly, and lo! there
 was miss standing at the table with bit of blank paper before her and
 pencil in her hand, which she guiltily slipped out of sight on my
 entrance.
 
“you’ll get nobody to take that, catherine,” i said, “if you write it;
 and at present i shall put out your candle.”
 
i set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as i did so slap on my
 hand and petulant “cross thing!” i then quitted her again, and she
 drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevish humours. the letter was
 finished and forwarded to its destination by milk-fetcher who came
 from the village; but that i didn’t learn till some time afterwards.
 weeks passed on, and cathy recovered her temper; though she grew
 wondrous fond of stealing off to corners by herself; and often, if i
 came near her suddenly while reading, she would start and bend over the
 book, evidently desirous to hide it; and i detected edges of loose
 paper sticking out beyond the leaves. she also got trick of coming
 down early in the morning and lingering about the kitchen, as if she
 were expecting the arrival of something; and she had small drawer in
 cabinet in the library, which she would trifle over for hours, and
 whose key she took special care to remove when she left it.
 
one day, as she inspected this drawer, i observed that the playthings
 and trinkets which recently formed its contents were transmuted into
 bits of folded paper. my curiosity and suspicions were roused; i
 determined to take peep at her mysterious treasures; so, at night, as
 soon as she and my master were safe upstairs, i searched, and readily
 found among my house keys one that would fit the lock. having opened, i
 emptied the whole contents into my apron, and took them with to
 examine at leisure in my own chamber. though i could not but suspect, i
 was still surprised to discover that they were mass of
 correspondence—daily almost, it must have been—from linton heathcliff:
 answers to documents forwarded by her. the earlier dated were
 embarrassed and short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious
 love-letters, foolish, as the age of the writer rendered natural, yet
 with touches here and there which i thought were borrowed from more
 experienced source. some of them struck as singularly odd compounds
 of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong feeling, and concluding in
 the affected, wordy style that schoolboy might use to fancied,
 incorporeal sweetheart. whether they satisfied cathy i don’t know; but
 they appeared very worthless trash to me. after turning over as many as
 i thought proper, i tied them in handkerchief and set them aside,
 relocking the vacant drawer.
 
following her habit, my young lady descended early, and visited the
 kitchen: i watched her go to the door, on the arrival of certain
 little boy; and, while the dairymaid filled his can, she tucked
 something into his jacket pocket, and plucked something out. i went
 round by the garden, and laid wait for the messenger; who fought
 valorously to defend his trust, and we spilt the milk between us; but i
 succeeded in abstracting the epistle; and, threatening serious
 consequences if did not look sharp home, i remained under the wall
 and perused miss cathy’s affectionate composition. it was more simple
 and more eloquent than her cousin’s: very pretty and very silly. i
 shook my head, and went meditating into the house. the day being wet,
 she could not divert herself with rambling about the park; so, at the
 conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to the solace of the
 drawer. her father sat reading at the table; and i, on purpose, had
 sought bit of work in some unripped fringes of the window-curtain,
 keeping my eye steadily fixed on her proceedings. never did any bird
 flying back to plundered nest, which it had left brimful of chirping
 young ones, express more complete despair, in its anguished cries and
 flutterings, than she by her single “oh!” and the change that
 transfigured her late happy countenance. mr. linton looked up.
 
“what is the matter, love? have you hurt yourself?” said.
 
his tone and look assured her _he_ had not been the discoverer of the
 hoard.
 
“no, papa!” she gasped. “ellen! ellen! come upstairs—i’m sick!”
 
i obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.
 
“oh, ellen! you have got them,” she commenced immediately, dropping on
 her knees, when we were enclosed alone. “oh, give them to me, and i’ll
 never, never do so again! don’t tell papa. you have not told papa,
 ellen? say you have not? i’ve been exceedingly naughty, but i won’t do
 it any more!”
 
with grave severity in my manner i bade her stand up.
 
“so,” i exclaimed, “miss catherine, you are tolerably far on, it seems:
 you may well be ashamed of them! fine bundle of trash you study in
 your leisure hours, to be sure: why, it’s good enough to be printed!
 and what do you suppose the master will think when i display it before
 him? i hav’n’t shown it yet, but you needn’t imagine i shall keep your
 ridiculous secrets. for shame! and you must have led the way in writing
 such absurdities: would not have thought of beginning, i’m certain.”
 
“i didn’t! i didn’t!” sobbed cathy, fit to break her heart. “i didn’t
 once think of loving him till—”
 
“_loving_!” cried i, as scornfully as i could utter the word.
 “_loving_! did anybody ever hear the like! i might just as well talk of
 loving the miller who comes once year to buy our corn. pretty loving,
 indeed! and both times together you have seen linton hardly four hours
 in your life! now here is the babyish trash. i’m going with it to the
 library; and we’ll see what your father says to such _loving_.”
 
she sprang at her precious epistles, but i held them above my head; and
 then she poured out further frantic entreaties that i would burn
 them—do anything rather than show them. and being really fully as much
 inclined to laugh as scold—for i esteemed it all girlish vanity—i at
 length relented in measure, and asked,—“if i consent to burn them,
 will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive letter again,
 nor book (for i perceive you have sent him books), nor locks of hair,
 nor rings, nor playthings?”
 
“we don’t send playthings,” cried catherine, her pride overcoming her
 shame.
 
“nor anything at all, then, my lady?” i said. “unless you will, here i
 go.”
 
“i promise, ellen!” she cried, catching my dress. “oh, put them in the
 fire, do, do!”
 
but when i proceeded to open place with the poker the sacrifice was
 too painful to be borne. she earnestly supplicated that i would spare
 her one or two.
 
“one or two, ellen, to keep for linton’s sake!”
 
i unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them in from an
 angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.
 
“i will have one, you cruel wretch!” she screamed, darting her hand
 into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed fragments, at the
 expense of her fingers.
 
“very well—and i will have some to exhibit to papa!” i answered,
 shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning anew to the door.
 
she emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and motioned to
 finish the immolation. it was done; i stirred up the ashes, and
 interred them under shovelful of coals; and she mutely, and with a
 sense of intense injury, retired to her private apartment. i descended
 to tell my master that the young lady’s qualm of sickness was almost
 gone, but i judged it best for her to lie down while. she wouldn’t
 dine; but she reappeared at tea, pale, and red about the eyes, and
 marvellously subdued in outward aspect. next morning i answered the
 letter by slip of paper, inscribed, “master heathcliff is requested
 to send more notes to miss linton, as she will not receive them.”
 and, thenceforth, the little boy came with vacant pockets.
 



chapter xxii
 

summer drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past michaelmas, but
 the harvest was late that year, and few of our fields were still
 uncleared. mr. linton and his daughter would frequently walk out among
 the reapers; at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk,
 and the evening happening to be chill and damp, my master caught bad
 cold, that settled obstinately on his lungs, and confined him indoors
 throughout the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.
 
poor cathy, frightened from her little romance, had been considerably
 sadder and duller since its abandonment; and her father insisted on her
 reading less, and taking more exercise. she had his companionship no
 longer; i esteemed it duty to supply its lack, as much as possible,
 with mine: an inefficient substitute; for i could only spare two or
 three hours, from my numerous diurnal occupations, to follow her
 footsteps, and then my society was obviously less desirable than his.
 
on an afternoon in october, or the beginning of november—a fresh watery
 afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling with moist, withered
 leaves, and the cold blue sky was half hidden by clouds—dark grey
 streamers, rapidly mounting from the west, and boding abundant rain—i
 requested my young lady to forego her ramble, because i was certain of
 showers. she refused; and i unwillingly donned cloak, and took my
 umbrella to accompany her on stroll to the bottom of the park: a
 formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited—and that she
 invariably was when mr. edgar had been worse than ordinary, thing
 never known from his confession, but guessed both by her and from
 his increased silence and the melancholy of his countenance. she went
 sadly on: there was running or bounding now, though the chill wind
 might well have tempted her to race. and often, from the side of my
 eye, i could detect her raising hand, and brushing something off her
 cheek. i gazed round for means of diverting her thoughts. on one side
 of the road rose high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks,
 with their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure: the soil was too
 loose for the latter; and strong winds had blown some nearly
 horizontal. in summer miss catherine delighted to climb along these
 trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above the ground;
 and i, pleased with her agility and her light, childish heart, still
 considered it proper to scold every time i caught her at such an
 elevation, but so that she knew there was necessity for descending.
 from dinner to tea she would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing
 nothing except singing old songs—my nursery lore—to herself, or
 watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to
 fly: or nestling with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming,
 happier than words can express.
 
“look, miss!” i exclaimed, pointing to nook under the roots of one
 twisted tree. “winter is not here yet. there’s little flower up
 yonder, the last bud from the multitude of bluebells that clouded those
 turf steps in july with lilac mist. will you clamber up, and pluck it
 to show to papa?”
 
cathy stared long time at the lonely blossom trembling in its earthy
 shelter, and replied, at length—“no, i’ll not touch it: but it looks
 melancholy, does it not, ellen?”
 
“yes,” i observed, “about as starved and sackless as you: your cheeks
 are bloodless; let us take hold of hands and run. you’re so low, i
 daresay i shall keep up with you.”
 
“no,” she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at intervals
 to muse over bit of moss, or tuft of blanched grass, or fungus
 spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage; and, ever
 and anon, her hand was lifted to her averted face.
 
“catherine, why are you crying, love?” i asked, approaching and putting
 my arm over her shoulder. “you mustn’t cry because papa has cold; be
 thankful it is nothing worse.”
 
she now put further restraint on her tears; her breath was stifled
 by sobs.
 
“oh, it _will_ be something worse,” she said. “and what shall i do when
 papa and you leave me, and i am by myself? i can’t forget your words,
 ellen; they are always in my ear. how life will be changed, how dreary
 the world will be, when papa and you are dead.”
 
“none can tell whether you won’t die before us,” i replied. “it’s wrong
 to anticipate evil. we’ll hope there are years and years to come before
 any of us go: master is young, and i am strong, and hardly forty-five.
 my mother lived till eighty, canty dame to the last. and suppose mr.
 linton were spared till saw sixty, that would be more years than you
 have counted, miss. and would it not be foolish to mourn calamity
 above twenty years beforehand?”
 
“but aunt isabella was younger than papa,” she remarked, gazing up with
 timid hope to seek further consolation.
 
“aunt isabella had not you and to nurse her,” i replied. “she wasn’t
 as happy as master: she hadn’t as much to live for. all you need do, is
 to wait well on your father, and cheer him by letting him see you
 cheerful; and avoid giving him anxiety on any subject: mind that,
 cathy! i’ll not disguise but you might kill him if you were wild and
 reckless, and cherished foolish, fanciful affection for the of a
 person who would be glad to have him in his grave; and allowed him to
 discover that you fretted over the separation has judged it
 expedient to make.”
 
“i fret about nothing on earth except papa’s illness,” answered my
 companion. “i care for nothing in comparison with papa. and i’ll
 never—never—oh, never, while i have my senses, do an act or say word
 to vex him. i love him better than myself, ellen; and i know it by
 this: i pray every night that i may live after him; because i would
 rather be miserable than that should be: that proves i love him
 better than myself.”
 
“good words,” i replied. “but deeds must prove it also; and after is
 well, remember you don’t forget resolutions formed in the hour of
 fear.”
 
as we talked, we neared door that opened on the road; and my young
 lady, lightening into sunshine again, climbed up and seated herself on
 the top of the wall, reaching over to gather some hips that bloomed
 scarlet on the summit branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the
 highway side: the lower fruit had disappeared, but only birds could
 touch the upper, except from cathy’s present station. in stretching to
 pull them, her hat fell off; and as the door was locked, she proposed
 scrambling down to recover it. i bid her be cautious lest she got a
 fall, and she nimbly disappeared. but the return was such easy
 matter: the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rosebushes
 and blackberry stragglers could yield assistance in re-ascending.
 i, like fool, didn’t recollect that, till i heard her laughing and
 exclaiming—“ellen! you’ll have to fetch the key, or else i must run
 round to the porter’s lodge. i can’t scale the ramparts on this side!”
 
“stay where you are,” i answered; “i have my bundle of keys in my
 pocket: perhaps i may manage to open it; if not, i’ll go.”
 
catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the door, while
 i tried all the large keys in succession. i had applied the last, and
 found that none would do; so, repeating my desire that she would remain
 there, i was about to hurry home as fast as i could, when an
 approaching sound arrested me. it was the trot of horse; cathy’s
 dance stopped also.
 
“who is that?” i whispered.
 
“ellen, i wish you could open the door,” whispered back my companion,
 anxiously.
 
“ho, miss linton!” cried deep voice (the rider’s), “i’m glad to meet
 you. don’t be in haste to enter, for i have an explanation to ask and
 obtain.”
 
“i sha’n’t speak to you, mr. heathcliff,” answered catherine. “papa
 says you are wicked man, and you hate both him and me; and ellen says
 the same.”
 
“that is nothing to the purpose,” said heathcliff. (he it was.) “i
 don’t hate my son, i suppose; and it is concerning him that i demand
 your attention. yes; you have cause to blush. two or three months
 since, were you not in the habit of writing to linton? making love in
 play, eh? you deserved, both of you, flogging for that! you especially,
 the elder; and less sensitive, as it turns out. i’ve got your letters,
 and if you give any pertness i’ll send them to your father. i
 presume you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it, didn’t you?
 well, you dropped linton with it into slough of despond. was in
 earnest: in love, really. as true as i live, he’s dying for you;
 breaking his heart at your fickleness: not figuratively, but actually.
 though hareton has made him standing jest for six weeks, and i have
 used more serious measures, and attempted to frighten him out of his
 idiocy, gets worse daily; and he’ll be under the sod before summer,
 unless you restore him!”
 
“how can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?” i called from the
 inside. “pray ride on! how can you deliberately get up such paltry
 falsehoods? miss cathy, i’ll knock the lock off with stone: you won’t
 believe that vile nonsense. you can feel in yourself it is impossible
 that person should die for love of stranger.”
 
“i was not aware there were eavesdroppers,” muttered the detected
 villain. “worthy mrs. dean, i like you, but i don’t like your
 double-dealing,” added aloud. “how could _you_ lie so glaringly as
 to affirm i hated the ‘poor child’? and invent bugbear stories to
 terrify her from my door-stones? catherine linton (the very name warms
 me), my bonny lass, i shall be from home all this week; go and see if i
 have not spoken truth: do, there’s darling! just imagine your father
 in my place, and linton in yours; then think how you would value your
 careless lover if refused to stir step to comfort you, when your
 father himself entreated him; and don’t, from pure stupidity, fall into
 the same error. i swear, on my salvation, he’s going to his grave, and
 none but you can save him!”
 
the lock gave way and i issued out.
 
“i swear linton is dying,” repeated heathcliff, looking hard at me.
 “and grief and disappointment are hastening his death. nelly, if you
 won’t let her go, you can walk over yourself. but i shall not return
 till this time next week; and i think your master himself would
 scarcely object to her visiting her cousin.”
 
“come in,” said i, taking cathy by the arm and half forcing her to
 re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of
 the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.
 
pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed—
 
“miss catherine, i’ll own to you that i have little patience with
 linton; and hareton and joseph have less. i’ll own that he’s with a
 harsh set. pines for kindness, as well as love; and kind word from
 you would be his best medicine. don’t mind mrs. dean’s cruel cautions;
 but be generous, and contrive to see him. dreams of you day and
 night, and cannot be persuaded that you don’t hate him, since you
 neither write nor call.”
 
i closed the door, and rolled stone to assist the loosened lock in
 holding it; and spreading my umbrella, i drew my charge underneath: for
 the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and
 warned us to avoid delay. our hurry prevented any comment on the
 encounter with heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but i divined
 instinctively that catherine’s heart was clouded now in double
 darkness. her features were so sad, they did not seem hers: she
 evidently regarded what she had heard as every syllable true.
 
the master had retired to rest before we came in. cathy stole to his
 room to inquire how was; had fallen asleep. she returned, and
 asked to sit with her in the library. we took our tea together; and
 afterwards she lay down on the rug, and told not to talk, for she
 was weary. i got book, and pretended to read. as soon as she supposed
 absorbed in my occupation, she recommenced her silent weeping: it
 appeared, at present, her favourite diversion. i suffered her to enjoy
 it while; then i expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all mr.
 heathcliff’s assertions about his son, as if i were certain she would
 coincide. alas! i hadn’t skill to counteract the effect his account had
 produced: it was just what intended.
 
“you may be right, ellen,” she answered; “but i shall never feel at
 ease till i know. and i must tell linton it is not my fault that i
 don’t write, and convince him that i shall not change.”
 
what use were anger and protestations against her silly credulity? we
 parted that night—hostile; but next day beheld on the road to
 wuthering heights, by the side of my wilful young mistress’s pony. i
 couldn’t bear to witness her sorrow: to see her pale, dejected
 countenance, and heavy eyes: and i yielded, in the faint hope that
 linton himself might prove, by his reception of us, how little of the
 tale was founded on fact.
 



chapter xxiii
 

the rainy night had ushered in misty morning—half frost, half
 drizzle—and temporary brooks crossed our path—gurgling from the
 uplands. my feet were thoroughly wetted; i was cross and low; exactly
 the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things. we
 entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether mr.
 heathcliff were really absent: because i put slight faith in his own
 affirmation.
 
joseph seemed sitting in sort of elysium alone, beside roaring
 fire; quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces
 of toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth. catherine
 ran to the hearth to warm herself. i asked if the master was in? my
 question remained so long unanswered, that i thought the old man had
 grown deaf, and repeated it louder.
 
“na—ay!” snarled, or rather screamed through his nose. “na—ay! yah
 muh goa back whear yah coom frough.”
 
“joseph!” cried peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner
 room. “how often am i to call you? there are only few red ashes now.
 joseph! come this moment.”
 
vigorous puffs, and resolute stare into the grate, declared had no
 ear for this appeal. the housekeeper and hareton were invisible; one
 gone on an errand, and the other at his work, probably. we knew
 linton’s tones, and entered.
 
“oh, i hope you’ll die in garret, starved to death!” said the boy,
 mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant.
 
stopped on observing his error: his cousin flew to him.
 
“is that you, miss linton?” said, raising his head from the arm of
 the great chair, in which reclined. “no—don’t kiss me: it takes my
 breath. dear me! papa said you would call,” continued he, after
 recovering little from catherine’s embrace; while she stood by
 looking very contrite. “will you shut the door, if you please? you left
 it open; and those—those _detestable_ creatures won’t bring coals to
 the fire. it’s so cold!”
 
i stirred up the cinders, and fetched scuttleful myself. the invalid
 complained of being covered with ashes; but had tiresome cough,
 and looked feverish and ill, so i did not rebuke his temper.
 
“well, linton,” murmured catherine, when his corrugated brow relaxed,
 “are you glad to see me? can i do you any good?”
 
“why didn’t you come before?” asked. “you should have come, instead
 of writing. it tired dreadfully writing those long letters. i’d far
 rather have talked to you. now, i can neither bear to talk, nor
 anything else. i wonder where zillah is! will you” (looking at me)
 “step into the kitchen and see?”
 
i had received thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to
 run to and fro at his behest, i replied—
 
“nobody is out there but joseph.”
 
“i want to drink,” exclaimed fretfully, turning away. “zillah is
 constantly gadding off to gimmerton since papa went: it’s miserable!
 and i’m obliged to come down here—they resolved never to hear me
 upstairs.”
 
“is your father attentive to you, master heathcliff?” i asked,
 perceiving catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.
 
“attentive? makes _them_ little more attentive at least,” he
 cried. “the wretches! do you know, miss linton, that brute hareton
 laughs at me! i hate him! indeed, i hate them all: they are odious
 beings.”
 
cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on pitcher in the
 dresser, filled tumbler, and brought it. bid her add spoonful of
 wine from bottle on the table; and having swallowed small portion,
 appeared more tranquil, and said she was very kind.
 
“and are you glad to see me?” asked she, reiterating her former
 question, and pleased to detect the faint dawn of smile.
 
“yes, i am. it’s something new to hear voice like yours!” replied.
 “but i have been vexed, because you wouldn’t come. and papa swore it
 was owing to me: called pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing;
 and said you despised me; and if had been in my place, would be
 more the master of the grange than your father by this time. but you
 don’t despise me, do you, miss—?”
 
“i wish you would say catherine, or cathy,” interrupted my young lady.
 “despise you? no! next to papa and ellen, i love you better than
 anybody living. i don’t love mr. heathcliff, though; and i dare not
 come when returns: will stay away many days?”
 
“not many,” answered linton; “but goes on to the moors frequently,
 since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two
 with in his absence. do say you will. i think i should not be
 peevish with you: you’d not provoke me, and you’d always be ready to
 help me, wouldn’t you?”
 
“yes,” said catherine, stroking his long soft hair, “if i could only
 get papa’s consent, i’d spend half my time with you. pretty linton! i
 wish you were my brother.”
 
“and then you would like as well as your father?” observed he, more
 cheerfully. “but papa says you would love better than him and all
 the world, if you were my wife; so i’d rather you were that.”
 
“no, i should never love anybody better than papa,” she returned
 gravely. “and people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their sisters
 and brothers: and if you were the latter, you would live with us, and
 papa would be as fond of you as is of me.”
 
linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but cathy affirmed
 they did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father’s aversion to
 her aunt. i endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue. i couldn’t
 succeed till everything she knew was out. master heathcliff, much
 irritated, asserted her relation was false.
 
“papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods,” she answered pertly.
 
“_my_ papa scorns yours!” cried linton. “he calls him sneaking fool.”
 
“yours is wicked man,” retorted catherine; “and you are very naughty
 to dare to repeat what says. must be wicked to have made aunt
 isabella leave him as she did.”
 
“she didn’t leave him,” said the boy; “you sha’n’t contradict me.”
 
“she did,” cried my young lady.
 
“well, i’ll tell _you_ something!” said linton. “your mother hated your
 father: now then.”
 
“oh!” exclaimed catherine, too enraged to continue.
 
“and she loved mine,” added he.
 
“you little liar! i hate you now!” she panted, and her face grew red
 with passion.
 
“she did! she did!” sang linton, sinking into the recess of his chair,
 and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other
 disputant, who stood behind.
 
“hush, master heathcliff!” i said; “that’s your father’s tale, too, i
 suppose.”
 
“it isn’t: you hold your tongue!” answered. “she did, she did,
 catherine! she did, she did!”
 
cathy, beside herself, gave the chair violent push, and caused him to
 fall against one arm. was immediately seized by suffocating cough
 that soon ended his triumph. it lasted so long that it frightened even
 me. as to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the
 mischief she had done: though she said nothing. i held him till the fit
 exhausted itself. then thrust away, and leant his head down
 silently. catherine quelled her lamentations also, took seat
 opposite, and looked solemnly into the fire.
 
“how do you feel now, master heathcliff?” i inquired, after waiting ten
 minutes.
 
“i wish _she_ felt as i do,” replied: “spiteful, cruel thing!
 hareton never touches me: never struck in his life. and i was
 better to-day: and there—” his voice died in whimper.
 
“_i_ didn’t strike you!” muttered cathy, chewing her lip to prevent
 another burst of emotion.
 
sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and kept it up for
 quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress his cousin apparently, for
 whenever caught stifled sob from her put renewed pain and
 pathos into the inflexions of his voice.
 
“i’m sorry i hurt you, linton,” she said at length, racked beyond
 endurance. “but _i_ couldn’t have been hurt by that little push, and i
 had idea that you could, either: you’re not much, are you, linton?
 don’t let go home thinking i’ve done you harm. answer! speak to me.”
 
“i can’t speak to you,” murmured; “you’ve hurt so that i shall
 lie awake all night choking with this cough. if you had it you’d know
 what it was; but _you’ll_ be comfortably asleep while i’m in agony, and
 nobody near me. i wonder how you would like to pass those fearful
 nights!” and began to wail aloud, for very pity of himself.
 
“since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,” i said, “it
 won’t be miss who spoils your ease: you’d be the same had she never
 come. however, she shall not disturb you again; and perhaps you’ll get
 quieter when we leave you.”
 
“must i go?” asked catherine dolefully, bending over him. “do you want
 to go, linton?”
 
“you can’t alter what you’ve done,” replied pettishly, shrinking
 from her, “unless you alter it for the worse by teasing into a
 fever.”
 
“well, then, i must go?” she repeated.
 
“let alone, at least,” said he; “i can’t bear your talking.”
 
she lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure tiresome
 while; but as neither looked up nor spoke, she finally made a
 movement to the door, and i followed. we were recalled by scream.
 linton had slid from his seat on to the hearthstone, and lay writhing
 in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of child, determined
 to be as grievous and harassing as it can. i thoroughly gauged his
 disposition from his behaviour, and saw at once it would be folly to
 attempt humouring him. not so my companion: she ran back in terror,
 knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till grew quiet
 from lack of breath: by means from compunction at distressing her.
 
“i shall lift him on to the settle,” i said, “and may roll about as
 pleases: we can’t stop to watch him. i hope you are satisfied, miss
 cathy, that _you_ are not the person to benefit him; and that his
 condition of health is not occasioned by attachment to you. now, then,
 there is! come away: as soon as knows there is nobody by to care
 for his nonsense, he’ll be glad to lie still.”
 
she placed cushion under his head, and offered him some water; he
 rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a
 stone or block of wood. she tried to put it more comfortably.
 
“i can’t do with that,” said; “it’s not high enough.”
 
catherine brought another to lay above it.
 
“that’s _too_ high,” murmured the provoking thing.
 
“how must i arrange it, then?” she asked despairingly.
 
twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle, and
 converted her shoulder into support.
 
“no, that won’t do,” i said. “you’ll be content with the cushion,
 master heathcliff. miss has wasted too much time on you already: we
 cannot remain five minutes longer.”
 
“yes, yes, we can!” replied cathy. “he’s good and patient now. he’s
 beginning to think i shall have far greater misery than will
 to-night, if i believe is the worse for my visit: and then i dare
 not come again. tell the truth about it, linton; for i mustn’t come, if
 i have hurt you.”
 
“you must come, to cure me,” answered. “you ought to come, because
 you have hurt me: you know you have extremely! i was not as ill when
 you entered as i am at present—was i?”
 
“but you’ve made yourself ill by crying and being in passion.—i
 didn’t do it all,” said his cousin. “however, we’ll be friends now. and
 you want me: you would wish to see sometimes, really?”
 
“i told you i did,” replied impatiently. “sit on the settle and let
 lean on your knee. that’s as mamma used to do, whole afternoons
 together. sit quite still and don’t talk: but you may sing song, if
 you can sing; or you may say nice long interesting ballad—one of
 those you promised to teach me; or story. i’d rather have ballad,
 though: begin.”
 
catherine repeated the longest she could remember. the employment
 pleased both mightily. linton would have another, and after that
 another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on
 until the clock struck twelve, and we heard hareton in the court,
 returning for his dinner.
 
“and to-morrow, catherine, will you be here to-morrow?” asked young
 heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluctantly.
 
“no,” i answered, “nor next day neither.” she, however, gave a
 different response evidently, for his forehead cleared as she stooped
 and whispered in his ear.
 
“you won’t go to-morrow, recollect, miss!” i commenced, when we were
 out of the house. “you are not dreaming of it, are you?”
 
she smiled.
 
“oh, i’ll take good care,” i continued: “i’ll have that lock mended,
 and you can escape by way else.”
 
“i can get over the wall,” she said laughing. “the grange is not a
 prison, ellen, and you are not my gaoler. and besides, i’m almost
 seventeen: i’m woman. and i’m certain linton would recover quickly if
 had to look after him. i’m older than is, you know, and wiser:
 less childish, am i not? and he’ll soon do as i direct him, with some
 slight coaxing. he’s pretty little darling when he’s good. i’d make
 such pet of him, if were mine. we should never quarrel, should we,
 after we were used to each other? don’t you like him, ellen?”
 
“like him!” i exclaimed. “the worst-tempered bit of sickly slip that
 ever struggled into its teens. happily, as mr. heathcliff conjectured,
 he’ll not win twenty. i doubt whether he’ll see spring, indeed. and
 small loss to his family whenever drops off. and lucky it is for us
 that his father took him: the kinder was treated, the more tedious
 and selfish he’d be. i’m glad you have chance of having him for a
 husband, miss catherine.”
 
my companion waxed serious at hearing this speech. to speak of his
 death so regardlessly wounded her feelings.
 
“he’s younger than i,” she answered, after protracted pause of
 meditation, “and ought to live the longest: will—he must live as
 long as i do. he’s as strong now as when first came into the north;
 i’m positive of that. it’s only cold that ails him, the same as papa
 has. you say papa will get better, and why shouldn’t he?”
 
“well, well,” i cried, “after all, we needn’t trouble ourselves; for
 listen, miss,—and mind, i’ll keep my word,—if you attempt going to
 wuthering heights again, with or without me, i shall inform mr. linton,
 and, unless allow it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be
 revived.”
 
“it has been revived,” muttered cathy, sulkily.
 
“must not be continued, then,” i said.
 
“we’ll see,” was her reply, and she set off at gallop, leaving to
 toil in the rear.
 
we both reached home before our dinner-time; my master supposed we had
 been wandering through the park, and therefore demanded no
 explanation of our absence. as soon as i entered i hastened to change
 my soaked shoes and stockings; but sitting such while at the heights
 had done the mischief. on the succeeding morning i was laid up, and
 during three weeks i remained incapacitated for attending to my duties:
 calamity never experienced prior to that period, and never, i am
 thankful to say, since.
 
my little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me, and
 cheer my solitude; the confinement brought exceedingly low. it is
 wearisome, to stirring active body: but few have slighter reasons for
 complaint than i had. the moment catherine left mr. linton’s room she
 appeared at my bedside. her day was divided between us; amusement
 usurped minute: she neglected her meals, her studies, and her play;
 and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched. she must have had a
 warm heart, when she loved her father so, to give so much to me. i said
 her days were divided between us; but the master retired early, and i
 generally needed nothing after six o’clock, thus the evening was her
 own. poor thing! i never considered what she did with herself after
 tea. and though frequently, when she looked in to bid good-night, i
 remarked fresh colour in her cheeks and pinkness over her slender
 fingers, instead of fancying the hue borrowed from cold ride across
 the moors, i laid it to the charge of hot fire in the library.
 



chapter xxiv
 

at the close of three weeks i was able to quit my chamber and move
 about the house. and on the first occasion of my sitting up in the
 evening i asked catherine to read to me, because my eyes were weak. we
 were in the library, the master having gone to bed: she consented,
 rather unwillingly, i fancied; and imagining my sort of books did not
 suit her, i bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
 she selected one of her own favourites, and got forward steadily about
 an hour; then came frequent questions.
 
“ellen, are not you tired? hadn’t you better lie down now? you’ll be
 sick, keeping up so long, ellen.”
 
“no, no, dear, i’m not tired,” i returned, continually.
 
perceiving immovable, she essayed another method of showing her
 disrelish for her occupation. it changed to yawning, and stretching,
 and—
 
“ellen, i’m tired.”
 
“give over then and talk,” i answered.
 
that was worse: she fretted and sighed, and looked at her watch till
 eight, and finally went to her room, completely overdone with sleep;
 judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing she
 inflicted on her eyes. the following night she seemed more impatient
 still; and on the third from recovering my company she complained of a
 headache, and left me. i thought her conduct odd; and having remained
 alone long while, i resolved on going and inquiring whether she were
 better, and asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of upstairs
 in the dark. catherine could i discover upstairs, and none below.
 the servants affirmed they had not seen her. i listened at mr. edgar’s
 door; all was silence. i returned to her apartment, extinguished my
 candle, and seated myself in the window.
 
the moon shone bright; sprinkling of snow covered the ground, and i
 reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it into her head to walk
 about the garden, for refreshment. i did detect figure creeping along
 the inner fence of the park; but it was not my young mistress: on its
 emerging into the light, i recognised one of the grooms. stood a
 considerable period, viewing the carriage-road through the grounds;
 then started off at brisk pace, as if had detected something, and
 reappeared presently, leading miss’s pony; and there she was, just
 dismounted, and walking by its side. the man took his charge stealthily
 across the grass towards the stable. cathy entered by the
 casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where
 i awaited her. she put the door gently to, slipped off her snowy
 shoes, untied her hat, and was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage,
 to lay aside her mantle, when i suddenly rose and revealed myself. the
 surprise petrified her an instant: she uttered an inarticulate
 exclamation, and stood fixed.
 
“my dear miss catherine,” i began, too vividly impressed by her recent
 kindness to break into scold, “where have you been riding out at this
 hour? and why should you try to deceive by telling tale? where
 have you been? speak!”
 
“to the bottom of the park,” she stammered. “i didn’t tell tale.”
 
“and nowhere else?” i demanded.
 
“no,” was the muttered reply.
 
“oh, catherine!” i cried, sorrowfully. “you know you have been doing
 wrong, or you wouldn’t be driven to uttering an untruth to me. that
 does grieve me. i’d rather be three months ill, than hear you frame a
 deliberate lie.”
 
she sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw her arms round my
 neck.
 
“well, ellen, i’m so afraid of you being angry,” she said. “promise not
 to be angry, and you shall know the very truth: i hate to hide it.”
 
we sat down in the window-seat; i assured her i would not scold,
 whatever her secret might be, and i guessed it, of course; so she
 commenced—
 
“i’ve been to wuthering heights, ellen, and i’ve never missed going a
 day since you fell ill; except thrice before, and twice after you left
 your room. i gave michael books and pictures to prepare minny every
 evening, and to put her back in the stable: you mustn’t scold _him_
 either, mind. i was at the heights by half-past six, and generally
 stayed till half-past eight, and then galloped home. it was not to
 amuse myself that i went: i was often wretched all the time. now and
 then i was happy: once in week perhaps. at first, i expected there
 would be sad work persuading you to let keep my word to linton: for
 i had engaged to call again next day, when we quitted him; but, as you
 stayed upstairs on the morrow, i escaped that trouble. while michael
 was refastening the lock of the park door in the afternoon, i got
 possession of the key, and told him how my cousin wished to visit
 him, because was sick, and couldn’t come to the grange; and how papa
 would object to my going: and then i negotiated with him about the
 pony. is fond of reading, and thinks of leaving soon to get
 married; so offered, if i would lend him books out of the library,
 to do what i wished: but i preferred giving him my own, and that
 satisfied him better.
 
“on my second visit linton seemed in lively spirits; and zillah (that
 is their housekeeper) made us clean room and good fire, and told us
 that, as joseph was out at prayer-meeting and hareton earnshaw was
 off with his dogs—robbing our woods of pheasants, as i heard
 afterwards—we might do what we liked. she brought some warm wine and
 gingerbread, and appeared exceedingly good-natured; and linton sat in
 the arm-chair, and i in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone,
 and we laughed and talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we
 planned where we would go, and what we would do in summer. i needn’t
 repeat that, because you would call it silly.
 
“one time, however, we were near quarrelling. said the pleasantest
 manner of spending hot july day was lying from morning till evening
 on bank of heath in the middle of the moors, with the bees humming
 dreamily about among the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead,
 and the blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly. that
 was his most perfect idea of heaven’s happiness: mine was rocking in a
 rustling green tree, with west wind blowing, and bright white clouds
 flitting rapidly above; and not only larks, but throstles, and
 blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every side,
 and the moors seen at distance, broken into cool dusky dells; but
 close by great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the breeze;
 and woods and sounding water, and the whole world awake and wild with
 joy. wanted all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; i wanted all to
 sparkle and dance in glorious jubilee. i said his heaven would be
 only half alive; and said mine would be drunk: i said i should fall
 asleep in his; and said could not breathe in mine, and began to
 grow very snappish. at last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the
 right weather came; and then we kissed each other and were friends.
 
“after sitting still an hour, i looked at the great room with its
 smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to play in,
 if we removed the table; and i asked linton to call zillah in to help
 us, and we’d have game at blindman’s-buff; she should try to catch
 us: you used to, you know, ellen. wouldn’t: there was pleasure in
 it, said; but consented to play at ball with me. we found two in
 cupboard, among heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores
 and shuttlecocks. one was marked c., and the other h.; i wished to have
 the c., because that stood for catherine, and the h. might be for
 heathcliff, his name; but the bran came out of h., and linton didn’t
 like it. i beat him constantly; and got cross again, and coughed,
 and returned to his chair. that night, though, easily recovered his
 good humour: was charmed with two or three pretty songs—_your_
 songs, ellen; and when i was obliged to go, begged and entreated me
 to come the following evening; and i promised. minny and i went flying
 home as light as air; and i dreamt of wuthering heights and my sweet,
 darling cousin, till morning.
 
“on the morrow i was sad; partly because you were poorly, and partly
 that i wished my father knew, and approved of my excursions: but it was
 beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as i rode on, the gloom cleared. i
 shall have another happy evening, i thought to myself; and what
 delights more, my pretty linton will. i trotted up their garden, and
 was turning round to the back, when that fellow earnshaw met me, took
 my bridle, and bid go in by the front entrance. patted minny’s
 neck, and said she was bonny beast, and appeared as if wanted me
 to speak to him. i only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it
 would kick him. answered in his vulgar accent, ‘it wouldn’t do mitch
 hurt if it did;’ and surveyed its legs with smile. i was half
 inclined to make it try; however, moved off to open the door, and,
 as raised the latch, looked up to the inscription above, and
 said, with stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation: ‘miss
 catherine! i can read yon, now.’
 
“‘wonderful,’ i exclaimed. ‘pray let us hear you—you _are_ grown
 clever!’
 
“he spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name—‘hareton earnshaw.’
 
“‘and the figures?’ i cried, encouragingly, perceiving that came to
 dead halt.
 
“‘i cannot tell them yet,’ answered.
 
“‘oh, you dunce!’ i said, laughing heartily at his failure.
 
“the fool stared, with grin hovering about his lips, and scowl
 gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether might not join in
 my mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really
 was, contempt. i settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity
 and desiring him to walk away, for i came to see linton, not him. he
 reddened—i saw that by the moonlight—dropped his hand from the latch,
 and skulked off, picture of mortified vanity. imagined himself to
 be as accomplished as linton, i suppose, because could spell his own
 name; and was marvellously discomfited that i didn’t think the same.”
 
“stop, miss catherine, dear!” i interrupted. “i shall not scold, but i
 don’t like your conduct there. if you had remembered that hareton was
 your cousin as much as master heathcliff, you would have felt how
 improper it was to behave in that way. at least, it was praiseworthy
 ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as linton; and
 probably did not learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed
 of his ignorance before, i have doubt; and wished to remedy it
 and please you. to sneer at his imperfect attempt was very bad
 breeding. had _you_ been brought up in his circumstances, would you be
 less rude? was as quick and as intelligent child as ever you were;
 and i’m hurt that should be despised now, because that base
 heathcliff has treated him so unjustly.”
 
“well, ellen, you won’t cry about it, will you?” she exclaimed,
 surprised at my earnestness. “but wait, and you shall hear if conned
 his b c to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the
 brute. i entered; linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to
 welcome me.
 
“‘i’m ill to-night, catherine, love,’ said; ‘and you must have all
 the talk, and let listen. come, and sit by me. i was sure you
 wouldn’t break your word, and i’ll make you promise again, before you
 go.’
 
“i knew now that i mustn’t tease him, as was ill; and i spoke softly
 and put questions, and avoided irritating him in any way. i had
 brought some of my nicest books for him: asked to read little
 of one, and i was about to comply, when earnshaw burst the door open:
 having gathered venom with reflection. advanced direct to us, seized
 linton by the arm, and swung him off the seat.
 
“‘get to thy own room!’ said, in voice almost inarticulate with
 passion; and his face looked swelled and furious. ‘take her there if
 she comes to see thee: thou shalln’t keep out of this. begone wi’ ye
 both!’
 
“he swore at us, and left linton time to answer, nearly throwing him
 into the kitchen; and clenched his fist as i followed, seemingly
 longing to knock down. i was afraid for moment, and i let one
 volume fall; kicked it after me, and shut us out. i heard a
 malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious
 joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and quivering.
 
“‘i wer sure he’d sarve ye out! he’s grand lad! he’s getten t’ raight
 sperrit in him! _he_ knaws—ay, knaws, as weel as i do, who sud be t’
 maister yonder—ech, ech, ech! made ye skift properly! ech, ech,
 ech!’
 
“‘where must we go?’ i asked of my cousin, disregarding the old
 wretch’s mockery.
 
“linton was white and trembling. was not pretty then, ellen: oh, no!
 looked frightful; for his thin face and large eyes were wrought into
 an expression of frantic, powerless fury. grasped the handle of the
 door, and shook it: it was fastened inside.
 
“‘if you don’t let in, i’ll kill you!—if you don’t let in, i’ll
 kill you!’ rather shrieked than said. ‘devil! devil!—i’ll kill
 you—i’ll kill you!’
 
“joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.
 
“‘thear, that’s t’ father!’ cried. ‘that’s father! we’ve allas
 summut o’ either side in us. niver heed, hareton, lad—dunnut be
 ’feard—he cannot get at thee!’
 
“i took hold of linton’s hands, and tried to pull him away; but he
 shrieked so shockingly that i dared not proceed. at last his cries were
 choked by dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and
 fell on the ground. i ran into the yard, sick with terror; and
 called for zillah, as loud as i could. she soon heard me: she was
 milking the cows in shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work,
 she inquired what there was to do? i hadn’t breath to explain; dragging
 her in, i looked about for linton. earnshaw had come out to examine the
 mischief had caused, and was then conveying the poor thing
 upstairs. zillah and i ascended after him; but stopped at the top
 of the steps, and said i shouldn’t go in: i must go home. i exclaimed
 that had killed linton, and i _would_ enter. joseph locked the door,
 and declared i should do ‘no sich stuff,’ and asked whether i were
 ‘bahn to be as mad as him.’ i stood crying till the housekeeper
 reappeared. she affirmed would be better in bit, but couldn’t
 do with that shrieking and din; and she took me, and nearly carried me
 into the house.
 
“ellen, i was ready to tear my hair off my head! i sobbed and wept so
 that my eyes were almost blind; and the ruffian you have such sympathy
 with stood opposite: presuming every now and then to bid ‘wisht,’
 and denying that it was his fault; and, finally, frightened by my
 assertions that i would tell papa, and that should be put in prison
 and hanged, commenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide
 his cowardly agitation. still, i was not rid of him: when at length
 they compelled to depart, and i had got some hundred yards off the
 premises, suddenly issued from the shadow of the road-side, and
 checked minny and took hold of me.
 
“‘miss catherine, i’m ill grieved,’ began, ‘but it’s rayther too
 bad—’
 
“i gave him cut with my whip, thinking perhaps would murder me. he
 let go, thundering one of his horrid curses, and i galloped home more
 than half out of my senses.
 
“i didn’t bid you good-night that evening, and i didn’t go to wuthering
 heights the next: i wished to go exceedingly; but i was strangely
 excited, and dreaded to hear that linton was dead, sometimes; and
 sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering hareton. on the
 third day i took courage: at least, i couldn’t bear longer suspense,
 and stole off once more. i went at five o’clock, and walked; fancying i
 might manage to creep into the house, and up to linton’s room,
 unobserved. however, the dogs gave notice of my approach. zillah
 received me, and saying ‘the lad was mending nicely,’ showed into a
 small, tidy, carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, i
 beheld linton laid on little sofa, reading one of my books. but he
 would neither speak to nor look at me, through whole hour, ellen:
 has such an unhappy temper. and what quite confounded me, when he
 did open his mouth, it was to utter the falsehood that i had occasioned
 the uproar, and hareton was not to blame! unable to reply, except
 passionately, i got up and walked from the room. sent after a
 faint ‘catherine!’ did not reckon on being answered so: but i
 wouldn’t turn back; and the morrow was the second day on which i stayed
 at home, nearly determined to visit him more. but it was so
 miserable going to bed and getting up, and never hearing anything about
 him, that my resolution melted into air before it was properly formed.
 it _had_ appeared wrong to take the journey once; now it seemed wrong
 to refrain. michael came to ask if must saddle minny; i said ‘yes,’
 and considered myself doing duty as she bore over the hills. i was
 forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it was use
 trying to conceal my presence.
 
“‘young master is in the house,’ said zillah, as she saw making for
 the parlour. i went in; earnshaw was there also, but quitted the
 room directly. linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking
 up to the fire, i began in serious tone, partly meaning it to be
 true—
 
“‘as you don’t like me, linton, and as you think i come on purpose to
 hurt you, and pretend that i do so every time, this is our last
 meeting: let us say good-bye; and tell mr. heathcliff that you have no
 wish to see me, and that mustn’t invent any more falsehoods on the
 subject.’
 
“‘sit down and take your hat off, catherine,’ answered. ‘you are so
 much happier than i am, you ought to be better. papa talks enough of my
 defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural i should
 doubt myself. i doubt whether i am not altogether as worthless as he
 calls me, frequently; and then i feel so cross and bitter, i hate
 everybody! i _am_ worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit,
 almost always; and, if you choose, you _may_ say good-bye: you’ll get
 rid of an annoyance. only, catherine, do this justice: believe that
 if i might be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, i would
 be; as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy. and
 believe that your kindness has made love you deeper than if i
 deserved your love: and though i couldn’t, and cannot help showing my
 nature to you, i regret it and repent it; and shall regret and repent
 it till i die!’
 
“i felt spoke the truth; and i felt i must forgive him: and, though
 we should quarrel the next moment, i must forgive him again. we were
 reconciled; but we cried, both of us, the whole time i stayed: not
 entirely for sorrow; yet i _was_ sorry linton had that distorted
 nature. he’ll never let his friends be at ease, and he’ll never be at
 ease himself! i have always gone to his little parlour, since that
 night; because his father returned the day after.
 
“about three times, i think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were
 the first evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled: now
 with his selfishness and spite, and now with his sufferings: but i’ve
 learned to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the
 latter. mr. heathcliff purposely avoids me: i have hardly seen him at
 all. last sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, i heard him
 abusing poor linton cruelly for his conduct of the night before. i
 can’t tell how knew of it, unless listened. linton had certainly
 behaved provokingly: however, it was the business of nobody but me, and
 i interrupted mr. heathcliff’s lecture by entering and telling him so.
 burst into laugh, and went away, saying was glad i took that
 view of the matter. since then, i’ve told linton must whisper his
 bitter things. now, ellen, you have heard all. i can’t be prevented
 from going to wuthering heights, except by inflicting misery on two
 people; whereas, if you’ll only not tell papa, my going need disturb
 the tranquillity of none. you’ll not tell, will you? it will be very
 heartless, if you do.”
 
“i’ll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, miss catherine,” i
 replied. “it requires some study; and so i’ll leave you to your rest,
 and go think it over.”
 
i thought it over aloud, in my master’s presence; walking straight from
 her room to his, and relating the whole story: with the exception of
 her conversations with her cousin, and any mention of hareton. mr.
 linton was alarmed and distressed, more than would acknowledge to
 me. in the morning, catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence, and
 she learnt also that her secret visits were to end. in vain she wept
 and writhed against the interdict, and implored her father to have pity
 on linton: all she got to comfort her was promise that would write
 and give him leave to come to the grange when pleased; but
 explaining that must longer expect to see catherine at wuthering
 heights. perhaps, had been aware of his nephew’s disposition and
 state of health, would have seen fit to withhold even that slight
 consolation.
 



chapter xxv
 

“these things happened last winter, sir,” said mrs. dean; “hardly more
 than year ago. last winter, i did not think, at another twelve
 months’ end, i should be amusing stranger to the family with relating
 them! yet, who knows how long you’ll be stranger? you’re too young to
 rest always contented, living by yourself; and i some way fancy one
 could see catherine linton and not love her. you smile; but why do you
 look so lively and interested when i talk about her? and why have you
 asked to hang her picture over your fireplace? and why—?”
 
“stop, my good friend!” i cried. “it may be very possible that _i_
 should love her; but would she love me? i doubt it too much to venture
 my tranquillity by running into temptation: and then my home is not
 here. i’m of the busy world, and to its arms i must return. go on. was
 catherine obedient to her father’s commands?”
 
“she was,” continued the housekeeper. “her affection for him was still
 the chief sentiment in her heart; and spoke without anger: spoke
 in the deep tenderness of one about to leave his treasure amid perils
 and foes, where his remembered words would be the only aid that he
 could bequeath to guide her. said to me, few days afterwards, ‘i
 wish my nephew would write, ellen, or call. tell me, sincerely, what
 you think of him: is changed for the better, or is there prospect
 of improvement, as grows man?’
 
“‘he’s very delicate, sir,’ i replied; ‘and scarcely likely to reach
 manhood: but this i can say, does not resemble his father; and if
 miss catherine had the misfortune to marry him, would not be beyond
 her control: unless she were extremely and foolishly indulgent.
 however, master, you’ll have plenty of time to get acquainted with him
 and see whether would suit her: it wants four years and more to his
 being of age.’”
 
edgar sighed; and, walking to the window, looked out towards gimmerton
 kirk. it was misty afternoon, but the february sun shone dimly, and
 we could just distinguish the two fir-trees in the yard, and the
 sparely-scattered gravestones.
 
“i’ve prayed often,” half soliloquised, “for the approach of what is
 coming; and now i begin to shrink, and fear it. i thought the memory of
 the hour i came down that glen bridegroom would be less sweet than
 the anticipation that i was soon, in few months, or, possibly, weeks,
 to be carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow! ellen, i’ve been very
 happy with my little cathy: through winter nights and summer days she
 was living hope at my side. but i’ve been as happy musing by myself
 among those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long june
 evenings, on the green mound of her mother’s grave, and
 wishing—yearning for the time when i might lie beneath it. what can i
 do for cathy? how must i quit her? i’d not care one moment for linton
 being heathcliff’s son; nor for his taking her from me, if could
 console her for my loss. i’d not care that heathcliff gained his ends,
 and triumphed in robbing of my last blessing! but should linton be
 unworthy—only feeble tool to his father—i cannot abandon her to him!
 and, hard though it be to crush her buoyant spirit, i must persevere in
 making her sad while i live, and leaving her solitary when i die.
 darling! i’d rather resign her to god, and lay her in the earth before
 me.”
 
“resign her to god as it is, sir,” i answered, “and if we should lose
 you—which may forbid—under his providence, i’ll stand her friend and
 counsellor to the last. miss catherine is good girl: i don’t fear
 that she will go wilfully wrong; and people who do their duty are
 always finally rewarded.”
 
spring advanced; yet my master gathered real strength, though he
 resumed his walks in the grounds with his daughter. to her
 inexperienced notions, this itself was sign of convalescence; and
 then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes were bright; she felt
 sure of his recovering. on her seventeenth birthday, did not visit
 the churchyard: it was raining, and i observed—
 
“you’ll surely not go out to-night, sir?”
 
answered,—“no, i’ll defer it this year little longer.”
 
wrote again to linton, expressing his great desire to see him; and,
 had the invalid been presentable, i’ve doubt his father would have
 permitted him to come. as it was, being instructed, returned an
 answer, intimating that mr. heathcliff objected to his calling at the
 grange; but his uncle’s kind remembrance delighted him, and hoped to
 meet him sometimes in his rambles, and personally to petition that his
 cousin and might not remain long so utterly divided.
 
that part of his letter was simple, and probably his own. heathcliff
 knew could plead eloquently for catherine’s company, then.
 
“i do not ask,” said, “that she may visit here; but am i never to
 see her, because my father forbids to go to her home, and you forbid
 her to come to mine? do, now and then, ride with her towards the
 heights; and let us exchange few words, in your presence! we have
 done nothing to deserve this separation; and you are not angry with me:
 you have reason to dislike me, you allow, yourself. dear uncle! send
 kind note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you please,
 except at thrushcross grange. i believe an interview would convince you
 that my father’s character is not mine: affirms i am more your
 nephew than his son; and though i have faults which render unworthy
 of catherine, she has excused them, and for her sake, you should also.
 you inquire after my health—it is better; but while i remain cut off
 from all hope, and doomed to solitude, or the society of those who
 never did and never will like me, how can i be cheerful and well?”
 
edgar, though felt for the boy, could not consent to grant his
 request; because could not accompany catherine. said, in summer,
 perhaps, they might meet: meantime, wished him to continue writing
 at intervals, and engaged to give him what advice and comfort was
 able by letter; being well aware of his hard position in his family.
 linton complied; and had been unrestrained, would probably have
 spoiled all by filling his epistles with complaints and lamentations:
 but his father kept sharp watch over him; and, of course, insisted on
 every line that my master sent being shown; so, instead of penning his
 peculiar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes constantly
 uppermost in his thoughts, harped on the cruel obligation of being
 held asunder from his friend and love; and gently intimated that mr.
 linton must allow an interview soon, or should fear was purposely
 deceiving him with empty promises.
 
cathy was powerful ally at home; and between them they at length
 persuaded my master to acquiesce in their having ride or walk
 together about once week, under my guardianship, and on the moors
 nearest the grange: for june found him still declining. though had
 set aside yearly portion of his income for my young lady’s fortune,
 had natural desire that she might retain—or at least return in a
 short time to—the house of her ancestors; and considered her only
 prospect of doing that was by union with his heir; had idea
 that the latter was failing almost as fast as himself; nor had any one,
 i believe: doctor visited the heights, and one saw master
 heathcliff to make report of his condition among us. i, for my part,
 began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that must be actually
 rallying, when mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed
 so earnest in pursuing his object. i could not picture father
 treating dying child as tyrannically and wickedly as i afterwards
 learned heathcliff had treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness:
 his efforts redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling
 plans were threatened with defeat by death.
 



chapter xxvi
 

summer was already past its prime, when edgar reluctantly yielded his
 assent to their entreaties, and catherine and i set out on our first
 ride to join her cousin. it was close, sultry day: devoid of
 sunshine, but with sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain: and our
 place of meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads.
 on arriving there, however, little herd-boy, despatched as a
 messenger, told us that,—“maister linton wer just o’ this side th’
 heights: and he’d be mitch obleeged to us to gang on bit further.”
 
“then master linton has forgot the first injunction of his uncle,” i
 observed: “he bid us keep on the grange land, and here we are off at
 once.”
 
“well, we’ll turn our horses’ heads round when we reach him,” answered
 my companion; “our excursion shall lie towards home.”
 
but when we reached him, and that was scarcely quarter of mile from
 his own door, we found had horse; and we were forced to dismount,
 and leave ours to graze. lay on the heath, awaiting our approach,
 and did not rise till we came within few yards. then walked so
 feebly, and looked so pale, that i immediately exclaimed,—“why, master
 heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying ramble this morning. how ill
 you do look!”
 
catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she changed the
 ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation
 on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether were
 worse than usual?
 
“no—better—better!” panted, trembling, and retaining her hand as if
 needed its support, while his large blue eyes wandered timidly over
 her; the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the
 languid expression they once possessed.
 
“but you have been worse,” persisted his cousin; “worse than when i saw
 you last; you are thinner, and—”
 
“i’m tired,” interrupted, hurriedly. “it is too hot for walking, let
 us rest here. and, in the morning, i often feel sick—papa says i grow
 so fast.”
 
badly satisfied, cathy sat down, and reclined beside her.
 
“this is something like your paradise,” said she, making an effort at
 cheerfulness. “you recollect the two days we agreed to spend in the
 place and way each thought pleasantest? this is nearly yours, only
 there are clouds; but then they are so soft and mellow: it is nicer
 than sunshine. next week, if you can, we’ll ride down to the grange
 park, and try mine.”
 
linton did not appear to remember what she talked of; and had
 evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of conversation. his
 lack of interest in the subjects she started, and his equal incapacity
 to contribute to her entertainment, were so obvious that she could not
 conceal her disappointment. an indefinite alteration had come over his
 whole person and manner. the pettishness that might be caressed into
 fondness, had yielded to listless apathy; there was less of the
 peevish temper of child which frets and teases on purpose to be
 soothed, and more of the self-absorbed moroseness of confirmed
 invalid, repelling consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured
 mirth of others as an insult. catherine perceived, as well as i did,
 that held it rather punishment, than gratification, to endure
 our company; and she made scruple of proposing, presently, to
 depart. that proposal, unexpectedly, roused linton from his lethargy,
 and threw him into strange state of agitation. glanced fearfully
 towards the heights, begging she would remain another half-hour, at
 least.
 
“but i think,” said cathy, “you’d be more comfortable at home than
 sitting here; and i cannot amuse you to-day, i see, by my tales, and
 songs, and chatter: you have grown wiser than i, in these six months;
 you have little taste for my diversions now: or else, if i could amuse
 you, i’d willingly stay.”
 
“stay to rest yourself,” replied. “and, catherine, don’t think or
 say that i’m _very_ unwell: it is the heavy weather and heat that make
 dull; and i walked about, before you came, great deal for me. tell
 uncle i’m in tolerable health, will you?”
 
“i’ll tell him that _you_ say so, linton. i couldn’t affirm that you
 are,” observed my young lady, wondering at his pertinacious assertion
 of what was evidently an untruth.
 
“and be here again next thursday,” continued he, shunning her puzzled
 gaze. “and give him my thanks for permitting you to come—my best
 thanks, catherine. and—and, if you _did_ meet my father, and asked
 you about me, don’t lead him to suppose that i’ve been extremely silent
 and stupid: don’t look sad and downcast, as you _are_ doing—he’ll be
 angry.”
 
“i care nothing for his anger,” exclaimed cathy, imagining she would be
 its object.
 
“but i do,” said her cousin, shuddering. “_don’t_ provoke him against
 me, catherine, for is very hard.”
 
“is severe to you, master heathcliff?” i inquired. “has grown
 weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?”
 
linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping her seat by
 his side another ten minutes, during which his head fell drowsily on
 his breast, and uttered nothing except suppressed moans of
 exhaustion or pain, cathy began to seek solace in looking for
 bilberries, and sharing the produce of her researches with me: she did
 not offer them to him, for she saw further notice would only weary and
 annoy.
 
“is it half-an-hour now, ellen?” she whispered in my ear, at last. “i
 can’t tell why we should stay. he’s asleep, and papa will be wanting us
 back.”
 
“well, we must not leave him asleep,” i answered; “wait till wakes,
 and be patient. you were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to
 see poor linton has soon evaporated!”
 
“why did _he_ wish to see me?” returned catherine. “in his crossest
 humours, formerly, i liked him better than i do in his present curious
 mood. it’s just as if it were task was compelled to perform—this
 interview—for fear his father should scold him. but i’m hardly going to
 come to give mr. heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason may have for
 ordering linton to undergo this penance. and, though i’m glad he’s
 better in health, i’m sorry he’s so much less pleasant, and so much
 less affectionate to me.”
 
“you think _he is_ better in health, then?” i said.
 
“yes,” she answered; “because always made such great deal of his
 sufferings, you know. is not tolerably well, as told to tell
 papa; but he’s better, very likely.”
 
“there you differ with me, miss cathy,” i remarked; “i should
 conjecture him to be far worse.”
 
linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror, and asked if
 any one had called his name.
 
“no,” said catherine; “unless in dreams. i cannot conceive how you
 manage to doze out of doors, in the morning.”
 
“i thought i heard my father,” gasped, glancing up to the frowning
 nab above us. “you are sure nobody spoke?”
 
“quite sure,” replied his cousin. “only ellen and i were disputing
 concerning your health. are you truly stronger, linton, than when we
 separated in winter? if you be, i’m certain one thing is not
 stronger—your regard for me: speak,—are you?”
 
the tears gushed from linton’s eyes as answered, “yes, yes, i am!”
 and, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up
 and down to detect its owner.
 
cathy rose. “for to-day we must part,” she said. “and i won’t conceal
 that i have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though i’ll
 mention it to nobody but you: not that i stand in awe of mr.
 heathcliff.”
 
“hush,” murmured linton; “for god’s sake, hush! he’s coming.” and he
 clung to catherine’s arm, striving to detain her; but at that
 announcement she hastily disengaged herself, and whistled to minny, who
 obeyed her like dog.
 
“i’ll be here next thursday,” she cried, springing to the saddle.
 “good-bye. quick, ellen!”
 
and so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed
 was in anticipating his father’s approach.
 
before we reached home, catherine’s displeasure softened into a
 perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with vague,
 uneasy doubts about linton’s actual circumstances, physical and social:
 in which i partook, though i counselled her not to say much; for a
 second journey would make us better judges. my master requested an
 account of our ongoings. his nephew’s offering of thanks was duly
 delivered, miss cathy gently touching on the rest: i also threw little
 light on his inquiries, for i hardly knew what to hide and what to
 reveal.
 



chapter xxvii
 

seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth
 rapid alteration of edgar linton’s state. the havoc that months had
 previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours. catherine
 we would fain have deluded yet; but her own quick spirit refused to
 delude her: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful
 probability, gradually ripening into certainty. she had not the heart
 to mention her ride, when thursday came round; i mentioned it for her,
 and obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library,
 where her father stopped short time daily—the brief period could
 bear to sit up—and his chamber, had become her whole world. she grudged
 each moment that did not find her bending over his pillow, or seated by
 his side. her countenance grew wan with watching and sorrow, and my
 master gladly dismissed her to what flattered himself would be a
 happy change of scene and society; drawing comfort from the hope that
 she would not now be left entirely alone after his death.
 
had fixed idea, i guessed by several observations let fall,
 that, as his nephew resembled him in person, would resemble him in
 mind; for linton’s letters bore few or indications of his defective
 character. and i, through pardonable weakness, refrained from
 correcting the error; asking myself what good there would be in
 disturbing his last moments with information that had neither power
 nor opportunity to turn to account.
 
we deferred our excursion till the afternoon; golden afternoon of
 august: every breath from the hills so full of life, that it seemed
 whoever respired it, though dying, might revive. catherine’s face was
 just like the landscape—shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid
 succession; but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more
 transient; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that
 passing forgetfulness of its cares.
 
we discerned linton watching at the same spot had selected before.
 my young mistress alighted, and told that, as she was resolved to
 stay very little while, i had better hold the pony and remain on
 horseback; but i dissented: i wouldn’t risk losing sight of the charge
 committed to minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
 master heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion:
 not the animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked
 more like fear.
 
“it is late!” said, speaking short and with difficulty. “is not your
 father very ill? i thought you wouldn’t come.”
 
“_why_ won’t you be candid?” cried catherine, swallowing her greeting.
 “why cannot you say at once you don’t want me? it is strange, linton,
 that for the second time you have brought here on purpose,
 apparently to distress us both, and for reason besides!”
 
linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half ashamed;
 but his cousin’s patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical
 behaviour.
 
“my father _is_ very ill,” she said; “and why am i called from his
 bedside? why didn’t you send to absolve from my promise, when you
 wished i wouldn’t keep it? come! i desire an explanation: playing and
 trifling are completely banished out of my mind; and i can’t dance
 attendance on your affectations now!”
 
“my affectations!” murmured; “what are they? for heaven’s sake,
 catherine, don’t look so angry! despise as much as you please; i am
 worthless, cowardly wretch: i can’t be scorned enough; but i’m too
 mean for your anger. hate my father, and spare for contempt.”
 
“nonsense!” cried catherine in passion. “foolish, silly boy! and
 there! trembles, as if i were really going to touch him! you needn’t
 bespeak contempt, linton: anybody will have it spontaneously at your
 service. get off! i shall return home: it is folly dragging you from
 the hearth-stone, and pretending—what do we pretend? let go my frock!
 if i pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should
 spurn such pity. ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is. rise,
 and don’t degrade yourself into an abject reptile—_don’t_!”
 
with streaming face and an expression of agony, linton had thrown his
 nerveless frame along the ground: seemed convulsed with exquisite
 terror.
 
“oh!” sobbed, “i cannot bear it! catherine, catherine, i’m a
 traitor, too, and i dare not tell you! but leave me, and i shall be
 killed! _dear_ catherine, my life is in your hands: and you have said
 you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn’t harm you. you’ll not go,
 then? kind, sweet, good catherine! and perhaps you _will_ consent—and
 he’ll let die with you!”
 
my young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to raise him.
 the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame her vexation, and she
 grew thoroughly moved and alarmed.
 
“consent to what?” she asked. “to stay! tell the meaning of this
 strange talk, and i will. you contradict your own words, and distract
 me! be calm and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on your
 heart. you wouldn’t injure me, linton, would you? you wouldn’t let any
 enemy hurt me, if you could prevent it? i’ll believe you are coward,
 for yourself, but not cowardly betrayer of your best friend.”
 
“but my father threatened me,” gasped the boy, clasping his attenuated
 fingers, “and i dread him—i dread him! i _dare_ not tell!”
 
“oh, well!” said catherine, with scornful compassion, “keep your
 secret: _i’m_ coward. save yourself: i’m not afraid!”
 
her magnanimity provoked his tears: wept wildly, kissing her
 supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out. i was
 cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined catherine should
 never suffer to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when,
 hearing rustle among the ling, i looked up and saw mr. heathcliff
 almost close upon us, descending the heights. didn’t cast glance
 towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for linton’s
 sobs to be audible; but hailing in the almost hearty tone assumed
 to none besides, and the sincerity of which i couldn’t avoid doubting,
 said—
 
“it is something to see you so near to my house, nelly. how are you at
 the grange? let us hear. the rumour goes,” added, in lower tone,
 “that edgar linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate his
 illness?”
 
“no; my master is dying,” i replied: “it is true enough. sad thing it
 will be for us all, but blessing for him!”
 
“how long will last, do you think?” asked.
 
“i don’t know,” i said.
 
“because,” continued, looking at the two young people, who were
 fixed under his eye—linton appeared as if could not venture to stir
 or raise his head, and catherine could not move, on his
 account—“because that lad yonder seems determined to beat me; and i’d
 thank his uncle to be quick, and go before him! hallo! has the whelp
 been playing that game long? i _did_ give him some lessons about
 snivelling. is pretty lively with miss linton generally?”
 
“lively? no—he has shown the greatest distress,” i answered. “to see
 him, i should say, that instead of rambling with his sweetheart on the
 hills, ought to be in bed, under the hands of doctor.”
 
“he shall be, in day or two,” muttered heathcliff. “but first—get up,
 linton! get up!” shouted. “don’t grovel on the ground there: up,
 this moment!”
 
linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear,
 caused by his father’s glance towards him, i suppose: there was nothing
 else to produce such humiliation. made several efforts to obey, but
 his little strength was annihilated for the time, and fell back
 again with moan. mr. heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean
 against ridge of turf.
 
“now,” said he, with curbed ferocity, “i’m getting angry—and if you
 don’t command that paltry spirit of yours—_damn_ you! get up directly!”
 
“i will, father,” panted. “only, let alone, or i shall faint.
 i’ve done as you wished, i’m sure. catherine will tell you that i—that
 i—have been cheerful. ah! keep by me, catherine; give your hand.”
 
“take mine,” said his father; “stand on your feet. there now—she’ll
 lend you her arm: that’s right, look at _her_. you would imagine i was
 the devil himself, miss linton, to excite such horror. be so kind as to
 walk home with him, will you? shudders if i touch him.”
 
“linton dear!” whispered catherine, “i can’t go to wuthering heights:
 papa has forbidden me. he’ll not harm you: why are you so afraid?”
 
“i can never re-enter that house,” answered. “i’m _not_ to re-enter
 it without you!”
 
“stop!” cried his father. “we’ll respect catherine’s filial scruples.
 nelly, take him in, and i’ll follow your advice concerning the doctor,
 without delay.”
 
“you’ll do well,” replied i. “but i must remain with my mistress: to
 mind your is not my business.”
 
“you are very stiff,” said heathcliff, “i know that: but you’ll force
 to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.
 come, then, my hero. are you willing to return, escorted by me?”
 
approached once more, and made as if would seize the fragile
 being; but, shrinking back, linton clung to his cousin, and implored
 her to accompany him, with frantic importunity that admitted no
 denial. however i disapproved, i couldn’t hinder her: indeed, how could
 she have refused him herself? what was filling him with dread we had no
 means of discerning; but there was, powerless under its gripe, and
 any addition seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy. we reached the
 threshold; catherine walked in, and i stood waiting till she had
 conducted the invalid to chair, expecting her out immediately; when
 mr. heathcliff, pushing forward, exclaimed—“my house is not stricken
 with the plague, nelly; and i have mind to be hospitable to-day: sit
 down, and allow to shut the door.”
 
shut and locked it also. i started.
 
“you shall have tea before you go home,” added. “i am by myself.
 hareton is gone with some cattle to the lees, and zillah and joseph are
 off on journey of pleasure; and, though i’m used to being alone, i’d
 rather have some interesting company, if i can get it. miss linton,
 take your seat by _him_. i give you what i have: the present is hardly
 worth accepting; but i have nothing else to offer. it is linton, i
 mean. how she does stare! it’s odd what savage feeling i have to
 anything that seems afraid of me! had i been born where laws are less
 strict and tastes less dainty, i should treat myself to slow
 vivisection of those two, as an evening’s amusement.”
 
drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself, “by
 hell! i hate them.”
 
“i am not afraid of you!” exclaimed catherine, who could not hear the
 latter part of his speech. she stepped close up; her black eyes
 flashing with passion and resolution. “give that key: i will have
 it!” she said. “i wouldn’t eat or drink here, if i were starving.”
 
heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table. he
 looked up, seized with sort of surprise at her boldness; or,
 possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance, of the person from whom
 she inherited it. she snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in
 getting it out of his loosened fingers: but her action recalled him to
 the present; recovered it speedily.
 
“now, catherine linton,” said, “stand off, or i shall knock you
 down; and that will make mrs. dean mad.”
 
regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand and its
 contents again. “we _will_ go!” she repeated, exerting her utmost
 efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax; and finding that her nails
 made impression, she applied her teeth pretty sharply. heathcliff
 glanced at glance that kept from interfering moment.
 catherine was too intent on his fingers to notice his face. opened
 them suddenly, and resigned the object of dispute; but, ere she had
 well secured it, seized her with the liberated hand, and, pulling
 her on his knee, administered with the other shower of terrific slaps
 on both sides of the head, each sufficient to have fulfilled his
 threat, had she been able to fall.
 
at this diabolical violence i rushed on him furiously. “you villain!” i
 began to cry, “you villain!” touch on the chest silenced me: i am
 stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what with that and the rage, i
 staggered dizzily back, and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a
 blood-vessel. the scene was over in two minutes; catherine, released,
 put her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were not
 sure whether her ears were off or on. she trembled like reed, poor
 thing, and leant against the table perfectly bewildered.
 
“i know how to chastise children, you see,” said the scoundrel, grimly,
 as stooped to repossess himself of the key, which had dropped to the
 floor. “go to linton now, as i told you; and cry at your ease! i shall
 be your father, to-morrow—all the father you’ll have in few days—and
 you shall have plenty of that. you can bear plenty; you’re weakling:
 you shall have daily taste, if i catch such devil of temper in
 your eyes again!”
 
cathy ran to instead of linton, and knelt down and put her burning
 cheek on my lap, weeping aloud. her cousin had shrunk into corner of
 the settle, as quiet as mouse, congratulating himself, i dare say,
 that the correction had alighted on another than him. mr. heathcliff,
 perceiving us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea
 himself. the cups and saucers were laid ready. poured it out, and
 handed cup.
 
“wash away your spleen,” said. “and help your own naughty pet and
 mine. it is not poisoned, though i prepared it. i’m going out to seek
 your horses.”
 
our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit somewhere. we
 tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the
 windows—they were too narrow for even cathy’s little figure.
 
“master linton,” i cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned, “you
 know what your diabolical father is after, and you shall tell us, or
 i’ll box your ears, as has done your cousin’s.”
 
“yes, linton, you must tell,” said catherine. “it was for your sake i
 came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse.”
 
“give some tea, i’m thirsty, and then i’ll tell you,” answered.
 “mrs. dean, go away. i don’t like you standing over me. now, catherine,
 you are letting your tears fall into my cup. i won’t drink that. give
 another.”
 
catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face. i felt disgusted
 at the little wretch’s composure, since was longer in terror for
 himself. the anguish had exhibited on the moor subsided as soon as
 ever entered wuthering heights; so i guessed had been menaced
 with an awful visitation of wrath if failed in decoying us there;
 and, that accomplished, had further immediate fears.
 
“papa wants us to be married,” continued, after sipping some of the
 liquid. “and knows your papa wouldn’t let us marry now; and he’s
 afraid of my dying if we wait; so we are to be married in the morning,
 and you are to stay here all night; and, if you do as wishes, you
 shall return home next day, and take with you.”
 
“take you with her, pitiful changeling!” i exclaimed. “_you_ marry?
 why, the man is mad! or thinks us fools, every one. and do you
 imagine that beautiful young lady, that healthy, hearty girl, will tie
 herself to little perishing monkey like you? are you cherishing the
 notion that _anybody_, let alone miss catherine linton, would have you
 for husband? you want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with
 your dastardly puling tricks: and—don’t look so silly, now! i’ve very
 good mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery, and
 your imbecile conceit.”
 
i did give him slight shaking; but it brought on the cough, and he
 took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and catherine
 rebuked me.
 
“stay all night? no,” she said, looking slowly round. “ellen, i’ll burn
 that door down but i’ll get out.”
 
and she would have commenced the execution of her threat directly, but
 linton was up in alarm for his dear self again. clasped her in his
 two feeble arms sobbing:—“won’t you have me, and save me? not let me
 come to the grange? oh, darling catherine! you mustn’t go and leave,
 after all. you _must_ obey my father—you _must_!”
 
“i must obey my own,” she replied, “and relieve him from this cruel
 suspense. the whole night! what would think? he’ll be distressed
 already. i’ll either break or burn way out of the house. be quiet!
 you’re in danger; but if you hinder me—linton, i love papa better
 than you!”
 
the mortal terror felt of mr. heathcliff’s anger restored to the boy
 his coward’s eloquence. catherine was near distraught: still, she
 persisted that she must go home, and tried entreaty in her turn,
 persuading him to subdue his selfish agony. while they were thus
 occupied, our jailor re-entered.
 
“your beasts have trotted off,” said, “and—now linton! snivelling
 again? what has she been doing to you? come, come—have done, and get to
 bed. in month or two, my lad, you’ll be able to pay her back her
 present tyrannies with vigorous hand. you’re pining for pure love,
 are you not? nothing else in the world: and she shall have you! there,
 to bed! zillah won’t be here to-night; you must undress yourself. hush!
 hold your noise! once in your own room, i’ll not come near you: you
 needn’t fear. by chance, you’ve managed tolerably. i’ll look to the
 rest.”
 
spoke these words, holding the door open for his to pass, and
 the latter achieved his exit exactly as spaniel might which suspected
 the person who attended on it of designing spiteful squeeze. the lock
 was re-secured. heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and i
 stood silent. catherine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to
 her cheek: his neighbourhood revived painful sensation. anybody else
 would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness,
 but scowled on her and muttered—“oh! you are not afraid of me? your
 courage is well disguised: you _seem_ damnably afraid!”
 
“i _am_ afraid now,” she replied, “because, if i stay, papa will be
 miserable: and how can i endure making him miserable—when he—when
 he—mr. heathcliff, _let_ go home! i promise to marry linton: papa
 would like to: and i love him. why should you wish to force to do
 what i’ll willingly do of myself?”
 
“let him dare to force you,” i cried. “there’s law in the land, thank
 god! there is; though we be in an out-of-the-way place. i’d inform if
 were my own son: and it’s felony without benefit of clergy!”
 
“silence!” said the ruffian. “to the devil with your clamour! i don’t
 want _you_ to speak. miss linton, i shall enjoy myself remarkably in
 thinking your father will be miserable: i shall not sleep for
 satisfaction. you could have hit on surer way of fixing your
 residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing
 that such an event would follow. as to your promise to marry linton,
 i’ll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place
 till it is fulfilled.”
 
“send ellen, then, to let papa know i’m safe!” exclaimed catherine,
 weeping bitterly. “or marry now. poor papa! ellen, he’ll think we’re
 lost. what shall we do?”
 
“not he! he’ll think you are tired of waiting on him, and run off for a
 little amusement,” answered heathcliff. “you cannot deny that you
 entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of his injunctions to
 the contrary. and it is quite natural that you should desire amusement
 at your age; and that you would weary of nursing sick man, and that
 man _only_ your father. catherine, his happiest days were over when
 your days began. cursed you, i dare say, for coming into the world
 (i did, at least); and it would just do if cursed you as _he_ went
 out of it. i’d join him. i don’t love you! how should i? weep away. as
 far as i can see, it will be your chief diversion hereafter; unless
 linton make amends for other losses: and your provident parent appears
 to fancy may. his letters of advice and consolation entertained me
 vastly. in his last recommended my jewel to be careful of his; and
 kind to her when got her. careful and kind—that’s paternal. but
 linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for himself.
 linton can play the little tyrant well. he’ll undertake to torture any
 number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared. you’ll
 be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his _kindness_, when you get
 home again, i assure you.”
 
“you’re right there!” i said; “explain your son’s character. show his
 resemblance to yourself: and then, i hope, miss cathy will think twice
 before she takes the cockatrice!”
 
“i don’t much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now,” answered;
 “because she must either accept him or remain prisoner, and you along
 with her, till your master dies. i can detain you both, quite
 concealed, here. if you doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and
 you’ll have an opportunity of judging!”
 
“i’ll not retract my word,” said catherine. “i’ll marry him within this
 hour, if i may go to thrushcross grange afterwards. mr. heathcliff,
 you’re cruel man, but you’re not fiend; and you won’t, from _mere_
 malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness. if papa thought i had
 left him on purpose, and if died before i returned, could i bear to
 live? i’ve given over crying: but i’m going to kneel here, at your
 knee; and i’ll not get up, and i’ll not take my eyes from your face
 till you look back at me! no, don’t turn away! _do_ look! you’ll see
 nothing to provoke you. i don’t hate you. i’m not angry that you struck
 me. have you never loved _anybody_ in all your life, uncle? _never_?
 ah! you must look once. i’m so wretched, you can’t help being sorry and
 pitying me.”
 
“keep your eft’s fingers off; and move, or i’ll kick you!” cried
 heathcliff, brutally repulsing her. “i’d rather be hugged by snake.
 how the devil can you dream of fawning on me? i _detest_ you!”
 
shrugged his shoulders: shook himself, indeed, as if his flesh crept
 with aversion; and thrust back his chair; while i got up, and opened my
 mouth, to commence downright torrent of abuse. but i was rendered
 dumb in the middle of the first sentence, by threat that i should be
 shown into room by myself the very next syllable i uttered. it was
 growing dark—we heard sound of voices at the garden-gate. our host
 hurried out instantly: _he_ had his wits about him; _we_ had not. there
 was talk of two or three minutes, and returned alone.
 
“i thought it had been your cousin hareton,” i observed to catherine.
 “i wish would arrive! who knows but might take our part?”
 
“it was three servants sent to seek you from the grange,” said
 heathcliff, overhearing me. “you should have opened lattice and
 called out: but i could swear that chit is glad you didn’t. she’s glad
 to be obliged to stay, i’m certain.”
 
at learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief
 without control; and allowed us to wail on till nine o’clock. then
 bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to zillah’s chamber; and i
 whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get
 through the window there, or into garret, and out by its skylight.
 the window, however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap
 was safe from our attempts; for we were fastened in as before. we
 neither of us lay down: catherine took her station by the lattice, and
 watched anxiously for morning; deep sigh being the only answer i
 could obtain to my frequent entreaties that she would try to rest. i
 seated myself in chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment
 on my many derelictions of duty; from which, it struck then, all the
 misfortunes of my employers sprang. it was not the case, in reality, i
 am aware; but it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and i
 thought heathcliff himself less guilty than i.
 
at seven o’clock came, and inquired if miss linton had risen. she
 ran to the door immediately, and answered, “yes.” “here, then,” he
 said, opening it, and pulling her out. i rose to follow, but turned
 the lock again. i demanded my release.
 
“be patient,” replied; “i’ll send up your breakfast in while.”
 
i thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily; and catherine
 asked why i was still shut up? answered, i must try to endure it
 another hour, and they went away. i endured it two or three hours; at
 length, i heard footstep: not heathcliff’s.
 
“i’ve brought you something to eat,” said voice; “oppen t’ door!”
 
complying eagerly, i beheld hareton, laden with food enough to last me
 all day.
 
“tak’ it,” added, thrusting the tray into my hand.
 
“stay one minute,” i began.
 
“nay,” cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers i could pour
 forth to detain him.
 
and there i remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next
 night; and another, and another. five nights and four days i remained,
 altogether, seeing nobody but hareton once every morning; and was a
 model of jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving
 his sense of justice or compassion.
 



chapter xxviii
 

on the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, different step
 approached—lighter and shorter; and, this time, the person entered the
 room. it was zillah; donned in her scarlet shawl, with black silk
 bonnet on her head, and willow-basket swung to her arm.
 
“eh, dear! mrs. dean!” she exclaimed. “well! there is talk about you
 at gimmerton. i never thought but you were sunk in the blackhorse
 marsh, and missy with you, till master told you’d been found, and
 he’d lodged you here! what! and you must have got on an island, sure?
 and how long were you in the hole? did master save you, mrs. dean? but
 you’re not so thin—you’ve not been so poorly, have you?”
 
“your master is true scoundrel!” i replied. “but shall answer for
 it. needn’t have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!”
 
“what do you mean?” asked zillah. “it’s not his tale: they tell that in
 the village—about your being lost in the marsh; and i calls to
 earnshaw, when i come in—‘eh, they’s queer things, mr. hareton,
 happened since i went off. it’s sad pity of that likely young lass,
 and cant nelly dean.’ stared. i thought had not heard aught, so i
 told him the rumour. the master listened, and just smiled to
 himself, and said, ‘if they have been in the marsh, they are out now,
 zillah. nelly dean is lodged, at this minute, in your room. you can
 tell her to flit, when you go up; here is the key. the bog-water got
 into her head, and she would have run home quite flighty, but i fixed
 her till she came round to her senses. you can bid her go to the grange
 at once, if she be able, and carry message from me, that her young
 lady will follow in time to attend the squire’s funeral.’”
 
“mr. edgar is not dead?” i gasped. “oh! zillah, zillah!”
 
“no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,” she replied; “you’re right
 sickly yet. he’s not dead; doctor kenneth thinks may last another
 day. i met him on the road and asked.”
 
instead of sitting down, i snatched my outdoor things, and hastened
 below, for the way was free. on entering the house, i looked about for
 some one to give information of catherine. the place was filled with
 sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand. as i
 hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a
 slight cough drew my attention to the hearth. linton lay on the settle,
 sole tenant, sucking stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements
 with apathetic eyes. “where is miss catherine?” i demanded sternly,
 supposing i could frighten him into giving intelligence, by catching
 him thus, alone. sucked on like an innocent.
 
“is she gone?” i said.
 
“no,” replied; “she’s upstairs: she’s not to go; we won’t let her.”
 
“you won’t let her, little idiot!” i exclaimed. “direct to her room
 immediately, or i’ll make you sing out sharply.”
 
“papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there,” he
 answered. “he says i’m not to be soft with catherine: she’s my wife,
 and it’s shameful that she should wish to leave me. says she hates
 and wants to die, that she may have my money; but she shan’t have
 it: and she shan’t go home! she never shall!—she may cry, and be sick
 as much as she pleases!”
 
resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if meant to
 drop asleep.
 
“master heathcliff,” i resumed, “have you forgotten all catherine’s
 kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved her, and when
 she brought you books and sung you songs, and came many time through
 wind and snow to see you? she wept to miss one evening, because you
 would be disappointed; and you felt then that she was hundred times
 too good to you: and now you believe the lies your father tells, though
 you know detests you both. and you join him against her. that’s fine
 gratitude, is it not?”
 
the corner of linton’s mouth fell, and took the sugar-candy from his
 lips.
 
“did she come to wuthering heights because she hated you?” i continued.
 “think for yourself! as to your money, she does not even know that you
 will have any. and you say she’s sick; and yet you leave her alone, up
 there in strange house! _you_ who have felt what it is to be so
 neglected! you could pity your own sufferings; and she pitied them,
 too; but you won’t pity hers! i shed tears, master heathcliff, you
 see—an elderly woman, and servant merely—and you, after pretending
 such affection, and having reason to worship her almost, store every
 tear you have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease. ah! you’re a
 heartless, selfish boy!”
 
“i can’t stay with her,” answered crossly. “i’ll not stay by myself.
 she cries so i can’t bear it. and she won’t give over, though i say
 i’ll call my father. i did call him once, and threatened to strangle
 her if she was not quiet; but she began again the instant left the
 room, moaning and grieving all night long, though i screamed for
 vexation that i couldn’t sleep.”
 
“is mr. heathcliff out?” i inquired, perceiving that the wretched
 creature had power to sympathise with his cousin’s mental tortures.
 
“he’s in the court,” replied, “talking to doctor kenneth; who says
 uncle is dying, truly, at last. i’m glad, for i shall be master of the
 grange after him. catherine always spoke of it as _her_ house. it isn’t
 hers! it’s mine: papa says everything she has is mine. all her nice
 books are mine; she offered to give them, and her pretty birds, and
 her pony minny, if i would get the key of our room, and let her out;
 but i told her she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine. and
 then she cried, and took little picture from her neck, and said i
 should have that; two pictures in gold case, on one side her mother,
 and on the other uncle, when they were young. that was yesterday—i said
 _they_ were mine, too; and tried to get them from her. the spiteful
 thing wouldn’t let me: she pushed off, and hurt me. i shrieked
 out—that frightens her—she heard papa coming, and she broke the hinges
 and divided the case, and gave her mother’s portrait; the other she
 attempted to hide: but papa asked what was the matter, and i explained
 it. took the one i had away, and ordered her to resign hers to me;
 she refused, and he—he struck her down, and wrenched it off the chain,
 and crushed it with his foot.”
 
“and were you pleased to see her struck?” i asked: having my designs in
 encouraging his talk.
 
“i winked,” answered: “i wink to see my father strike dog or a
 horse, does it so hard. yet i was glad at first—she deserved
 punishing for pushing me: but when papa was gone, she made come to
 the window and showed her cheek cut on the inside, against her
 teeth, and her mouth filling with blood; and then she gathered up the
 bits of the picture, and went and sat down with her face to the wall,
 and she has never spoken to since: and i sometimes think she can’t
 speak for pain. i don’t like to think so; but she’s naughty thing for
 crying continually; and she looks so pale and wild, i’m afraid of her.”
 
“and you can get the key if you choose?” i said.
 
“yes, when i am upstairs,” answered; “but i can’t walk upstairs
 now.”
 
“in what apartment is it?” i asked.
 
“oh,” cried, “i shan’t tell _you_ where it is. it is our secret.
 nobody, neither hareton nor zillah, is to know. there! you’ve tired
 me—go away, go away!” and turned his face on to his arm, and shut
 his eyes again.
 
i considered it best to depart without seeing mr. heathcliff, and bring
 rescue for my young lady from the grange. on reaching it, the
 astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was
 intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two
 or three were about to hurry up and shout the news at mr. edgar’s door:
 but i bespoke the announcement of it myself. how changed i found him,
 even in those few days! lay an image of sadness and resignation
 awaiting his death. very young looked: though his actual age was
 thirty-nine, one would have called him ten years younger, at least. he
 thought of catherine; for murmured her name. i touched his hand, and
 spoke.
 
“catherine is coming, dear master!” i whispered; “she is alive and
 well; and will be here, i hope, to-night.”
 
i trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: half rose up,
 looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in swoon. as
 soon as recovered, i related our compulsory visit, and detention at
 the heights. i said heathcliff forced to go in: which was not quite
 true. i uttered as little as possible against linton; nor did i
 describe all his father’s brutal conduct—my intentions being to add no
 bitterness, if i could help it, to his already overflowing cup.
 
divined that one of his enemy’s purposes was to secure the personal
 property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather himself; yet why
 did not wait till his decease was puzzle to my master, because
 ignorant how nearly and his nephew would quit the world together.
 however, felt that his will had better be altered: instead of
 leaving catherine’s fortune at her own disposal, determined to put
 it in the hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her
 children, if she had any, after her. by that means, it could not fall
 to mr. heathcliff should linton die.
 
having received his orders, i despatched man to fetch the attorney,
 and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young
 lady of her jailor. both parties were delayed very late. the single
 servant returned first. said mr. green, the lawyer, was out when he
 arrived at his house, and had to wait two hours for his re-entrance;
 and then mr. green told him had little business in the village
 that must be done; but would be at thrushcross grange before
 morning. the four men came back unaccompanied also. they brought word
 that catherine was ill: too ill to quit her room; and heathcliff would
 not suffer them to see her. i scolded the stupid fellows well for
 listening to that tale, which i would not carry to my master; resolving
 to take whole bevy up to the heights, at daylight, and storm it
 literally, unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us. her
 father _shall_ see her, i vowed, and vowed again, if that devil be
 killed on his own door-stones in trying to prevent it!
 
happily, i was spared the journey and the trouble. i had gone
 downstairs at three o’clock to fetch jug of water; and was passing
 through the hall with it in my hand, when sharp knock at the front
 door made jump. “oh! it is green,” i said, recollecting myself—“only
 green,” and i went on, intending to send somebody else to open it; but
 the knock was repeated: not loud, and still importunately. i put the
 jug on the banister and hastened to admit him myself. the harvest moon
 shone clear outside. it was not the attorney. my own sweet little
 mistress sprang on my neck sobbing, “ellen, ellen! is papa alive?”
 
“yes,” i cried: “yes, my angel, is, god be thanked, you are safe
 with us again!”
 
she wanted to run, breathless as she was, upstairs to mr. linton’s
 room; but i compelled her to sit down on chair, and made her drink,
 and washed her pale face, chafing it into faint colour with my apron.
 then i said i must go first, and tell of her arrival; imploring her to
 say, she should be happy with young heathcliff. she stared, but soon
 comprehending why i counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured
 she would not complain.
 
i couldn’t abide to be present at their meeting. i stood outside the
 chamber-door quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed,
 then. all was composed, however: catherine’s despair was as silent as
 her father’s joy. she supported him calmly, in appearance; and fixed
 on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.
 
died blissfully, mr. lockwood: died so. kissing her cheek, he
 murmured,—“i am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to
 us!” and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant
 gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed. none
 could have noticed the exact minute of his death, it was so entirely
 without struggle.
 
whether catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too
 weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she
 sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that
 deathbed, but i insisted on her coming away and taking some repose. it
 was well i succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the
 lawyer, having called at wuthering heights to get his instructions how
 to behave. had sold himself to mr. heathcliff: that was the cause of
 his delay in obeying my master’s summons. fortunately, thought of
 worldly affairs crossed the latter’s mind, to disturb him, after his
 daughter’s arrival.
 
mr. green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the
 place. gave all the servants but me, notice to quit. would have
 carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that edgar
 linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with
 his family. there was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud
 protestations against any infringement of its directions. the funeral
 was hurried over; catherine, mrs. linton heathcliff now, was suffered
 to stay at the grange till her father’s corpse had quitted it.
 
she told that her anguish had at last spurred linton to incur the
 risk of liberating her. she heard the men i sent disputing at the door,
 and she gathered the sense of heathcliff’s answer. it drove her
 desperate. linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon
 after i left, was terrified into fetching the key before his father
 re-ascended. had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without
 shutting it; and when should have gone to bed, begged to sleep
 with hareton, and his petition was granted for once. catherine stole
 out before break of day. she dared not try the doors lest the dogs
 should raise an alarm; she visited the empty chambers and examined
 their windows; and, luckily, lighting on her mother’s, she got easily
 out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the fir-tree
 close by. her accomplice suffered for his share in the escape,
 notwithstanding his timid contrivances.
 



chapter xxix
 

the evening after the funeral, my young lady and i were seated in the
 library; now musing mournfully—one of us despairingly—on our loss, now
 venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.
 
we had just agreed the best destiny which could await catherine would
 be permission to continue resident at the grange; at least during
 linton’s life: being allowed to join her there, and i to remain as
 housekeeper. that seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be
 hoped for; and yet i did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect
 of retaining my home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved
 young mistress; when servant—one of the discarded ones, not yet
 departed—rushed hastily in, and said “that devil heathcliff” was coming
 through the court: should fasten the door in his face?
 
if we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time. he
 made ceremony of knocking or announcing his name: was master, and
 availed himself of the master’s privilege to walk straight in, without
 saying word. the sound of our informant’s voice directed him to the
 library; entered and motioning him out, shut the door.
 
it was the same room into which had been ushered, as guest,
 eighteen years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the
 same autumn landscape lay outside. we had not yet lighted candle, but
 all the apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the
 splendid head of mrs. linton, and the graceful one of her husband.
 heathcliff advanced to the hearth. time had little altered his person
 either. there was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more
 composed, his frame stone or two heavier, perhaps, and other
 difference. catherine had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she
 saw him.
 
“stop!” said, arresting her by the arm. “no more runnings away!
 where would you go? i’m come to fetch you home; and i hope you’ll be a
 dutiful daughter and not encourage my to further disobedience. i
 was embarrassed how to punish him when i discovered his part in the
 business: he’s such cobweb, pinch would annihilate him; but you’ll
 see by his look that has received his due! i brought him down one
 evening, the day before yesterday, and just set him in chair, and
 never touched him afterwards. i sent hareton out, and we had the room
 to ourselves. in two hours, i called joseph to carry him up again; and
 since then my presence is as potent on his nerves as ghost; and i
 fancy sees often, though i am not near. hareton says wakes and
 shrieks in the night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him
 from me; and, whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must
 come: he’s your concern now; i yield all my interest in him to you.”
 
“why not let catherine continue here,” i pleaded, “and send master
 linton to her? as you hate them both, you’d not miss them: they _can_
 only be daily plague to your unnatural heart.”
 
“i’m seeking tenant for the grange,” answered; “and i want my
 children about me, to be sure. besides, that lass owes her services
 for her bread. i’m not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness
 after linton is gone. make haste and get ready, now; and don’t oblige
 to compel you.”
 
“i shall,” said catherine. “linton is all i have to love in the world,
 and though you have done what you could to make him hateful to me, and
 to him, you _cannot_ make us hate each other. and i defy you to hurt
 him when i am by, and i defy you to frighten me!”
 
“you are boastful champion,” replied heathcliff; “but i don’t like
 you well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the
 torment, as long as it lasts. it is not i who will make him hateful to
 you—it is his own sweet spirit. he’s as bitter as gall at your
 desertion and its consequences: don’t expect thanks for this noble
 devotion. i heard him draw pleasant picture to zillah of what he
 would do if were as strong as i: the inclination is there, and his
 very weakness will sharpen his wits to find substitute for strength.”
 
“i know has bad nature,” said catherine: “he’s your son. but i’m
 glad i’ve better, to forgive it; and i know loves me, and for that
 reason i love him. mr. heathcliff, _you_ have _nobody_ to love you;
 and, however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
 thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery. you _are_
 miserable, are you not? lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
 _nobody_ loves you—_nobody_ will cry for you when you die! i wouldn’t
 be you!”
 
catherine spoke with kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made
 up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw
 pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.
 
“you shall be sorry to be yourself presently,” said her father-in-law,
 “if you stand there another minute. begone, witch, and get your
 things!”
 
she scornfully withdrew. in her absence i began to beg for zillah’s
 place at the heights, offering to resign mine to her; but would
 suffer it on account. bid be silent; and then, for the first
 time, allowed himself glance round the room and look at the
 pictures. having studied mrs. linton’s, said—“i shall have that
 home. not because i need it, but—” turned abruptly to the fire, and
 continued, with what, for lack of better word, i must call a
 smile—“i’ll tell you what i did yesterday! i got the sexton, who was
 digging linton’s grave, to remove the earth off her coffin lid, and i
 opened it. i thought, once, i would have stayed there: when i saw her
 face again—it is hers yet!—he had hard work to stir me; but said it
 would change if the air blew on it, and so i struck one side of the
 coffin loose, and covered it up: not linton’s side, damn him! i wish
 he’d been soldered in lead. and i bribed the sexton to pull it away
 when i’m laid there, and slide mine out too; i’ll have it made so: and
 then by the time linton gets to us he’ll not know which is which!”
 
“you were very wicked, mr. heathcliff!” i exclaimed; “were you not
 ashamed to disturb the dead?”
 
“i disturbed nobody, nelly,” replied; “and i gave some ease to
 myself. i shall be great deal more comfortable now; and you’ll have a
 better chance of keeping underground, when i get there. disturbed
 her? no! she has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen
 years—incessantly—remorselessly—till yesternight; and yesternight i was
 tranquil. i dreamt i was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with
 my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers.”
 
“and if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what would you
 have dreamt of then?” i said.
 
“of dissolving with her, and being more happy still!” answered. “do
 you suppose i dread any change of that sort? i expected such a
 transformation on raising the lid, but i’m better pleased that it should
 not commence till i share it. besides, unless i had received distinct
 impression of her passionless features, that strange feeling would
 hardly have been removed. it began oddly. you know i was wild after she
 died; and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her to return to her
 spirit! i have strong faith in ghosts: i have conviction that they
 can, and do, exist among us! the day she was buried, there came fall
 of snow. in the evening i went to the churchyard. it blew bleak as
 winter—all round was solitary. i didn’t fear that her fool of husband
 would wander up the glen so late; and one else had business to bring
 them there. being alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the
 sole barrier between us, i said to myself—‘i’ll have her in my arms
 again! if she be cold, i’ll think it is this north wind that chills
 _me_; and if she be motionless, it is sleep.’ i got spade from the
 tool-house, and began to delve with all my might—it scraped the coffin;
 i fell to work with my hands; the wood commenced cracking about the
 screws; i was on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that
 i heard sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, and
 bending down. ‘if i can only get this off,’ i muttered, ‘i wish they
 may shovel in the earth over us both!’ and i wrenched at it more
 desperately still. there was another sigh, close at my ear. i appeared
 to feel the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. i knew
 living thing in flesh and blood was by; but, as certainly as you
 perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though it
 cannot be discerned, so certainly i felt that cathy was there: not
 under me, but on the earth. sudden sense of relief flowed from my
 heart through every limb. i relinquished my labour of agony, and turned
 consoled at once: unspeakably consoled. her presence was with me: it
 remained while i re-filled the grave, and led home. you may laugh,
 if you will; but i was sure i should see her there. i was sure she was
 with me, and i could not help talking to her. having reached the
 heights, i rushed eagerly to the door. it was fastened; and, i
 remember, that accursed earnshaw and my wife opposed my entrance. i
 remember stopping to kick the breath out of him, and then hurrying
 upstairs, to my room and hers. i looked round impatiently—i felt her by
 me—i could _almost_ see her, and yet i _could not_! i ought to have
 sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning—from the fervour of
 my supplications to have but one glimpse! i had not one. she showed
 herself, as she often was in life, devil to me! and, since then,
 sometimes more and sometimes less, i’ve been the sport of that
 intolerable torture! infernal! keeping my nerves at such stretch
 that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would long ago have
 relaxed to the feebleness of linton’s. when i sat in the house with
 hareton, it seemed that on going out i should meet her; when i walked
 on the moors i should meet her coming in. when i went from home i
 hastened to return; she _must_ be somewhere at the heights, i was
 certain! and when i slept in her chamber—i was beaten out of that. i
 couldn’t lie there; for the moment i closed my eyes, she was either
 outside the window, or sliding back the panels, or entering the room,
 or even resting her darling head on the same pillow as she did when a
 child; and i must open my lids to see. and so i opened and closed them
 hundred times night—to be always disappointed! it racked me! i’ve
 often groaned aloud, till that old rascal joseph doubt believed that
 my conscience was playing the fiend inside of me. now, since i’ve seen
 her, i’m pacified—a little. it was strange way of killing: not by
 inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths, to beguile with the
 spectre of hope through eighteen years!”
 
mr. heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead; his hair clung to it, wet
 with perspiration; his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire,
 the brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the
 grim aspect of his countenance, but imparting peculiar look of
 trouble, and painful appearance of mental tension towards one
 absorbing subject. only half addressed me, and i maintained silence.
 i didn’t like to hear him talk! after short period resumed his
 meditation on the picture, took it down and leant it against the sofa
 to contemplate it at better advantage; and while so occupied catherine
 entered, announcing that she was ready, when her pony should be
 saddled.
 
“send that over to-morrow,” said heathcliff to me; then turning to her,
 added: “you may do without your pony: it is fine evening, and
 you’ll need ponies at wuthering heights; for what journeys you take,
 your own feet will serve you. come along.”
 
“good-bye, ellen!” whispered my dear little mistress. as she kissed me,
 her lips felt like ice. “come and see me, ellen; don’t forget.”
 
“take care you do such thing, mrs. dean!” said her new father. “when
 i wish to speak to you i’ll come here. i want none of your prying at my
 house!”
 
signed her to precede him; and casting back look that cut my
 heart, she obeyed. i watched them, from the window, walk down the
 garden. heathcliff fixed catherine’s arm under his: though she disputed
 the act at first evidently; and with rapid strides hurried her into
 the alley, whose trees concealed them.
 



chapter xxx
 

i have paid visit to the heights, but i have not seen her since she
 left: joseph held the door in his hand when i called to ask after her,
 and wouldn’t let pass. said mrs. linton was “thrang,” and the
 master was not in. zillah has told something of the way they go on,
 otherwise i should hardly know who was dead and who living. she thinks
 catherine haughty, and does not like her, i can guess by her talk. my
 young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but mr.
 heathcliff told her to follow her own business, and let his
 daughter-in-law look after herself; and zillah willingly acquiesced,
 being narrow-minded, selfish woman. catherine evinced child’s
 annoyance at this neglect; repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted
 my informant among her enemies, as securely as if she had done her some
 great wrong. i had long talk with zillah about six weeks ago, a
 little before you came, one day when we foregathered on the moor; and
 this is what she told me.
 
“the first thing mrs. linton did,” she said, “on her arrival at the
 heights, was to run upstairs, without even wishing good-evening to me
 and joseph; she shut herself into linton’s room, and remained till
 morning. then, while the master and earnshaw were at breakfast, she
 entered the house, and asked all in quiver if the doctor might be
 sent for? her cousin was very ill.
 
“‘we know that!’ answered heathcliff; ‘but his life is not worth a
 farthing, and i won’t spend farthing on him.’
 
“‘but i cannot tell how to do,’ she said; ‘and if nobody will help me,
 he’ll die!’
 
“‘walk out of the room,’ cried the master, ‘and let never hear a
 word more about him! none here care what becomes of him; if you do, act
 the nurse; if you do not, lock him up and leave him.’
 
“then she began to bother me, and i said i’d had enough plague with the
 tiresome thing; we each had our tasks, and hers was to wait on linton:
 mr. heathcliff bid leave that labour to her.
 
“how they managed together, i can’t tell. i fancy fretted great
 deal, and moaned hisseln night and day; and she had precious little
 rest: one could guess by her white face and heavy eyes. she sometimes
 came into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if she would
 fain beg assistance; but i was not going to disobey the master: i never
 dare disobey him, mrs. dean; and, though i thought it wrong that
 kenneth should not be sent for, it was concern of mine either to
 advise or complain, and i always refused to meddle. once or twice,
 after we had gone to bed, i’ve happened to open my door again and seen
 her sitting crying on the stairs’-top; and then i’ve shut myself in
 quick, for fear of being moved to interfere. i did pity her then, i’m
 sure: still i didn’t wish to lose my place, you know.
 
“at last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and frightened me
 out of my wits, by saying, ‘tell mr. heathcliff that his is
 dying—i’m sure is, this time. get up, instantly, and tell him.’
 
“having uttered this speech, she vanished again. i lay quarter of an
 hour listening and trembling. nothing stirred—the house was quiet.
 
“she’s mistaken, i said to myself. he’s got over it. i needn’t disturb
 them; and i began to doze. but my sleep was marred second time by a
 sharp ringing of the bell—the only bell we have, put up on purpose for
 linton; and the master called to to see what was the matter, and
 inform them that wouldn’t have that noise repeated.
 
“i delivered catherine’s message. cursed to himself, and in few
 minutes came out with lighted candle, and proceeded to their room. i
 followed. mrs. heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with her hands
 folded on her knees. her father-in-law went up, held the light to
 linton’s face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards turned to
 her.
 
“‘now—catherine,’ said, ‘how do you feel?’
 
“she was dumb.
 
“‘how do you feel, catherine?’ repeated.
 
“‘he’s safe, and i’m free,’ she answered: ‘i should feel well—but,’ she
 continued, with bitterness she couldn’t conceal, ‘you have left so
 long to struggle against death alone, that i feel and see only death! i
 feel like death!’
 
“and she looked like it, too! i gave her little wine. hareton and
 joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and
 heard our talk from outside, now entered. joseph was fain, i believe,
 of the lad’s removal; hareton seemed thought bothered: though was
 more taken up with staring at catherine than thinking of linton. but
 the master bid him get off to bed again: we didn’t want his help. he
 afterwards made joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told to
 return to mine, and mrs. heathcliff remained by herself.
 
“in the morning, sent to tell her she must come down to
 breakfast: she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she
 was ill; at which i hardly wondered. i informed mr. heathcliff, and he
 replied,—‘well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now and
 then to get her what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell
 me.’”
 
cathy stayed upstairs fortnight, according to zillah; who visited her
 twice day, and would have been rather more friendly, but her attempts
 at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.
 
heathcliff went up once, to show her linton’s will. had bequeathed
 the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his
 father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act
 during her week’s absence, when his uncle died. the lands, being a
 minor, could not meddle with. however, mr. heathcliff has claimed
 and kept them in his wife’s right and his also: i suppose legally; at
 any rate, catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his
 possession.
 
“nobody,” said zillah, “ever approached her door, except that once, but
 i; and nobody asked anything about her. the first occasion of her
 coming down into the house was on sunday afternoon. she had cried
 out, when i carried up her dinner, that she couldn’t bear any longer
 being in the cold; and i told her the master was going to thrushcross
 grange, and earnshaw and i needn’t hinder her from descending; so, as
 soon as she heard heathcliff’s horse trot off, she made her appearance,
 donned in black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears as
 plain as quaker: she couldn’t comb them out.
 
“joseph and i generally go to chapel on sundays:” the kirk, (you know,
 has minister now, explained mrs. dean; and they call the methodists’
 or baptists’ place, i can’t say which it is, at gimmerton, chapel.)
 “joseph had gone,” she continued, “but i thought proper to bide at
 home. young folks are always the better for an elder’s over-looking;
 and hareton, with all his bashfulness, isn’t model of nice behaviour.
 i let him know that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and she
 had been always used to see the sabbath respected; so had as good
 leave his guns and bits of indoor work alone, while she stayed. he
 coloured up at the news, and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes.
 the train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in minute. i saw
 meant to give her his company; and i guessed, by his way, wanted
 to be presentable; so, laughing, as i durst not laugh when the master
 is by, i offered to help him, if would, and joked at his confusion.
 grew sullen, and began to swear.
 
“now, mrs. dean,” zillah went on, seeing not pleased by her manner,
 “you happen think your young lady too fine for mr. hareton; and happen
 you’re right: but i own i should love well to bring her pride peg
 lower. and what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her,
 now? she’s as poor as you or i: poorer, i’ll be bound: you’re saving,
 and i’m doing my little all that road.”
 
hareton allowed zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into
 good humour; so, when catherine came, half forgetting her former
 insults, tried to make himself agreeable, by the housekeeper’s
 account.
 
“missis walked in,” she said, “as chill as an icicle, and as high as a
 princess. i got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair. no, she
 turned up her nose at my civility. earnshaw rose, too, and bid her come
 to the settle, and sit close by the fire: was sure she was starved.
 
“‘i’ve been starved month and more,’ she answered, resting on the
 word as scornful as she could.
 
“and she got chair for herself, and placed it at distance from both
 of us. having sat till she was warm, she began to look round, and
 discovered number of books on the dresser; she was instantly upon her
 feet again, stretching to reach them: but they were too high up. her
 cousin, after watching her endeavours while, at last summoned courage
 to help her; she held her frock, and filled it with the first that
 came to hand.
 
“that was great advance for the lad. she didn’t thank him; still, he
 felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance, and ventured to
 stand behind as she examined them, and even to stoop and point out what
 struck his fancy in certain old pictures which they contained; nor was
 daunted by the saucy style in which she jerked the page from his
 finger: contented himself with going bit farther back and looking
 at her instead of the book. she continued reading, or seeking for
 something to read. his attention became, by degrees, quite centred in
 the study of her thick silky curls: her face couldn’t see, and she
 couldn’t see him. and, perhaps, not quite awake to what did, but
 attracted like child to candle, at last proceeded from staring
 to touching; put out his hand and stroked one curl, as gently as if
 it were bird. might have stuck knife into her neck, she started
 round in such taking.
 
“‘get away this moment! how dare you touch me? why are you stopping
 there?’ she cried, in tone of disgust. ‘i can’t endure you! i’ll go
 upstairs again, if you come near me.’
 
“mr. hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as could do: sat down
 in the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over her volumes
 another half hour; finally, earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.
 
“‘will you ask her to read to us, zillah? i’m stalled of doing naught;
 and i do like—i could like to hear her! dunnot say i wanted it, but ask
 of yourseln.’
 
“‘mr. hareton wishes you would read to us, ma’am,’ i said, immediately.
 ‘he’d take it very kind—he’d be much obliged.’
 
“she frowned; and looking up, answered—
 
“‘mr. hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
 understand that i reject any pretence at kindness you have the
 hypocrisy to offer! i despise you, and will have nothing to say to any
 of you! when i would have given my life for one kind word, even to see
 one of your faces, you all kept off. but i won’t complain to you! i’m
 driven down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your
 society.’
 
“‘what could i ha’ done?’ began earnshaw. ‘how was i to blame?’
 
“‘oh! you are an exception,’ answered mrs. heathcliff. ‘i never missed
 such concern as you.’
 
“‘but i offered more than once, and asked,’ said, kindling up at her
 pertness, ‘i asked mr. heathcliff to let wake for you—’
 
“‘be silent! i’ll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your
 disagreeable voice in my ear!’ said my lady.
 
“hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him! and unslinging his
 gun, restrained himself from his sunday occupations longer. he
 talked now, freely enough; and she presently saw fit to retreat to her
 solitude: but the frost had set in, and, in spite of her pride, she was
 forced to condescend to our company, more and more. however, i took
 care there should be further scorning at my good nature: ever since,
 i’ve been as stiff as herself; and she has lover or liker among us:
 and she does not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her,
 and she’ll curl back without respect of any one. she’ll snap at the
 master himself, and as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more
 hurt she gets, the more venomous she grows.”
 
at first, on hearing this account from zillah, i determined to leave my
 situation, take cottage, and get catherine to come and live with me:
 but mr. heathcliff would as soon permit that as would set up hareton
 in an independent house; and i can see remedy, at present, unless
 she could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my
 province to arrange.
 
* * * * *
 

thus ended mrs. dean’s story. notwithstanding the doctor’s prophecy, i
 am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week
 in january, i propose getting out on horseback in day or two, and
 riding over to wuthering heights, to inform my landlord that i shall
 spend the next six months in london; and, if likes, may look out
 for another tenant to take the place after october. i would not pass
 another winter here for much.
 



chapter xxxi
 

yesterday was bright, calm, and frosty. i went to the heights as i
 proposed: my housekeeper entreated to bear little note from her to
 her young lady, and i did not refuse, for the worthy woman was not
 conscious of anything odd in her request. the front door stood open,
 but the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit; i knocked and
 invoked earnshaw from among the garden-beds; unchained it, and i
 entered. the fellow is as handsome rustic as need be seen. i took
 particular notice of him this time; but then does his best
 apparently to make the least of his advantages.
 
i asked if mr. heathcliff were at home? answered, no; but would
 be in at dinner-time. it was eleven o’clock, and i announced my
 intention of going in and waiting for him; at which immediately
 flung down his tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not
 as substitute for the host.
 
we entered together; catherine was there, making herself useful in
 preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; she looked more
 sulky and less spirited than when i had seen her first. she hardly
 raised her eyes to notice me, and continued her employment with the
 same disregard to common forms of politeness as before; never returning
 my bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.
 
“she does not seem so amiable,” i thought, “as mrs. dean would persuade
 to believe. she’s beauty, it is true; but not an angel.”
 
earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen. “remove them
 yourself,” she said, pushing them from her as soon as she had done; and
 retiring to stool by the window, where she began to carve figures of
 birds and beasts out of the turnip-parings in her lap. i approached
 her, pretending to desire view of the garden; and, as i fancied,
 adroitly dropped mrs. dean’s note on to her knee, unnoticed by
 hareton—but she asked aloud, “what is that?” and chucked it off.
 
“a letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the grange,” i
 answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it
 should be imagined missive of my own. she would gladly have gathered
 it up at this information, but hareton beat her; seized and put it
 in his waistcoat, saying mr. heathcliff should look at it first.
 thereat, catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very
 stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her
 eyes; and her cousin, after struggling awhile to keep down his softer
 feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor beside her,
 as ungraciously as could. catherine caught and perused it eagerly;
 then she put few questions to concerning the inmates, rational and
 irrational, of her former home; and gazing towards the hills, murmured
 in soliloquy:
 
“i should like to be riding minny down there! i should like to be
 climbing up there! oh! i’m tired—i’m _stalled_, hareton!” and she leant
 her pretty head back against the sill, with half yawn and half a
 sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring
 nor knowing whether we remarked her.
 
“mrs. heathcliff,” i said, after sitting some time mute, “you are not
 aware that i am an acquaintance of yours? so intimate that i think it
 strange you won’t come and speak to me. my housekeeper never wearies of
 talking about and praising you; and she’ll be greatly disappointed if i
 return with news of or from you, except that you received her letter
 and said nothing!”
 
she appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked,—
 
“does ellen like you?”
 
“yes, very well,” i replied, hesitatingly.
 
“you must tell her,” she continued, “that i would answer her letter,
 but i have materials for writing: not even book from which i might
 tear leaf.”
 
“no books!” i exclaimed. “how do you contrive to live here without
 them? if i may take the liberty to inquire. though provided with a
 large library, i’m frequently very dull at the grange; take my books
 away, and i should be desperate!”
 
“i was always reading, when i had them,” said catherine; “and mr.
 heathcliff never reads; so took it into his head to destroy my
 books. i have not had glimpse of one for weeks. only once, i searched
 through joseph’s store of theology, to his great irritation; and once,
 hareton, i came upon secret stock in your room—some latin and greek,
 and some tales and poetry: all old friends. i brought the last here—and
 you gathered them, as magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love
 of stealing! they are of use to you; or else you concealed them in
 the bad spirit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.
 perhaps _your_ envy counselled mr. heathcliff to rob of my
 treasures? but i’ve most of them written on my brain and printed in my
 heart, and you cannot deprive of those!”
 
earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his
 private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of
 her accusations.
 
“mr. hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge,” i
 said, coming to his rescue. “he is not _envious_, but _emulous_ of your
 attainments. he’ll be clever scholar in few years.”
 
“and wants to sink into dunce, meantime,” answered catherine.
 “yes, i hear him trying to spell and read to himself, and pretty
 blunders makes! i wish you would repeat chevy chase as you did
 yesterday: it was extremely funny. i heard you; and i heard you turning
 over the dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing
 because you couldn’t read their explanations!”
 
the young man evidently thought it too bad that should be laughed at
 for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it. i had a
 similar notion; and, remembering mrs. dean’s anecdote of his first
 attempt at enlightening the darkness in which had been reared, i
 observed,—“but, mrs. heathcliff, we have each had commencement, and
 each stumbled and tottered on the threshold; had our teachers scorned
 instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter yet.”
 
“oh!” she replied, “i don’t wish to limit his acquirements: still, he
 has right to appropriate what is mine, and make it ridiculous to me
 with his vile mistakes and mispronunciations! those books, both prose
 and verse, are consecrated to by other associations; and i hate to
 have them debased and profaned in his mouth! besides, of all, has
 selected my favourite pieces that i love the most to repeat, as if out
 of deliberate malice.”
 
hareton’s chest heaved in silence minute: laboured under severe
 sense of mortification and wrath, which it was easy task to
 suppress. i rose, and, from gentlemanly idea of relieving his
 embarrassment, took up my station in the doorway, surveying the
 external prospect as i stood. followed my example, and left the
 room; but presently reappeared, bearing half dozen volumes in his
 hands, which threw into catherine’s lap, exclaiming,—“take them! i
 never want to hear, or read, or think of them again!”
 
“i won’t have them now,” she answered. “i shall connect them with you,
 and hate them.”
 
she opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and read a
 portion in the drawling tone of beginner; then laughed, and threw it
 from her. “and listen,” she continued, provokingly, commencing verse
 of an old ballad in the same fashion.
 
but his self-love would endure further torment: i heard, and not
 altogether disapprovingly, manual check given to her saucy tongue.
 the little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her cousin’s sensitive
 though uncultivated feelings, and physical argument was the only mode
 had of balancing the account, and repaying its effects on the
 inflictor. afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the
 fire. i read in his countenance what anguish it was to offer that
 sacrifice to spleen. i fancied that as they consumed, recalled the
 pleasure they had already imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing
 pleasure had anticipated from them; and i fancied i guessed the
 incitement to his secret studies also. had been content with daily
 labour and rough animal enjoyments, till catherine crossed his path.
 shame at her scorn, and hope of her approval, were his first prompters
 to higher pursuits; and instead of guarding him from one and winning
 him to the other, his endeavours to raise himself had produced just the
 contrary result.
 
“yes, that’s all the good that such brute as you can get from them!”
 cried catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching the
 conflagration with indignant eyes.
 
“you’d _better_ hold your tongue, now,” answered fiercely.
 
and his agitation precluded further speech; advanced hastily to the
 entrance, where i made way for him to pass. but ere had crossed the
 door-stones, mr. heathcliff, coming up the causeway, encountered him,
 and laying hold of his shoulder asked,—“what’s to do now, my lad?”
 
“naught, naught,” said, and broke away to enjoy his grief and anger
 in solitude.
 
heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.
 
“it will be odd if i thwart myself,” muttered, unconscious that i
 was behind him. “but when i look for his father in his face, i find
 _her_ every day more! how the devil is so like? i can hardly bear to
 see him.”
 
bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in. there was a
 restless, anxious expression in his countenance, i had never remarked
 there before; and looked sparer in person. his daughter-in-law, on
 perceiving him through the window, immediately escaped to the kitchen,
 so that i remained alone.
 
“i’m glad to see you out of doors again, mr. lockwood,” said, in
 reply to my greeting; “from selfish motives partly: i don’t think i
 could readily supply your loss in this desolation. i’ve wondered more
 than once what brought you here.”
 
“an idle whim, i fear, sir,” was my answer; “or else an idle whim is
 going to spirit away. i shall set out for london next week; and i
 must give you warning that i feel disposition to retain thrushcross
 grange beyond the twelve months i agreed to rent it. i believe i shall
 not live there any more.”
 
“oh, indeed; you’re tired of being banished from the world, are you?”
 said. “but if you be coming to plead off paying for place you
 won’t occupy, your journey is useless: i never relent in exacting my
 due from any one.”
 
“i’m coming to plead off nothing about it,” i exclaimed, considerably
 irritated. “should you wish it, i’ll settle with you now,” and i drew
 my note-book from my pocket.
 
“no, no,” replied, coolly; “you’ll leave sufficient behind to cover
 your debts, if you fail to return: i’m not in such hurry. sit down
 and take your dinner with us; guest that is safe from repeating his
 visit can generally be made welcome. catherine! bring the things in:
 where are you?”
 
catherine reappeared, bearing tray of knives and forks.
 
“you may get your dinner with joseph,” muttered heathcliff, aside, “and
 remain in the kitchen till is gone.”
 
she obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no
 temptation to transgress. living among clowns and misanthropists, she
 probably cannot appreciate better class of people when she meets
 them.
 
with mr. heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and hareton,
 absolutely dumb, on the other, i made somewhat cheerless meal, and
 bade adieu early. i would have departed by the back way, to get last
 glimpse of catherine and annoy old joseph; but hareton received orders
 to lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted to the door, so i
 could not fulfil my wish.
 
“how dreary life gets over in that house!” i reflected, while riding
 down the road. “what realisation of something more romantic than a
 fairy tale it would have been for mrs. linton heathcliff, had she and i
 struck up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated
 together into the stirring atmosphere of the town!”
 



chapter xxxii
 

1802.—this september i was invited to devastate the moors of friend
 in the north, and on my journey to his abode, i unexpectedly came
 within fifteen miles of gimmerton. the ostler at roadside
 public-house was holding pail of water to refresh my horses, when a
 cart of very green oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he
 remarked,—“yon’s frough gimmerton, nah! they’re allas three wick’ after
 other folk wi’ ther harvest.”
 
“gimmerton?” i repeated—my residence in that locality had already grown
 dim and dreamy. “ah! i know. how far is it from this?”
 
“happen fourteen mile o’er th’ hills; and rough road,” answered.
 
sudden impulse seized to visit thrushcross grange. it was scarcely
 noon, and i conceived that i might as well pass the night under my own
 roof as in an inn. besides, i could spare day easily to arrange
 matters with my landlord, and thus save myself the trouble of invading
 the neighbourhood again. having rested awhile, i directed my servant to
 inquire the way to the village; and, with great fatigue to our beasts,
 we managed the distance in some three hours.
 
i left him there, and proceeded down the valley alone. the grey church
 looked greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier. i distinguished a
 moor-sheep cropping the short turf on the graves. it was sweet, warm
 weather—too warm for travelling; but the heat did not hinder from
 enjoying the delightful scenery above and below: had i seen it nearer
 august, i’m sure it would have tempted to waste month among its
 solitudes. in winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more
 divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold swells
 of heath.
 
i reached the grange before sunset, and knocked for admittance; but the
 family had retreated into the back premises, i judged, by one thin,
 blue wreath, curling from the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear. i
 rode into the court. under the porch, girl of nine or ten sat
 knitting, and an old woman reclined on the housesteps, smoking a
 meditative pipe.
 
“is mrs. dean within?” i demanded of the dame.
 
“mistress dean? nay!” she answered, “she doesn’t bide here: shoo’s up
 at th’ heights.”
 
“are you the housekeeper, then?” i continued.
 
“eea, aw keep th’ hause,” she replied.
 
“well, i’m mr. lockwood, the master. are there any rooms to lodge me
 in, i wonder? i wish to stay all night.”
 
“t’ maister!” she cried in astonishment. “whet, whoiver knew yah wur
 coming? yah sud ha’ send word. they’s nowt norther dry nor mensful
 abaht t’ place: nowt there isn’t!”
 
she threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed, and i
 entered too; soon perceiving that her report was true, and, moreover,
 that i had almost upset her wits by my unwelcome apparition, i bade her
 be composed. i would go out for walk; and, meantime she must try to
 prepare corner of sitting-room for to sup in, and bedroom to
 sleep in. sweeping and dusting, only good fire and dry sheets were
 necessary. she seemed willing to do her best; though she thrust the
 hearth-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker, and
 malappropriated several other articles of her craft: but i retired,
 confiding in her energy for resting-place against my return.
 wuthering heights was the goal of my proposed excursion. an
 after-thought brought back, when i had quitted the court.
 
“all well at the heights?” i inquired of the woman.
 
“eea, f’r owt ee knaw!” she answered, skurrying away with pan of hot
 cinders.
 
i would have asked why mrs. dean had deserted the grange, but it was
 impossible to delay her at such crisis, so i turned away and made my
 exit, rambling leisurely along, with the glow of sinking sun behind,
 and the mild glory of rising moon in front—one fading, and the other
 brightening—as i quitted the park, and climbed the stony by-road
 branching off to mr. heathcliff’s dwelling. before i arrived in sight
 of it, all that remained of day was beamless amber light along the
 west: but i could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of
 grass, by that splendid moon. i had neither to climb the gate nor to
 knock—it yielded to my hand. that is an improvement, i thought. and i
 noticed another, by the aid of my nostrils; fragrance of stocks and
 wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees.
 
both doors and lattices were open; and yet, as is usually the case in a
 coal-district, fine red fire illumined the chimney: the comfort which
 the eye derives from it renders the extra heat endurable. but the house
 of wuthering heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of space
 for withdrawing out of its influence; and accordingly what inmates
 there were had stationed themselves not far from one of the windows. i
 could both see them and hear them talk before i entered, and looked and
 listened in consequence; being moved thereto by mingled sense of
 curiosity and envy, that grew as i lingered.
 
“con-_trary_!” said voice as sweet as silver bell. “that for the
 third time, you dunce! i’m not going to tell you again. recollect, or
 i’ll pull your hair!”
 
“contrary, then,” answered another, in deep but softened tones. “and
 now, kiss me, for minding so well.”
 
“no, read it over first correctly, without single mistake.”
 
the male speaker began to read: was young man, respectably dressed
 and seated at table, having book before him. his handsome features
 glowed with pleasure, and his eyes kept impatiently wandering from the
 page to small white hand over his shoulder, which recalled him by a
 smart slap on the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of
 inattention. its owner stood behind; her light, shining ringlets
 blending, at intervals, with his brown locks, as she bent to
 superintend his studies; and her face—it was lucky could not see her
 face, or would never have been so steady. i could; and i bit my lip
 in spite, at having thrown away the chance i might have had of doing
 something besides staring at its smiting beauty.
 
the task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil
 claimed reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, he
 generously returned. then they came to the door, and from their
 conversation i judged they were about to issue out and have walk on
 the moors. i supposed i should be condemned in hareton earnshaw’s
 heart, if not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions
 if i showed my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and
 feeling very mean and malignant, i skulked round to seek refuge in the
 kitchen. there was unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at
 the door sat my old friend nelly dean, sewing and singing song; which
 was often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and
 intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.
 
“i’d rayther, by th’ haulf, hev’ ’em swearing i’ my lugs fro’h morn to
 neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!” said the tenant of the kitchen, in
 answer to an unheard speech of nelly’s. “it’s blazing shame, that i
 cannot oppen t’ blessed book, but yah set up them glories to sattan,
 and all t’ flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th’ warld!
 oh! ye’re raight nowt; and shoo’s another; and that poor lad ’ll be
 lost atween ye. poor lad!” added, with groan; “he’s witched: i’m
 sartin on’t. oh, lord, judge ’em, for there’s norther law nor justice
 among wer rullers!”
 
“no! or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, i suppose,” retorted
 the singer. “but wisht, old man, and read your bible like christian,
 and never mind me. this is ‘fairy annie’s wedding’—a bonny tune—it goes
 to dance.”
 
mrs. dean was about to recommence, when i advanced; and recognising me
 directly, she jumped to her feet, crying—“why, bless you, mr. lockwood!
 how could you think of returning in this way? all’s shut up at
 thrushcross grange. you should have given us notice!”
 
“i’ve arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as i shall stay,”
 i answered. “i depart again to-morrow. and how are you transplanted
 here, mrs. dean? tell that.”
 
“zillah left, and mr. heathcliff wished to come, soon after you went
 to london, and stay till you returned. but, step in, pray! have you
 walked from gimmerton this evening?”
 
“from the grange,” i replied; “and while they make lodging room
 there, i want to finish my business with your master; because i don’t
 think of having another opportunity in hurry.”
 
“what business, sir?” said nelly, conducting into the house. “he’s
 gone out at present, and won’t return soon.”
 
“about the rent,” i answered.
 
“oh! then it is with mrs. heathcliff you must settle,” she observed;
 “or rather with me. she has not learnt to manage her affairs yet, and i
 act for her: there’s nobody else.”
 
i looked surprised.
 
“ah! you have not heard of heathcliff’s death, i see,” she continued.
 
“heathcliff dead!” i exclaimed, astonished. “how long ago?”
 
“three months since: but sit down, and let take your hat, and i’ll
 tell you all about it. stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?”
 
“i want nothing: i have ordered supper at home. you sit down too. i
 never dreamt of his dying! let hear how it came to pass. you say you
 don’t expect them back for some time—the young people?”
 
“no—i have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they
 don’t care for me. at least, have drink of our old ale; it will do
 you good: you seem weary.”
 
she hastened to fetch it before i could refuse, and i heard joseph
 asking whether “it warn’t crying scandal that she should have
 followers at her time of life? and then, to get them jocks out o’ t’
 maister’s cellar! fair shaamed to ’bide still and see it.”
 
she did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in minute, bearing a
 reaming silver pint, whose contents i lauded with becoming earnestness.
 and afterwards she furnished with the sequel of heathcliff’s
 history. had “queer” end, as she expressed it.
 
* * * * *
 

i was summoned to wuthering heights, within fortnight of your leaving
 us, she said; and i obeyed joyfully, for catherine’s sake. my first
 interview with her grieved and shocked me: she had altered so much
 since our separation. mr. heathcliff did not explain his reasons for
 taking new mind about my coming here; only told wanted me,
 and was tired of seeing catherine: i must make the little parlour my
 sitting-room, and keep her with me. it was enough if were obliged to
 see her once or twice day. she seemed pleased at this arrangement;
 and, by degrees, i smuggled over great number of books, and other
 articles, that had formed her amusement at the grange; and flattered
 myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. the delusion did not last
 long. catherine, contented at first, in brief space grew irritable
 and restless. for one thing, she was forbidden to move out of the
 garden, and it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as
 spring drew on; for another, in following the house, i was forced to
 quit her frequently, and she complained of loneliness: she preferred
 quarrelling with joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her
 solitude. i did not mind their skirmishes: but hareton was often
 obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the
 house to himself; and though in the beginning she either left it at his
 approach, or quietly joined in my occupations, and shunned remarking or
 addressing him—and though was always as sullen and silent as
 possible—after while, she changed her behaviour, and became incapable
 of letting him alone: talking at him; commenting on his stupidity and
 idleness; expressing her wonder how could endure the life he
 lived—how could sit whole evening staring into the fire, and
 dozing.
 
“he’s just like dog, is not, ellen?” she once observed, “or a
 cart-horse? does his work, eats his food, and sleeps eternally! what
 blank, dreary mind must have! do you ever dream, hareton? and, if
 you do, what is it about? but you can’t speak to me!”
 
then she looked at him; but would neither open his mouth nor look
 again.
 
“he’s, perhaps, dreaming now,” she continued. “he twitched his shoulder
 as juno twitches hers. ask him, ellen.”
 
“mr. hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs, if you don’t
 behave!” i said. had not only twitched his shoulder but clenched his
 fist, as if tempted to use it.
 
“i know why hareton never speaks, when i am in the kitchen,” she
 exclaimed, on another occasion. “he is afraid i shall laugh at him.
 ellen, what do you think? began to teach himself to read once; and,
 because i laughed, burned his books, and dropped it: was not a
 fool?”
 
“were not you naughty?” i said; “answer that.”
 
“perhaps i was,” she went on; “but i did not expect him to be so silly.
 hareton, if i gave you book, would you take it now? i’ll try!”
 
she placed one she had been perusing on his hand; flung it off, and
 muttered, if she did not give over, would break her neck.
 
“well, i shall put it here,” she said, “in the table-drawer; and i’m
 going to bed.”
 
then she whispered to watch whether touched it, and departed. but
 would not come near it; and so i informed her in the morning, to her
 great disappointment. i saw she was sorry for his persevering sulkiness
 and indolence: her conscience reproved her for frightening him off
 improving himself: she had done it effectually. but her ingenuity was
 at work to remedy the injury: while i ironed, or pursued other such
 stationary employments as i could not well do in the parlour, she would
 bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to me. when hareton was
 there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book
 lying about: that she did repeatedly; but was as obstinate as a
 mule, and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather took to
 smoking with joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of
 the fire, the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense,
 as would have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to
 disregard it. on fine evenings the latter followed his shooting
 expeditions, and catherine yawned and sighed, and teased to talk to
 her, and ran off into the court or garden the moment i began; and, as a
 last resource, cried, and said she was tired of living: her life was
 useless.
 
mr. heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had
 almost banished earnshaw from his apartment. owing to an accident at
 the commencement of march, became for some days fixture in the
 kitchen. his gun burst while out on the hills by himself; splinter
 cut his arm, and lost good deal of blood before could reach
 home. the consequence was that, perforce, was condemned to the
 fireside and tranquillity, till made it up again. it suited
 catherine to have him there: at any rate, it made her hate her room
 upstairs more than ever: and she would compel to find out business
 below, that she might accompany me.
 
on easter monday, joseph went to gimmerton fair with some cattle; and,
 in the afternoon, i was busy getting up linen in the kitchen. earnshaw
 sat, morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was
 beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes,
 varying her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered
 ejaculations, and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the
 direction of her cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the
 grate. at notice that i could do with her longer intercepting my
 light, she removed to the hearthstone. i bestowed little attention on
 her proceedings, but, presently, i heard her begin—“i’ve found out,
 hareton, that i want—that i’m glad—that i should like you to be my
 cousin now, if you had not grown so cross to me, and so rough.”
 
hareton returned answer.
 
“hareton, hareton, hareton! do you hear?” she continued.
 
“get off wi’ ye!” growled, with uncompromising gruffness.
 
“let take that pipe,” she said, cautiously advancing her hand and
 abstracting it from his mouth.
 
before could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and behind the
 fire. swore at her and seized another.
 
“stop,” she cried, “you must listen to first; and i can’t speak
 while those clouds are floating in my face.”
 
“will you go to the devil!” exclaimed, ferociously, “and let be!”
 
“no,” she persisted, “i won’t: i can’t tell what to do to make you talk
 to me; and you are determined not to understand. when i call you
 stupid, i don’t mean anything: i don’t mean that i despise you. come,
 you shall take notice of me, hareton: you are my cousin, and you shall
 own me.”
 
“i shall have naught to do wi’ you and your mucky pride, and your
 damned mocking tricks!” answered. “i’ll go to hell, body and soul,
 before i look sideways after you again. side out o’ t’ gate, now, this
 minute!”
 
catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing her lip,
 and endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to conceal growing
 tendency to sob.
 
“you should be friends with your cousin, mr. hareton,” i interrupted,
 “since she repents of her sauciness. it would do you great deal of
 good: it would make you another man to have her for companion.”
 
“a companion!” cried; “when she hates me, and does not think fit
 to wipe her shoon! nay, if it made king, i’d not be scorned for
 seeking her good-will any more.”
 
“it is not i who hate you, it is you who hate me!” wept cathy, no
 longer disguising her trouble. “you hate as much as mr. heathcliff
 does, and more.”
 
“you’re damned liar,” began earnshaw: “why have i made him angry, by
 taking your part, then, hundred times? and that when you sneered at
 and despised me, and—go on plaguing me, and i’ll step in yonder, and
 say you worried out of the kitchen!”
 
“i didn’t know you took my part,” she answered, drying her eyes; “and i
 was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now i thank you, and beg you
 to forgive me: what can i do besides?”
 
she returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand. blackened
 and scowled like thunder-cloud, and kept his fists resolutely
 clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground. catherine, by instinct,
 must have divined it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that
 prompted this dogged conduct; for, after remaining an instant
 undecided, she stooped and impressed on his cheek gentle kiss. the
 little rogue thought i had not seen her, and, drawing back, she took
 her former station by the window, quite demurely. i shook my head
 reprovingly, and then she blushed and whispered—“well! what should i
 have done, ellen? wouldn’t shake hands, and wouldn’t look: i must
 show him some way that i like him—that i want to be friends.”
 
whether the kiss convinced hareton, i cannot tell: was very careful,
 for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when did
 raise it, was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.
 
catherine employed herself in wrapping handsome book neatly in white
 paper, and having tied it with bit of ribbon, and addressed it to
 “mr. hareton earnshaw,” she desired to be her ambassadress, and
 convey the present to its destined recipient.
 
“and tell him, if he’ll take it, i’ll come and teach him to read it
 right,” she said; “and, if refuse it, i’ll go upstairs, and never
 tease him again.”
 
i carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my
 employer. hareton would not open his fingers, so i laid it on his knee.
 did not strike it off, either. i returned to my work. catherine
 leaned her head and arms on the table, till she heard the slight rustle
 of the covering being removed; then she stole away, and quietly seated
 herself beside her cousin. trembled, and his face glowed: all his
 rudeness and all his surly harshness had deserted him: could not
 summon courage, at first, to utter syllable in reply to her
 questioning look, and her murmured petition.
 
“say you forgive me, hareton, do. you can make so happy by speaking
 that little word.”
 
muttered something inaudible.
 
“and you’ll be my friend?” added catherine, interrogatively.
 
“nay, you’ll be ashamed of every day of your life,” answered;
 “and the more ashamed, the more you know me; and i cannot bide it.”
 
“so you won’t be my friend?” she said, smiling as sweet as honey, and
 creeping close up.
 
i overheard further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round
 again, i perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of
 the accepted book, that i did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on
 both sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.
 
the work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their
 position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till joseph came home.
 he, poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of catherine seated
 on the same bench with hareton earnshaw, leaning her hand on his
 shoulder; and confounded at his favourite’s endurance of her proximity:
 it affected him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that
 night. his emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs drew, as
 solemnly spread his large bible on the table, and overlaid it with
 dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day’s
 transactions. at length summoned hareton from his seat.
 
“tak’ these in to t’ maister, lad,” said, “and bide there. i’s gang
 up to my own rahm. this hoile’s neither mensful nor seemly for us: we
 mun side out and seearch another.”
 
“come, catherine,” i said, “we must ‘side out’ too: i’ve done my
 ironing. are you ready to go?”
 
“it is not eight o’clock!” she answered, rising unwillingly. “hareton,
 i’ll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and i’ll bring some more
 to-morrow.”
 
“ony books that yah leave, i shall tak’ into th’ hahse,” said joseph,
 “and it’ll be mitch if yah find ’em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!”
 
cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as
 she passed hareton, went singing upstairs: lighter of heart, i venture
 to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps,
 during her earliest visits to linton.
 
the intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered
 temporary interruptions. earnshaw was not to be civilized with wish,
 and my young lady was philosopher, and paragon of patience; but
 both their minds tending to the same point—one loving and desiring to
 esteem, and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed—they contrived
 in the end to reach it.
 
you see, mr. lockwood, it was easy enough to win mrs. heathcliff’s
 heart. but now, i’m glad you did not try. the crown of all my wishes
 will be the union of those two. i shall envy one on their wedding
 day: there won’t be happier woman than myself in england!
 



chapter xxxiii
 

on the morrow of that monday, earnshaw being still unable to follow his
 ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, i
 speedily found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me,
 as heretofore. she got downstairs before me, and out into the garden,
 where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work; and when i
 went to bid them come to breakfast, i saw she had persuaded him to
 clear large space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and
 they were busy planning together an importation of plants from the
 grange.
 
i was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a
 brief half-hour; the black-currant trees were the apple of joseph’s
 eye, and she had just fixed her choice of flower-bed in the midst of
 them.
 
“there! that will be all shown to the master,” i exclaimed, “the minute
 it is discovered. and what excuse have you to offer for taking such
 liberties with the garden? we shall have fine explosion on the head
 of it: see if we don’t! mr. hareton, i wonder you should have more
 wit than to go and make that mess at her bidding!”
 
“i’d forgotten they were joseph’s,” answered earnshaw, rather puzzled;
 “but i’ll tell him i did it.”
 
we always ate our meals with mr. heathcliff. i held the mistress’s post
 in making tea and carving; so i was indispensable at table. catherine
 usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to hareton; and i
 presently saw she would have more discretion in her friendship than
 she had in her hostility.
 
“now, mind you don’t talk with and notice your cousin too much,” were
 my whispered instructions as we entered the room. “it will certainly
 annoy mr. heathcliff, and he’ll be mad at you both.”
 
“i’m not going to,” she answered.
 
the minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking primroses in
 his plate of porridge.
 
dared not speak to her there: dared hardly look; and yet she went
 on teasing, till was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.
 i frowned, and then she glanced towards the master: whose mind was
 occupied on other subjects than his company, as his countenance
 evinced; and she grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with
 deep gravity. afterwards she turned, and recommenced her nonsense; at
 last, hareton uttered smothered laugh. mr. heathcliff started; his
 eye rapidly surveyed our faces. catherine met it with her accustomed
 look of nervousness and yet defiance, which abhorred.
 
“it is well you are out of my reach,” exclaimed. “what fiend
 possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal
 eyes? down with them! and don’t remind of your existence again. i
 thought i had cured you of laughing.”
 
“it was me,” muttered hareton.
 
“what do you say?” demanded the master.
 
hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession. mr.
 heathcliff looked at him bit, and then silently resumed his breakfast
 and his interrupted musing. we had nearly finished, and the two young
 people prudently shifted wider asunder, so i anticipated further
 disturbance during that sitting: when joseph appeared at the door,
 revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage
 committed on his precious shrubs was detected. must have seen cathy
 and her cousin about the spot before examined it, for while his jaws
 worked like those of cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech
 difficult to understand, began:—
 
“i mun hev’ my wage, and i mun goa! i _hed_ aimed to dee wheare i’d
 sarved fur sixty year; and i thowt i’d lug my books up into t’ garret,
 and all my bits o’ stuff, and they sud hev’ t’ kitchen to theirseln;
 for t’ sake o’ quietness. it wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but
 i thowt i _could_ do that! but nah, shoo’s taan my garden fro’ me, and
 by th’ heart, maister, i cannot stand it! yah may bend to th’ yoak an
 ye will—i noan used to ’t, and an old man doesn’t sooin get used to new
 barthens. i’d rayther arn my bite an’ my sup wi’ hammer in th’ road!”
 
“now, now, idiot!” interrupted heathcliff, “cut it short! what’s your
 grievance? i’ll interfere in quarrels between you and nelly. she may
 thrust you into the coal-hole for anything i care.”
 
“it’s noan nelly!” answered joseph. “i sudn’t shift for nelly—nasty ill
 nowt as shoo is. thank god! _shoo_ cannot stale t’ sowl o’ nob’dy! shoo
 wer niver soa handsome, but what body mud look at her ’bout winking.
 it’s yon flaysome, graceless quean, that’s witched our lad, wi’ her
 bold een and her forrard ways—till—nay! it fair brusts my heart! he’s
 forgotten all i’ve done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up
 whole row o’ t’ grandest currant-trees i’ t’ garden!” and here he
 lamented outright; unmanned by sense of his bitter injuries, and
 earnshaw’s ingratitude and dangerous condition.
 
“is the fool drunk?” asked mr. heathcliff. “hareton, is it you he’s
 finding fault with?”
 
“i’ve pulled up two or three bushes,” replied the young man; “but i’m
 going to set ’em again.”
 
“and why have you pulled them up?” said the master.
 
catherine wisely put in her tongue.
 
“we wanted to plant some flowers there,” she cried. “i’m the only
 person to blame, for i wished him to do it.”
 
“and who the devil gave _you_ leave to touch stick about the place?”
 demanded her father-in-law, much surprised. “and who ordered _you_ to
 obey her?” added, turning to hareton.
 
the latter was speechless; his cousin replied—“you shouldn’t grudge a
 few yards of earth for to ornament, when you have taken all my
 land!”
 
“your land, insolent slut! you never had any,” said heathcliff.
 
“and my money,” she continued; returning his angry glare, and meantime
 biting piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.
 
“silence!” exclaimed. “get done, and begone!”
 
“and hareton’s land, and his money,” pursued the reckless thing.
 “hareton and i are friends now; and i shall tell him all about you!”
 
the master seemed confounded moment: grew pale, and rose up,
 eyeing her all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.
 
“if you strike me, hareton will strike you,” she said; “so you may as
 well sit down.”
 
“if hareton does not turn you out of the room, i’ll strike him to
 hell,” thundered heathcliff. “damnable witch! dare you pretend to rouse
 him against me? off with her! do you hear? fling her into the kitchen!
 i’ll kill her, ellen dean, if you let her come into my sight again!”
 
hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.
 
“drag her away!” cried, savagely. “are you staying to talk?” and he
 approached to execute his own command.
 
“he’ll not obey you, wicked man, any more,” said catherine; “and he’ll
 soon detest you as much as i do.”
 
“wisht! wisht!” muttered the young man, reproachfully; “i will not hear
 you speak so to him. have done.”
 
“but you won’t let him strike me?” she cried.
 
“come, then,” whispered earnestly.
 
it was too late: heathcliff had caught hold of her.
 
“now, _you_ go!” said to earnshaw. “accursed witch! this time she
 has provoked when i could not bear it; and i’ll make her repent it
 for ever!”
 
had his hand in her hair; hareton attempted to release her locks,
 entreating him not to hurt her that once. heathcliff’s black eyes
 flashed; seemed ready to tear catherine in pieces, and i was just
 worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of sudden his fingers
 relaxed; shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed
 intently in her face. then drew his hand over his eyes, stood a
 moment to collect himself apparently, and turning anew to catherine,
 said, with assumed calmness—“you must learn to avoid putting in a
 passion, or i shall really murder you some time! go with mrs. dean, and
 keep with her; and confine your insolence to her ears. as to hareton
 earnshaw, if i see him listen to you, i’ll send him seeking his bread
 where can get it! your love will make him an outcast and beggar.
 nelly, take her; and leave me, all of you! leave me!”
 
i led my young lady out: she was too glad of her escape to resist; the
 other followed, and mr. heathcliff had the room to himself till dinner.
 i had counselled catherine to dine upstairs; but, as soon as he
 perceived her vacant seat, sent to call her. spoke to none of
 us, ate very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that
 should not return before evening.
 
the two new friends established themselves in the house during his
 absence; where i heard hareton sternly check his cousin, on her
 offering revelation of her father-in-law’s conduct to his father. he
 said wouldn’t suffer word to be uttered in his disparagement: if
 were the devil, it didn’t signify; would stand by him; and he’d
 rather she would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on mr.
 heathcliff. catherine was waxing cross at this; but found means to
 make her hold her tongue, by asking how she would like _him_ to speak
 ill of her father? then she comprehended that earnshaw took the
 master’s reputation home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger
 than reason could break—chains, forged by habit, which it would be
 cruel to attempt to loosen. she showed good heart, thenceforth, in
 avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning
 heathcliff; and confessed to her sorrow that she had endeavoured to
 raise bad spirit between him and hareton: indeed, i don’t believe she
 has ever breathed syllable, in the latter’s hearing, against her
 oppressor since.
 
when this slight disagreement was over, they were friends again, and as
 busy as possible in their several occupations of pupil and teacher. i
 came in to sit with them, after i had done my work; and i felt so
 soothed and comforted to watch them, that i did not notice how time got
 on. you know, they both appeared in measure my children: i had long
 been proud of one; and now, i was sure, the other would be source of
 equal satisfaction. his honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off
 rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had been
 bred; and catherine’s sincere commendations acted as spur to his
 industry. his brightening mind brightened his features, and added
 spirit and nobility to their aspect: i could hardly fancy it the same
 individual i had beheld on the day i discovered my little lady at
 wuthering heights, after her expedition to the crags. while i admired
 and they laboured, dusk drew on, and with it returned the master. he
 came upon us quite unexpectedly, entering by the front way, and had a
 full view of the whole three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at
 him. well, i reflected, there was never pleasanter, or more harmless
 sight; and it will be burning shame to scold them. the red fire-light
 glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed their faces animated with
 the eager interest of children; for, though was twenty-three and she
 eighteen, each had so much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither
 experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
 
they lifted their eyes together, to encounter mr. heathcliff: perhaps
 you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they
 are those of catherine earnshaw. the present catherine has other
 likeness to her, except breadth of forehead, and certain arch of
 the nostril that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or
 not. with hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at
 all times, _then_ it was particularly striking; because his senses were
 alert, and his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity. i suppose
 this resemblance disarmed mr. heathcliff: walked to the hearth in
 evident agitation; but it quickly subsided as looked at the young
 man: or, i should say, altered its character; for it was there yet. he
 took the book from his hand, and glanced at the open page, then
 returned it without any observation; merely signing catherine away: her
 companion lingered very little behind her, and i was about to depart
 also, but bid sit still.
 
“it is poor conclusion, is it not?” observed, having brooded
 while on the scene had just witnessed: “an absurd termination to
 my violent exertions? i get levers and mattocks to demolish the two
 houses, and train myself to be capable of working like hercules, and
 when everything is ready and in my power, i find the will to lift a
 slate off either roof has vanished! my old enemies have not beaten me;
 now would be the precise time to revenge myself on their
 representatives: i could do it; and none could hinder me. but where is
 the use? i don’t care for striking: i can’t take the trouble to raise
 my hand! that sounds as if i had been labouring the whole time only to
 exhibit fine trait of magnanimity. it is far from being the case: i
 have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and i am too idle
 to destroy for nothing.
 
“nelly, there is strange change approaching; i’m in its shadow at
 present. i take so little interest in my daily life that i hardly
 remember to eat and drink. those two who have left the room are the
 only objects which retain distinct material appearance to me; and
 that appearance causes pain, amounting to agony. about _her_ i won’t
 speak; and i don’t desire to think; but i earnestly wish she were
 invisible: her presence invokes only maddening sensations. _he_ moves
 differently: and yet if i could do it without seeming insane, i’d
 never see him again! you’ll perhaps think rather inclined to become
 so,” added, making an effort to smile, “if i try to describe the
 thousand forms of past associations and ideas awakens or embodies.
 but you’ll not talk of what i tell you; and my mind is so eternally
 secluded in itself, it is tempting at last to turn it out to another.
 
“five minutes ago hareton seemed personification of my youth, not a
 human being; i felt to him in such variety of ways, that it would
 have been impossible to have accosted him rationally. in the first
 place, his startling likeness to catherine connected him fearfully with
 her. that, however, which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my
 imagination, is actually the least: for what is not connected with her
 to me? and what does not recall her? i cannot look down to this floor,
 but her features are shaped in the flags! in every cloud, in every
 tree—filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every object
 by day—i am surrounded with her image! the most ordinary faces of men
 and women—my own features—mock with resemblance. the entire world
 is dreadful collection of memoranda that she did exist, and that i
 have lost her! well, hareton’s aspect was the ghost of my immortal
 love; of my wild endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride,
 my happiness, and my anguish—
 
“but it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you: only it will let you
 know why, with reluctance to be always alone, his society is no
 benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment i suffer: and it
 partly contributes to render regardless how and his cousin go on
 together. i can give them attention any more.”
 
“but what do you mean by _change_, mr. heathcliff?” i said, alarmed
 at his manner: though was neither in danger of losing his senses,
 nor dying, according to my judgment: was quite strong and healthy;
 and, as to his reason, from childhood had delight in dwelling on
 dark things, and entertaining odd fancies. might have had a
 monomania on the subject of his departed idol; but on every other point
 his wits were as sound as mine.
 
“i shall not know that till it comes,” said; “i’m only half
 conscious of it now.”
 
“you have feeling of illness, have you?” i asked.
 
“no, nelly, i have not,” answered.
 
“then you are not afraid of death?” i pursued.
 
“afraid? no!” replied. “i have neither fear, nor presentiment,
 nor hope of death. why should i? with my hard constitution and
 temperate mode of living, and unperilous occupations, i ought to, and
 probably _shall_, remain above ground till there is scarcely black
 hair on my head. and yet i cannot continue in this condition! i have to
 remind myself to breathe—almost to remind my heart to beat! and it is
 like bending back stiff spring: it is by compulsion that i do the
 slightest act not prompted by one thought; and by compulsion that i
 notice anything alive or dead, which is not associated with one
 universal idea. i have single wish, and my whole being and faculties
 are yearning to attain it. they have yearned towards it so long, and so
 unwaveringly, that i’m convinced it _will_ be reached—and
 _soon_—because it has devoured my existence: i am swallowed up in the
 anticipation of its fulfilment. my confessions have not relieved me;
 but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour
 which i show. god! it is long fight; i wish it were over!”
 
began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to himself, till i
 was inclined to believe, as said joseph did, that conscience had
 turned his heart to an earthly hell. i wondered greatly how it would
 end. though seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by
 looks, it was his habitual mood, i had doubt: asserted it
 himself; but not soul, from his general bearing, would have
 conjectured the fact. you did not when you saw him, mr. lockwood: and
 at the period of which i speak, was just the same as then; only
 fonder of continued solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in
 company.
 



chapter xxxiv
 

for some days after that evening, mr. heathcliff shunned meeting us at
 meals; yet would not consent formally to exclude hareton and cathy.
 had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing
 rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed
 sufficient sustenance for him.
 
one night, after the family were in bed, i heard him go downstairs, and
 out at the front door. i did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning
 i found was still away. we were in april then: the weather was sweet
 and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the
 two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom. after
 breakfast, catherine insisted on my bringing chair and sitting with
 my work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled
 hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and
 arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the
 influence of joseph’s complaints. i was comfortably revelling in the
 spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my
 young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose
 roots for border, returned only half laden, and informed us that mr.
 heathcliff was coming in. “and spoke to me,” she added, with a
 perplexed countenance.
 
“what did say?” asked hareton.
 
“he told to begone as fast as i could,” she answered. “but looked
 so different from his usual look that i stopped moment to stare at
 him.”
 
“how?” inquired.
 
“why, almost bright and cheerful. no, _almost_ nothing—_very much_
 excited, and wild, and glad!” she replied.
 
“night-walking amuses him, then,” i remarked, affecting careless
 manner: in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious to ascertain
 the truth of her statement; for to see the master looking glad would
 not be an every-day spectacle. i framed an excuse to go in. heathcliff
 stood at the open door; was pale, and trembled: yet, certainly,
 had strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of
 his whole face.
 
“will you have some breakfast?” i said. “you must be hungry, rambling
 about all night!” i wanted to discover where had been, but i did not
 like to ask directly.
 
“no, i’m not hungry,” answered, averting his head, and speaking
 rather contemptuously, as if guessed i was trying to divine the
 occasion of his good humour.
 
i felt perplexed: i didn’t know whether it were not proper
 opportunity to offer bit of admonition.
 
“i don’t think it right to wander out of doors,” i observed, “instead
 of being in bed: it is not wise, at any rate this moist season. i
 daresay you’ll catch bad cold, or fever: you have something the
 matter with you now!”
 
“nothing but what i can bear,” replied; “and with the greatest
 pleasure, provided you’ll leave alone: get in, and don’t annoy me.”
 
i obeyed: and, in passing, i noticed breathed as fast as cat.
 
“yes!” i reflected to myself, “we shall have fit of illness. i cannot
 conceive what has been doing.”
 
that noon sat down to dinner with us, and received heaped-up plate
 from my hands, as if intended to make amends for previous fasting.
 
“i’ve neither cold nor fever, nelly,” remarked, in allusion to my
 morning’s speech; “and i’m ready to do justice to the food you give
 me.”
 
took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the
 inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct. laid them on the
 table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out. we
 saw him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal,
 and earnshaw said he’d go and ask why would not dine: thought we
 had grieved him some way.
 
“well, is coming?” cried catherine, when her cousin returned.
 
“nay,” answered; “but he’s not angry: seemed rarely pleased
 indeed; only i made him impatient by speaking to him twice; and then he
 bid be off to you: wondered how i could want the company of
 anybody else.”
 
i set his plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or two he
 re-entered, when the room was clear, in degree calmer: the same
 unnatural—it was unnatural—appearance of joy under his black brows; the
 same bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in kind of
 smile; his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness,
 but as tight-stretched cord vibrates—a strong thrilling, rather than
 trembling.
 
i will ask what is the matter, i thought; or who should? and i
 exclaimed—“have you heard any good news, mr. heathcliff? you look
 uncommonly animated.”
 
“where should good news come from to me?” said. “i’m animated with
 hunger; and, seemingly, i must not eat.”
 
“your dinner is here,” i returned; “why won’t you get it?”
 
“i don’t want it now,” muttered, hastily: “i’ll wait till supper.
 and, nelly, once for all, let beg you to warn hareton and the other
 away from me. i wish to be troubled by nobody: i wish to have this
 place to myself.”
 
“is there some new reason for this banishment?” i inquired. “tell me
 why you are so queer, mr. heathcliff? where were you last night? i’m
 not putting the question through idle curiosity, but—”
 
“you are putting the question through very idle curiosity,” he
 interrupted, with laugh. “yet i’ll answer it. last night i was on the
 threshold of hell. to-day, i am within sight of my heaven. i have my
 eyes on it: hardly three feet to sever me! and now you’d better go!
 you’ll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain
 from prying.”
 
having swept the hearth and wiped the table, i departed; more perplexed
 than ever.
 
did not quit the house again that afternoon, and one intruded on
 his solitude; till, at eight o’clock, i deemed it proper, though
 unsummoned, to carry candle and his supper to him. was leaning
 against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out: his face was
 turned to the interior gloom. the fire had smouldered to ashes; the
 room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening; and so
 still, that not only the murmur of the beck down gimmerton was
 distinguishable, but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or
 through the large stones which it could not cover. i uttered an
 ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced
 shutting the casements, one after another, till i came to his.
 
“must i close this?” i asked, in order to rouse him; for would not
 stir.
 
the light flashed on his features as i spoke. oh, mr. lockwood, i
 cannot express what terrible start i got by the momentary view! those
 deep black eyes! that smile, and ghastly paleness! it appeared to me,
 not mr. heathcliff, but goblin; and, in my terror, i let the candle
 bend towards the wall, and it left in darkness.
 
“yes, close it,” replied, in his familiar voice. “there, that is
 pure awkwardness! why did you hold the candle horizontally? be quick,
 and bring another.”
 
i hurried out in foolish state of dread, and said to joseph—“the
 master wishes you to take him light and rekindle the fire.” for i
 dared not go in myself again just then.
 
joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but brought it
 back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand, explaining
 that mr. heathcliff was going to bed, and wanted nothing to eat till
 morning. we heard him mount the stairs directly; did not proceed to
 his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its
 window, as i mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get
 through; and it struck that plotted another midnight excursion,
 of which had rather we had suspicion.
 
“is ghoul or vampire?” i mused. i had read of such hideous
 incarnate demons. and then i set myself to reflect how i had tended him
 in infancy, and watched him grow to youth, and followed him almost
 through his whole course; and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to
 that sense of horror. “but where did come from, the little dark
 thing, harboured by good man to his bane?” muttered superstition, as
 i dozed into unconsciousness. and i began, half dreaming, to weary
 myself with imagining some fit parentage for him; and, repeating my
 waking meditations, i tracked his existence over again, with grim
 variations; at last, picturing his death and funeral: of which, all i
 can remember is, being exceedingly vexed at having the task of
 dictating an inscription for his monument, and consulting the sexton
 about it; and, as had surname, and we could not tell his age, we
 were obliged to content ourselves with the single word, “heathcliff.”
 that came true: we were. if you enter the kirkyard, you’ll read, on his
 headstone, only that, and the date of his death.
 
dawn restored to common sense. i rose, and went into the garden, as
 soon as i could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his
 window. there were none. “he has stayed at home,” i thought, “and he’ll
 be all right to-day.” i prepared breakfast for the household, as was my
 usual custom, but told hareton and catherine to get theirs ere the
 master came down, for lay late. they preferred taking it out of
 doors, under the trees, and i set little table to accommodate them.
 
on my re-entrance, i found mr. heathcliff below. and joseph were
 conversing about some farming business; gave clear, minute
 directions concerning the matter discussed, but spoke rapidly, and
 turned his head continually aside, and had the same excited expression,
 even more exaggerated. when joseph quitted the room took his seat in
 the place generally chose, and i put basin of coffee before him.
 drew it nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at
 the opposite wall, as i supposed, surveying one particular portion, up
 and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest
 that stopped breathing during half minute together.
 
“come now,” i exclaimed, pushing some bread against his hand, “eat and
 drink that, while it is hot: it has been waiting near an hour.”
 
didn’t notice me, and yet smiled. i’d rather have seen him gnash
 his teeth than smile so.
 
“mr. heathcliff! master!” i cried, “don’t, for god’s sake, stare as if
 you saw an unearthly vision.”
 
“don’t, for god’s sake, shout so loud,” replied. “turn round, and
 tell me, are we by ourselves?”
 
“of course,” was my answer; “of course we are.”
 
still, i involuntarily obeyed him, as if i was not quite sure. with a
 sweep of his hand cleared vacant space in front among the
 breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease.
 
now, i perceived was not looking at the wall; for when i regarded
 him alone, it seemed exactly that gazed at something within two
 yards’ distance. and whatever it was, it communicated, apparently, both
 pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes: at least the anguished, yet
 raptured, expression of his countenance suggested that idea. the
 fancied object was not fixed, either: his eyes pursued it with
 unwearied diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never weaned
 away. i vainly reminded him of his protracted abstinence from food: if
 stirred to touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if he
 stretched his hand out to get piece of bread, his fingers clenched
 before they reached it, and remained on the table, forgetful of their
 aim.
 
i sat, model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed attention
 from its engrossing speculation; till grew irritable, and got up,
 asking why i would not allow him to have his own time in taking his
 meals? and saying that on the next occasion i needn’t wait: i might set
 the things down and go. having uttered these words left the house,
 slowly sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the
 gate.
 
the hours crept anxiously by: another evening came. i did not retire to
 rest till late, and when i did, i could not sleep. returned after
 midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room
 beneath. i listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and
 descended. it was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a
 hundred idle misgivings.
 
i distinguished mr. heathcliff’s step, restlessly measuring the floor,
 and frequently broke the silence by deep inspiration, resembling a
 groan. muttered detached words also; the only one i could catch was
 the name of catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or
 suffering; and spoken as one would speak to person present; low and
 earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul. i had not courage to
 walk straight into the apartment; but i desired to divert him from his
 reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and
 began to scrape the cinders. it drew him forth sooner than i expected.
 opened the door immediately, and said—“nelly, come here—is it
 morning? come in with your light.”
 
“it is striking four,” i answered. “you want candle to take upstairs:
 you might have lit one at this fire.”
 
“no, i don’t wish to go upstairs,” said. “come in, and kindle _me_ a
 fire, and do anything there is to do about the room.”
 
“i must blow the coals red first, before i can carry any,” i replied,
 getting chair and the bellows.
 
roamed to and fro, meantime, in state approaching distraction; his
 heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave space for
 common breathing between.
 
“when day breaks i’ll send for green,” said; “i wish to make some
 legal inquiries of him while i can bestow thought on those matters,
 and while i can act calmly. i have not written my will yet; and how to
 leave my property i cannot determine. i wish i could annihilate it from
 the face of the earth.”
 
“i would not talk so, mr. heathcliff,” i interposed. “let your will be
 while: you’ll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet! i
 never expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at
 present, marvellously so, however; and almost entirely through your own
 fault. the way you’ve passed these three last days might knock up a
 titan. do take some food, and some repose. you need only look at
 yourself in glass to see how you require both. your cheeks are
 hollow, and your eyes blood-shot, like person starving with hunger
 and going blind with loss of sleep.”
 
“it is not my fault that i cannot eat or rest,” replied. “i assure
 you it is through settled designs. i’ll do both, as soon as i
 possibly can. but you might as well bid man struggling in the water
 rest within arms’ length of the shore! i must reach it first, and then
 i’ll rest. well, never mind mr. green: as to repenting of my
 injustices, i’ve done injustice, and i repent of nothing. i’m too
 happy; and yet i’m not happy enough. my soul’s bliss kills my body, but
 does not satisfy itself.”
 
“happy, master?” i cried. “strange happiness! if you would hear me
 without being angry, i might offer some advice that would make you
 happier.”
 
“what is that?” asked. “give it.”
 
“you are aware, mr. heathcliff,” i said, “that from the time you were
 thirteen years old you have lived selfish, unchristian life; and
 probably hardly had bible in your hands during all that period. you
 must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have
 space to search it now. could it be hurtful to send for some one—some
 minister of any denomination, it does not matter which—to explain it,
 and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts; and how
 unfit you will be for its heaven, unless change takes place before
 you die?”
 
“i’m rather obliged than angry, nelly,” said, “for you remind of
 the manner in which i desire to be buried. it is to be carried to the
 churchyard in the evening. you and hareton may, if you please,
 accompany me: and mind, particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys
 my directions concerning the two coffins! minister need come; nor
 need anything be said over me.—i tell you i have nearly attained _my_
 heaven; and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me.”
 
“and supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that
 means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk?” i
 said, shocked at his godless indifference. “how would you like it?”
 
“they won’t do that,” replied: “if they did, you must have me
 removed secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically,
 that the dead are not annihilated!”
 
as soon as heard the other members of the family stirring retired
 to his den, and i breathed freer. but in the afternoon, while joseph
 and hareton were at their work, came into the kitchen again, and,
 with wild look, bid come and sit in the house: wanted somebody
 with him. i declined; telling him plainly that his strange talk and
 manner frightened me, and i had neither the nerve nor the will to be
 his companion alone.
 
“i believe you think fiend,” said, with his dismal laugh:
 “something too horrible to live under decent roof.” then turning to
 catherine, who was there, and who drew behind at his approach, he
 added, half sneeringly,—“will _you_ come, chuck? i’ll not hurt you. no!
 to you i’ve made myself worse than the devil. well, there is _one_ who
 won’t shrink from my company! by god! she’s relentless. oh, damn it!
 it’s unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear—even mine.”
 
solicited the society of one more. at dusk went into his
 chamber. through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard
 him groaning and murmuring to himself. hareton was anxious to enter;
 but i bid him fetch mr. kenneth, and should go in and see him. when
 came, and i requested admittance and tried to open the door, i found
 it locked; and heathcliff bid us be damned. was better, and would be
 left alone; so the doctor went away.
 
the following evening was very wet: indeed, it poured down till
 day-dawn; and, as i took my morning walk round the house, i observed
 the master’s window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in. he
 cannot be in bed, i thought: those showers would drench him through. he
 must either be up or out. but i’ll make more ado, i’ll go boldly and
 look.
 
having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, i ran to
 unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant; quickly pushing them
 aside, i peeped in. mr. heathcliff was there—laid on his back. his eyes
 met mine so keen and fierce, i started; and then seemed to smile. i
 could not think him dead: but his face and throat were washed with
 rain; the bed-clothes dripped, and was perfectly still. the lattice,
 flapping to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill; no
 blood trickled from the broken skin, and when i put my fingers to it, i
 could doubt more: was dead and stark!
 
i hasped the window; i combed his black long hair from his forehead; i
 tried to close his eyes: to extinguish, if possible, that frightful,
 life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it. they would
 not shut: they seemed to sneer at my attempts; and his parted lips and
 sharp white teeth sneered too! taken with another fit of cowardice, i
 cried out for joseph. joseph shuffled up and made noise, but
 resolutely refused to meddle with him.
 
“th’ divil’s harried off his soul,” cried, “and may hev’ his
 carcass into t’ bargin, for aught i care! ech! what wicked ’un he
 looks, girning at death!” and the old sinner grinned in mockery. i
 thought intended to cut caper round the bed; but suddenly
 composing himself, fell on his knees, and raised his hands, and
 returned thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock were
 restored to their rights.
 
i felt stunned by the awful event; and my memory unavoidably recurred
 to former times with sort of oppressive sadness. but poor hareton,
 the most wronged, was the only one who really suffered much. sat by
 the corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest. pressed its hand,
 and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one else shrank from
 contemplating; and bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs
 naturally from generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.
 
mr. kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master
 died. i concealed the fact of his having swallowed nothing for four
 days, fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, i am persuaded, he
 did not abstain on purpose: it was the consequence of his strange
 illness, not the cause.
 
we buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as wished.
 earnshaw and i, the sexton, and six men to carry the coffin,
 comprehended the whole attendance. the six men departed when they had
 let it down into the grave: we stayed to see it covered. hareton, with
 streaming face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould
 himself: at present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion
 mounds—and i hope its tenant sleeps as soundly. but the country folks,
 if you ask them, would swear on the bible that _walks_: there are
 those who speak to having met him near the church, and on the moor, and
 even within this house. idle tales, you’ll say, and so say i. yet that
 old man by the kitchen fire affirms has seen two on ’em looking out
 of his chamber window on every rainy night since his death:—and an odd
 thing happened to about month ago. i was going to the grange one
 evening—a dark evening, threatening thunder—and, just at the turn of
 the heights, i encountered little boy with sheep and two lambs
 before him; was crying terribly; and i supposed the lambs were
 skittish, and would not be guided.
 
“what is the matter, my little man?” i asked.
 
“there’s heathcliff and woman yonder, under t’ nab,” blubbered,
 “un’ i darnut pass ’em.”
 
i saw nothing; but neither the sheep nor would go on, so i bid him
 take the road lower down. probably raised the phantoms from
 thinking, as traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense had heard
 his parents and companions repeat. yet, still, i don’t like being out
 in the dark now; and i don’t like being left by myself in this grim
 house: i cannot help it; i shall be glad when they leave it, and shift
 to the grange.
 
“they are going to the grange, then?” i said.
 
“yes,” answered mrs. dean, “as soon as they are married, and that will
 be on new year’s day.”
 
“and who will live here then?”
 
“why, joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, lad to keep
 him company. they will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut
 up.”
 
“for the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?” i observed.
 
“no, mr. lockwood,” said nelly, shaking her head. “i believe the dead
 are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity.”
 
at that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.
 
“_they_ are afraid of nothing,” i grumbled, watching their approach
 through the window. “together, they would brave satan and all his
 legions.”
 
as they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take last look
 at the moon—or, more correctly, at each other by her light—i felt
 irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and, pressing remembrance
 into the hand of mrs. dean, and disregarding her expostulations at my
 rudeness, i vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house-door;
 and so should have confirmed joseph in his opinion of his
 fellow-servant’s gay indiscretions, had not fortunately recognised
 for respectable character by the sweet ring of sovereign at his
 feet.
 
my walk home was lengthened by diversion in the direction of the
 kirk. when beneath its walls, i perceived decay had made progress, even
 in seven months: many window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and
 slates jutted off, here and there, beyond the right line of the roof,
 to be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.
 
i sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next
 the moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in heath; edgar linton’s
 only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot; heathcliff’s
 still bare.
 
i lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths
 fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind
 breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever
 imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.
 





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook wuthering heights ***
 



updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
 be renamed.
 
creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
 law means that one owns united states copyright in these works,
 so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
 states without permission and without paying copyright
 royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
 of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
 concept and trademark. project gutenberg is registered trademark,
 and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
 the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
 of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
 copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
 easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
 of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
 gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
 do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
 by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
 license, especially commercial redistribution.
 

start: full license
 
the full project gutenberg license
 
please read this before you distribute or use this work
 
to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
 distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
 (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
 gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
 project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
 
section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
 electronic works
 
1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
 electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
 and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 (trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
 the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
 destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
 possession. if you paid fee for obtaining copy of or access to a
 project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
 by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain refund from the person
 or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
 
1.b. “project gutenberg” is registered trademark. it may only be
 used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
 agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are few
 things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
 even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
 paragraph 1.c below. there are lot of things you can do with project
 gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
 agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
 electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.
 
1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
 foundation” or pglaf), owns compilation copyright in the collection
 of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
 works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
 states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
 united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
 claim right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
 displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
 all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
 that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
 free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
 works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
 project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
 comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
 same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
 you share it without charge with others.
 
1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
 what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
 in constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
 check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
 distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
 other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
 representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
 country other than the united states.
 
1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
 
1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
 immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
 prominently whenever any copy of project gutenberg™ work (any work
 on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
 phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
 performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
 
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
 other parts of the world at cost and with almost restrictions
 whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
 of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. if you
 are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
 
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
 derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
 contain notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
 copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
 the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
 redistributing or providing access to work with the phrase “project
 gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
 either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
 obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
 trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
 with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
 must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
 additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
 will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
 posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
 beginning of this work.
 
1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
 license terms from this work, or any files containing part of this
 work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.
 
1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
 electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
 prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
 active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
 gutenberg™ license.
 
1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
 compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
 any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
 to or distribute copies of project gutenberg™ work in format
 other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
 version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
 (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at additional cost, fee or expense
 to the user, provide copy, means of exporting copy, or means
 of obtaining copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
 vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
 full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
 
1.e.7. do not charge fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
 performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
 unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
 
1.e.8. you may charge reasonable fee for copies of or providing
 access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
 provided that:
 
• you pay royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
 to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but has
 agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
 within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
 legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
 payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
 section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation.”
 
• you provide full refund of any money paid by user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
 license. you must require such user to return or destroy all
 copies of the works possessed in physical medium and discontinue
 all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
 works.
 
• you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, full refund of
 any money paid for work or replacement copy, if defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.
 
• you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge fee or distribute project
 gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
 are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
 from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
 the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
 forth in section 3 below.
 
1.f.
 
1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
 effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
 works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
 gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
 contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
 or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other
 intellectual property infringement, defective or damaged disk or
 other medium, computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
 cannot be read by your equipment.
 
1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
 of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
 gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing project
 gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
 liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
 fees. you agree that you have remedies for negligence, strict
 liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
 provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
 trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
 liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
 incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
 damage.
 
1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
 receive refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
 written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
 received the work on physical medium, you must return the medium
 with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
 with the defective work may elect to provide replacement copy in
 lieu of refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you second
 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of refund. if
 the second copy is also defective, you may demand refund in writing
 without further opportunities to fix the problem.
 
1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
 in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
 other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
 limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.
 
1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
 damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
 limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
 unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
 remaining provisions.
 
1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
 providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
 accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
 production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
 electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
 including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
 the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
 or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
 additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 defect you cause.
 
section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™
 
project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
 exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
 from people in all walks of life.
 
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
 assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
 goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
 remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
 gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide secure
 and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
 generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
 
section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is non-profit
 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
 state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
 revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
 number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
 u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.
 
the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
 salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
 to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
 
section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
 literary archive foundation
 
project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
 public support and donations to carry out its mission of
 increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
 freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
 array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
 status with the irs.
 
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
 charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
 states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
 considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
 with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
 where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
 donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
 have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of prohibition
 against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
 approach us with offers to donate.
 
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
 outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
 
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
 methods and addresses. donations are accepted in number of other
 ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
 
section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works
 
professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
 gutenberg™ concept of library of electronic works that could be
 freely shared with anyone. for forty years, produced and
 distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only loose network of
 volunteer support.
 
project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
 editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
 the u.s. unless copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
 necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
 edition.
 
most people start at our website which has the main pg search
 facility: www.gutenberg.org.
 
this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
 including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
 archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
 subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 


